
                              1 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ACCUSATIONS;
Report Says U.S. Human Rights Abuses Have Eroded Support for Efforts Against
Terrorism

BYLINE:  By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


International support for the campaign against terrorism is weakening because of
human rights abuses by the United States, Human Rights Watch charged in a report
published today.

The report, the group's annual survey of human rights issues worldwide, cited
the Bush administration's detention of so-called enemy combatants without formal
charges or access to lawyers, closed-door deportation hearings of terrorism
suspects and the refusal to abide by the Geneva Convention in the treatment of
prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, among other examples.

"The United States is far from the worst human rights abuser," said Kenneth
Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, a private advocacy group. "But
Washington has so much power today that when it flouts human rights standards,
it damages human rights causes worldwide."

The White House did not comment in detail, but a spokesman, Scott McClellan,
said: "The United States is the world's leader when it comes to promoting human
rights. And while we are fighting terrorism, we are also recommitting ourselves
to the fight for freedom, dignity and human rights."'

The report is replete with examples of other countries that Human Rights Watch
said had shirked their commitment to human rights, and the group asserted that,
in many cases, those countries had used America's recent behavior as an excuse.

An example of the evidence that support for the campaign against terrorism is
slackening, said Tom Malinowski, a director in the group's Washington office,
was the elections last year in Pakistan, in which Gen. Pervez Musharraf was
elected president.

"The radical anti-American party gained huge support in part, we assert, because
Musharraf repressed the moderate center, and the United States did not call him
on it," he said. By suppressing its criticism of General Musharraf, the
administration may actually have weakened his hand and fueled anti-American
sentiments in Pakistan, the group said.

"To fight terrorism, you need the support of the people in countries where
terrorists live," Mr. Roth said. "Cozying up to oppressive governments is hardly
a way to build those alliances."

The report said: "Even when the U.S. government does try to promote human rights
, its authority is undermined by its refusal to be bound by the standards it
preaches to others. From its rejection of the Geneva Conventions to its misuse
of the 'enemy combatant' designation, from its threatened use of substandard
military commissions to its misuse of immigration laws to deny criminal suspects
their rights, Washington has waged war on terrorism as if human rights were not
a constraint."

The report also accused Washington of withholding criticism of abuses by
numerous friends and allies, including Russia, Israel and Malaysia.

"The overriding message sent by these U.S. bilateral actions," the report said,
"is that human rights are dispensable in the name of fighting terrorism." The
result, it said, has been "a copycat phenomenon."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (96%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); TERRORISM (92%); WAR
ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
DEPORTATION (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS
(78%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); EXECUTIVES (74%); IMMIGRATION (74%); LAWYERS
(73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (71%); NAVIES (67%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (63%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  DEPORTATION;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (77%) ROTH, KENNETH; BRINKLEY, JOEL

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Showdown for a Tool In Rights Lawsuits

BYLINE:  By ALEX MARKELS

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1813 words


IN a watershed case that could affect how multinationals do business in
developing countries, a federal appeals court will consider on Tuesday whether
the energy giant Unocal should stand trial in connection with human rights
abuses that the government of Myanmar is accused of inflicting on villagers
during construction of a natural-gas pipeline.

The crucial question before the unusually large panel of 11 judges is whether to
apply international legal standards that hold parties responsible for aiding and
abetting human rights abuses. The case is in the United States Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco.

The plaintiffs are a group of villagers from Tenasserim, a region in
southeastern Myanmar, the country once known as Burma. They say Unocal paid the
military to provide security for the project and supported the government, which
forced villagers to help build the $1.2 billion pipeline in the 1990's and
threatened those who refused with rape and other atrocities. Unocal denies the
accusations.

If the court allows the civil suit to go to a jury trial, "this will raise the
stakes for multinationals that do business with repressive regimes," said
William S. Dodge, an international law professor at the Hastings College of the
Law in San Francisco. "There are plenty of repressive regimes around the world,
and there are plenty of multinationals that do business with them. The question
is, how far can a corporation like Unocal go in cooperating with such a regime
before the company bears some legal responsibility?"

THE case is among a growing number based on the once-obscure Alien Tort Claims
Act, a 1789 law originally intended to help prosecute international pirates in
American courts. Since the early 1980's, it has been used to argue cases
successfully against foreign military and police personnel accused of human
rights abuses. More recently, human rights and labor groups have seized on it to
do battle with oil, mining and other multinational companies that work with
governments that they say engage in torture, genocide and similar violations of
international law.

There have been more than a dozen alien tort cases filed against companies since
the mid-1990's, but none have so far gone to a jury trial. Some have been
dismissed on procedural grounds, while others are pending. The possibility of
trials has raised concerns among both corporations and the Bush administration
over potentially embarrassing testimony -- and worry that a verdict could set a
precedent that encourages thousands of foreign plaintiffs to seek damages for
crimes committed by their own governments.

"You get a perfect storm of sympathetic plaintiffs, trial lawyers and
anti-globalization activists working together to bring these suits," said
William A. Reinsch, the president of the National Foreign Trade Council, an
industry group based in Washington. He cites cases like one recently filed
against dozens of companies that did business in South Africa under apartheid.
"It could be disastrous for global trade," he added.

Though there has not been a single verdict against them, companies are feeling
the impact of the litigation, which they must increasingly factor into
investment decisions.

"It's causing companies to run away from situations like Burma," said Errol P.
Mendes, a law professor at the University of Ottawa and recently a co-author of
"Global Governance, Economy and Law" (Taylor & Francis), which details the
impact of such lawsuits on multinational companies.

He and others point to a variety of recent corporate decisions to demur or pull
back from projects in countries where governments have been accused of
human-rights abuses, including Nigeria, Indonesia and Sudan, as well as Myanmar.

Although Unocal, based in El Segundo, Calif., continues to do business in
Myanmar, "this has created a great deal of uncertainty about future investing,"
said Charles O. Strathman, its vice president and chief legal officer. "It's not
just the legal fees involved; it's also very disruptive and a big time
commitment."

The negative publicity from such cases may be even more costly. Social-justice
and environmental groups see the Unocal case as an example of globalization gone
bad, inspiring protests on college campuses and campaigns to pressure school
administrators to sell Unocal stock.

"Whether these companies prevail in a court of law, they are already losing in
the court of public opinion," Professor Mendes said. "Just the launching of
these lawsuits has a huge impact on companies' brand equity, which these days is
their most important asset."

The suits are just one way to try to bring pressure on companies. In resolutions
being put before corporate directors, shareholders are calling for companies to
pull out of projects implicated in human-rights lawsuits. For example, after a
shareholder resolution and negative publicity from a pending human-rights
lawsuit, Talisman Energy in March sold its $770 million stake in an oil
development project in Sudan. It had been accused of assisting Sudanese forces
in an ethnic cleansing campaign against villagers near its oil fields.

"There was shareholder fatigue" in the investment, said David W. Mann, a senior
manager for investor relations at Talisman, which is based in Calgary, Alberta,
and listed on the New York Stock Exchange. He denied the suit's accusations.

Although a lawsuit filed against ChevronTexaco by villagers in Ecuador was
dismissed last year by a federal judge, the company decided to end its oil
development there last fall. The case is now scheduled to be heard in an
Ecuadorian court. Various factors led to the decision to leave Ecuador, but the
litigation "was not a positive indicator to say this is a place we want to
continue to do business," said Edward B. Scott, vice president and general
counsel for the company's overseas division. The threat of similar litigation,
he said, "adds a further element of risk and makes us less competitive."

SECURITY experts regard such statements as signs that multinational companies
based in the United States are increasingly worried about their liability for
acts committed by host governments, which have long provided security and other
services for their oil, mining and other projects.

While corporate officials emphatically defend their human-rights records
overseas, "business leaders are getting very nervous about these lawsuits," said
Catherine J. Boggs, a lawyer at Baker & McKensie in Chicago, who advises
companies about security arrangements with local governments. "Some think the
best way to deal with them is to try to repeal the law altogether, or at least
modify it."

To that end, pro-trade groups and the Justice Department filed briefs in May in
the Unocal case, arguing that the alien tort statute had been misapplied by
plaintiffs and that such lawsuits could undermine American business interests
and the war or terrorism. The lawsuit bears "serious implications for our
current war against terrorism" and permits similar claims to be easily asserted
against allies in that war, an assistant attorney general, Robert D. McCallum,
wrote in the government's brief.

Despite increased pressure on judges to support the antiterrorism effort, legal
experts say it is unlikely that the court will move to invalidate use of the
alien tort statute in the Unocal case. Yet even if it advances to a jury trial,
it may be difficult to prove that Unocal actively participated in abuse by
Myanmar. "It's not to say that these acts weren't horrible, but the aiding and
abetting by Unocal is not obvious," said Anthony J. Sebok, a professor at the
Brooklyn Law School who specializes in tort law. "These are difficult
allegations to prove because they have to show that Unocal knew precisely how
its aid was being used to commit human rights abuses."

Yet company officials worry that the aiding-and-abetting standard, which can
include "knowing practical assistance, encouragement or moral support" to the
perpetrator of the abuse, is so broad that practically any involvement with the
government of Myanmar could be misconstrued as complicity. "The investment
itself could be considered moral support or assistance," said M. Randall
Oppenheimer, a lawyer at O'Melveny & Myers in Los Angeles, who represents Unocal
in the case. "It seems fundamentally unfair to hold people liable for a
situation that they don't control."

The plaintiffs argue, however, that Unocal was well aware of the military's poor
human rights record in Myanmar and should have known that its security forces
would engage in brutal practices, like forcing villagers who lived in the path
of the pipeline not only to relocate, but to help build it. Their lawyers cite a
1992 report by consultants who advised the company on the risks of doing
business with the government of Myanmar. The report warned that the military
"habitually uses forced labor to construct roads."

A lawyer who represents the plaintiffs, Katharine J. Redford of EarthRights
International in Washington, said: "Their own consultants told them they could
be implicated as a willing partner in the abuse. That's exactly our allegation."

EVEN if the suit fails to prove that such actions amounted to aiding and
abetting Myanmar's military, legal experts say that potentially embarrassing
evidence made public during a jury trial could embolden potential plaintiffs in
other cases to come forward. "It's similar to what happened with tobacco,"
Professor Sebok said. "The very fact that they were able to see the corporate
files raises the threat value, so the next time around there would be greater
willingness to settle at some price."

While companies aggressively fight both the lawsuits and the statute on which
they are based, many have also endorsed documents like the State Department's
Voluntary Principles on Human Rights and Security. It outlines ways to ensure
security for corporate operations and to prevent abuse -- to add human rights
clauses to contracts with security firms, for example.

Some have also begun to work with organizations outside government. Executives
at the Royal Dutch/Shell Group are working with members of Human Rights Watch,
based in New York, to improve the human rights situation in Nigeria, where the
company has been accused of assisting in abuses against members of a local
opposition group. And Unocal has met with representatives of Amnesty
International and recently allowed observers from the Collaborative for
Development Action, an independent consulting group based in Boston, to visit
the Myanmar pipeline and study its impact on the local people.

"It's a very cynical strategy," said Arvind Ganesan, director of the business
and human rights program at Human Rights Watch, "because you end up with
companies' trying to do the right thing, but also trying to ensure that there's
no consequences for doing the wrong thing."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Protesters at Unocal's headquarters demonstrated in 2001
against its cooperation with the government of Myanmar. The government provided
security for Unocal's pipeline project near the Thai border. (Agence
France-Press/Getty, above; EarthRights International)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); NATURAL GAS
PRODUCTS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PIPELINE
TRANSPORTATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (89%); JURY
TRIALS (89%); TORTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); NATURAL GAS (78%);
GLOBALIZATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (78%);
OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CIVIL PROCEDURE (78%); SEX OFFENSES
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); NATURAL GAS PIPELINES
(77%); TORTURE (77%); PETROLEUM & COAL PRODUCTS MFG (76%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
(76%); OIL & GAS PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION (76%); LAWYERS (75%); US PRESIDENTS
(75%); GENOCIDE (72%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (71%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (71%);
DAMAGES (70%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (51%)
GAS (FUEL);  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  PIPELINES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SEX
CRIMES;  LABOR;  FOREIGN INVESTMENTS

ORGANIZATION: UNOCAL CORP

INDUSTRY:  SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS;

PERSON: MARKELS, ALEX

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

IN THE SCHOOLS;
Advocacy Invigorates Human Rights Topics

BYLINE:  By MERRI ROSENBERG;  E-mail: wested@nytimes.com.

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: NEW ROCHELLE


SLAVERY, violence in Latin America, oppression in China all these are compelling
topics to local undergraduates. Interest in human rights issues isn't new at
colleges, of course. But a blend of advocacy and academic study has recently
invigorated human rights offerings on local campuses.

"I think students showed more interest even before Sept. 11," said Dr. Zehra
Arat, a professor in the natural and social sciences division at Purchase
College. "What Sept. 11 did was increase interest in U.S. foreign involvement
and foreign policy."

Dr. Arat noted that until two years ago, the American Political Science
Association didn't even have a human rights section.

Pace University students at the Pleasantville campus can earn academic credit
for participating in the Model United Nations program, which is usually treated
as an extracurricular club. Students who choose to earn three credits for their
work are graded on the position papers they research and write, as well as other
projects. A student at the College of New Rochelle might examine the prevalence
of asthma in local schools; because the disease is often found in poor
neighborhoods, it is considered a rights issue.

Human rights courses have also migrated beyond the traditional confines of
history or political science departments. At Sarah Lawrence College in
Bronxville, such courses are offered through the anthropology, history and Asian
studies departments. The College of New Rochelle, with $250,000 in financing
from the federal Department of Education, has expanded its human rights
curriculum from seven undergraduate courses to 14, involving departments like
business and science as well as languages and international law.

"We're mainstreaming human rights into the curriculum," said Anne McKernan,
associate professor of history at the College of New Rochelle. "There's a
growing sense that this is a field with the potential for creating peace. Human
rights allows us to be global. Students want to be involved, and ask us about
advocacy."

At a daylong conference on human rights at the College of New Rochelle, local
high school students sat in rapt silence, viewing slides showing children who
were being exploited as slave workers in Africa, scavenging through garbage
dumps in the Philippines for food or living as refugees in the Balkans. They
listened to Craig Kielburger, the Canadian founder of Kids Can Free the
Children, a children's rights advocacy organization, recite a brutal litany of
abuses against children. Later the students met with Mr. Kielburger to discuss
ways they could make a difference, whether through raising money to help build
schools in Central America or raising awareness of children's rights among their
peers.

The Oct. 18 conference highlighted still another shift: the trickle-down effect
to local high schools of the increased interest in human rights.

Scarsdale, New Rochelle and Mamaroneck High Schools all offer a human rights
course. This is in addition to lessons about the Holocaust that are required by
state law and usually included in a history course.

At New Rochelle High School for the past two years. a course called "Facing
History and Ourselves" has been taught by Neal Shultz, a social studies teacher
and recipient of the Louis B. Yavner award for the teaching of human rights and
the Holocaust by the New York State Board of Regents.

" 'Facing History,' which came out of anti-Semitic incidents in Massachusetts,
looks at Jim Crow South racism, eugenics from the racial D.N.A. and Social
Darwinist movement, the Holocaust and issues around racial stereotyping and
profiling," said Mr. Shultz. The course has grown from one section of 19
students to 80 students in four sections.

"Students are aware of Nike and the sweatshops," said Mr. Schultz. "These kids
feel they're children of privilege, and are really hungry to do something. They
want to do more. It's why after-school clubs like Amnesty International and
Habitat for Humanity have proliferated."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Participants in a human rights class held at New Rochelle High
School. (George M. Gutierrez for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL
SCIENCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CHILD WELFARE (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS
(89%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(89%); SLAVERY (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); CURRICULA (89%);
CHILDREN (87%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EXTRA
CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (78%); FUNDRAISING (78%); STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); HISTORY (77%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (77%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); REFUGEES (73%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL
STUDIES (73%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (73%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (72%);
FOREIGN POLICY (70%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (70%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (69%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); SCHOOL BUILDINGS (67%); LANDFILLS (50%) COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN POLITICAL SCIENCE ASSOCIATION (57%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: ROSENBERG, MERRI

COUNTRY: CHINA (92%); AFRICA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (78%); LATIN AMERICA (73%)

REGION: WESTCHESTER COUNTY (NY)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Demand Vote on Libya's Leadership of Rights Panel

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Jan. 19


Libya, long accused by human rights advocates of major abuses, is set to win the
chairmanship of the United Nations' top rights body on Monday despite strong
opposition from the United States.

Diplomats said the North African country of President Muammar el-Qaddafi would
be chosen by the United Nations Human Rights Commission to preside at the annual
session at which the health of rights around the world would be scrutinized. The
six-week session is set for March 17-April 25 here in Geneva.

For the first time since the commission was founded in 1947, the decision will
go to a vote after Washington said it could not reward Libya's "terrible
conduct" and demanded a ballot.

Libya, which is still not fully free of United Nations penalties imposed for its
role in the Lockerbie airliner bombing, has been nominated by African countries
whose turn it is by United Nations tradition to make the choice.

"There will be enough votes in support, there is no doubt about that," said one
European diplomat. "Even the Americans are certain Libya will win."

So far only Canada has said it will back Washington in the secret ballot in the
53-nation commission, where there are a number of countries whose rights records
have often been questioned, including Cuba, Sudan and Algeria.

The seven European Union members of the Geneva-based body failed to agree on a
common position and each will decide for itself, European diplomats said.

Asian and Middle Eastern nations are increasingly opposed to the singling out of
nations for criticism during the annual sessions and would reject any bid to
stop African countries using their right to name the chairman, diplomats added.

"Libya's record as an abuser of human rights is well known," said the State
Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, in announcing Washington's position.
"It is also a country under U.N. sanctions because it has yet to fulfill the
conditions related to the bombing of Pan Am 103." Sanctions were suspended in
1999 after Libya handed over two agents for trial over the bombing, in 1988, in
which 270 people died. One agent was subsequently convicted and jailed.

Libya's ambassador to the United Nations here, Najat al-Hajjaji, who will take
over as commission chairwoman, declined to comment ahead of the vote. But Libya
has in the past dismissed Washington's objections as "lies."

Various United Nations human rights committees have expressed concern at reports
of torture, prolonged detention and extrajudicial killings in Libya, where the
unpredictable Qaddafi has governed since taking power in a coup in 1969.

"Over the past three decades, Libya's human rights record has been appalling,"
said Joanna Weschler of Human Rights Watch, based in New York.

Human rights advocates and officials are worried that the controversy generated
by the choice of chairman could further damage the standing of the commission,
which has shown increasing reluctance to speak out strongly against rights
abuses.

"Libya's election poses a real test for the commission," Ms. Weschler added.
"Repressive regimes must not be allowed to hijack the U.N. human rights system."

The United Nations human rights commissioner, Sergio Vieira de Mello, has backed
calls for reform, which would include conditions for commission membership, like
the ratifying and putting in place of all major human rights accords.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (88%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (78%); TORTURE (78%); COUPS (77%); APPOINTMENTS (77%); BALLOTS (74%);
FINES & PENALTIES (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (65%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON
HUMAN RIGHTS

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); NORTHERN AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (92%);
EUROPE (92%); SUDAN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); SWITZERLAND
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: LIBYA

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              6 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Cites Abuses by Moscow and Chechen Guerrillas

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 29


The international organization Human Rights Watch issued a broad condemnation of
the Russian government's human rights policies in Chechnya today. The Kremlin
was accused of using harassment and lies to force civilians from refugee camps
and allowing its military to beat and abduct Chechen civilians with virtual
impunity.

The group also said that Chechen guerrillas had ignored global conventions
banning human rights abuses in internal conflicts and that representatives of
Chechen separatist movements had offered only tepid objections to the
guerrillas' campaigns of terror and murder.

The guerrillas "are believed to be responsible for a continuing pattern of
assassinations of village administrators and other civil servants working for
the pro-Moscow government in Chechnya," the report said.

"At the same time, abuses by Russian forces in Chechnya -- forced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions, looting and arbitrary detention --
have continued unabated."

The 27-page report contained some new details of alleged abuses and human rights
violations by each side in the conflict. But the organization's overall
depiction of the conflict -- as a contest of bloodthirsty rebels pitted against
a military of mercenaries and ill-disciplined draftees -- has changed little
since the second round of the Chechnya war began more than three years ago.

The Russian government has regularly rebuffed such condemnations by Western
human rights groups and government monitors, calling them biased accounts by
outsiders who fail to grasp that the guerrillas are brutal terrorists. In recent
weeks it has won qualified support from the United States and some other Western
governments, which say the Chechen conflict has been supported, if not led, by
international terror groups.

Russia decided last month to close the Chechnya office of observers from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which monitors human and
political rights in a number of nations.

Human Rights Watch also said today that Russia had limited inspections by human
rights monitors from the United Nations, rejecting or delaying requests to visit
Chechnya from United Nations officials responsible for investigating allegations
of torture, illegal executions and violence against women.

In the report issued today, the organization said Russian officials had embarked
on a campaign to force thousands of civilians to leave war-refugee camps in
Ingushetia, which borders Chechnya, and return to an uncertain life in the
Chechen war zone.

The report charged that officials were using false promises to force families to
leave camps, saying that pledges to resettle the tent-dwellers in better
Ingushetia housing were in fact illusory. When Human Rights Watch officials
inspected 12 dwellings on a list of so-called "resettlement alternatives"
offered by the government, the report stated, 10 of the 12 were found to be
uninhabitable or nonexistent. Two others were filled to capacity.

The organizations also accused the two sides of failing to curb human rights
abuses by their forces and said civilians in Chechnya were at growing risk.

Separatist guerrillas have stepped up terrorist bombings and assassinations of
civilians seen as backing the region's pro-Moscow administration, the report
stated, while even government officials have complained publicly about the
increase this winter in executions widely attributed to Russian troops.

The organization also stated that it had documented a number of executions and
"disappearances" attributed to Russian soldiers, including the November slaying
of a human rights activist, Malika Umazheva, which it called "the first clearly
retaliatory murder of its kind."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); REFUGEES
(89%); CRIMINAL HARASSMENT (89%); INSPECTIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TORTURE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST PERSONS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (75%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (75%); CIVIL SERVICES (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Payoff for Colonel Qaddafi

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 375 words


The line between farce and tragedy can be blurry. This was certainly true
earlier this week when Libya was selected chairman of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights. It was an act of such absurdity that it may finally
force some serious thinking about reforming the commission. If such change does
not occur, that body, which advertises itself as the central world forum on
human rights, will pass from a state of confusion to one of utter irrelevance.

Libya's ascent from human rights pariah to chairman of the board has been a
tawdry one, involving cynical trade-offs. Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan
leader, has used his oil wealth to finance a new body of African fellowship
called the African Union. In exchange, he wanted his country to be selected by
fellow Africans as their next nominee to be chairman of the rights commission.
In the regional rotation of chairmanship, it was Africa's turn to select. A
number of African countries are striving to protect human rights, which makes
the selection of Libya for this position especially egregious.

All the principles the U.N. rights commission claims to stand for -- free
elections, free expression, fair trials -- are absent in Libya. Unfortunately,
the selection of Libya fits a pattern at the commission over the past few years.
Countries like Syria, Cuba, Algeria and China have taken up membership slots and
subverted the commission's purpose. Instead of investigating human rights abuse,
the commission has been turning itself into a support group for abusers.

This can change. The group Human Rights Watch has suggested that for a country
to gain a seat on the commission it must have ratified the main human rights
treaties, provided reports on its compliance with conventions, issued a standing
invitation to United Nations investigators and not have been condemned recently
by the commission.

The new United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Sergio Vieira de
Mello, supports this effort. He must answer to the commission but doesn't
control it. Nonetheless, he will be judged in part by how seriously the
commission can be taken. He should try to get the membership rules changed and
help steer a once-respectable international forum back to its rightful place.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%) EDITORIALS;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); AFRICAN
UNION (56%); UNITED NATIONS (55%) UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: DE MELLO, SERGIO VIEIRA (HIGH COMMISSIONER)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (94%); AFRICA (94%); SYRIA (76%)

REGION: LIBYA

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              9 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Could Come Under Scrutiny of the U.N. Rights Commission

BYLINE:  By ALISON LANGLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 17


The United Nations Commission on Human Rights, with Libya's ambassador as its
chairman, is about to begin an unusual annual session that is likely to focus on
the United States record and recent actions.

Commission participants said they might hold a "special sitting" to discuss
accusations that the United States is violating rights in its handling of people
accused of terrorism and in its counterterrorism measures. They also said that
during the six-week session the commission could look at any action the United
States took in Iraq.

The commission usually focuses on efforts to end trafficking in human beings,
religious intolerance or racism, though the commission's agenda has often been
shaped by politics.

"We see black clouds gathering in the sky of the region and this is ominous of a
catastrophic war which will certainly violate all human rights and especially
the right to life," said the Libyan ambassador, Najat al-Hajjaji, in her opening
remarks today.

Sergio Vieira de Mello, the high commissioner for human rights, said he was
watching the United States closely, especially its handling of prisoners held at
Guantanamo.

He noted that there were well-established rules against arbitrary detentions and
indefinite imprisonment, and guarantees about the treatment of prisoners and
trials. He said that those norms were under siege today, "and I urge you to
address it squarely in the coming weeks."

The United States delegation sat quietly through the opening remarks. Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, the United States representative to the commission, will have her
chance to speak on Tuesday.

At a news conference later, Ms. Hajjaji said she believed that the issue of Iraq
would dominate deliberations. "I don't think the commission can ignore war, any
kind of war," she said.

What the outcome of a special sitting on Iraq might be is unclear. The United
States has never been formally censured by the human rights group and it is not
likely that it will be this time. Many countries are reluctant to take such
action, especially if they themselves could be censured in the future. Criticism
at the session is more likely, especially over the handling of the prisoners at
Guantanamo.

Johannes Kyrle, Austria's secretary general for foreign affairs, said he
believed that the human rights commission had an important complementary role to
that of the United Nations Security Council in ensuring that the world strikes
the right balance between security and human rights.

Much attention is expected to focus on the commission's chairwoman. The Libyan
ambassador said she believed she could be neutral in the debate on Iraq and
would act only on the wishes of commission members.

But at one point in the news conference, Ms. Hajjaji reacted sharply when asked
about a looming war in Iraq, saying that if cities were attacked, "do you think
they will be respecting human rights?"

Ms. Hajjaji's appointment drew criticism when it was made in January because
Libya has been widely accused of human rights violations. Today, a group of
protesters from a group called Reporters Without Borders sitting in the balcony
unfurled a banner with the word "shame" and threw leaflets on delegates
condemning the appointment. The protesters were removed by guards.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (72%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); IRAQ WAR (71%); RACE & RACISM
(69%); NAVIES (68%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (55%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  GUANTANAMO BAY
NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: LANGLEY, ALISON; HAJJAJI, NAJAT AL- (AMB); DE MELLO, SERGIO VIEIRA (HIGH
COMMISSIONER)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (92%); LIBYA (91%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); AUSTRIA (52%)

REGION: IRAQ;  LIBYA;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civilian Toll: A Moral and Legal Bog

BYLINE:  By DAPHNE EVIATAR

SECTION: Section D; Column 2; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1717 words


Civilian casualties are unavoidable in war, and this one is no exception.
"People are going to die," Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, said this month before the invasion of Iraq.

But the United States military makes intense efforts to avoid civilian deaths.
Washington trains its soldiers on the rules of war and has introduced procedures
to try to minimize harm to noncombatants. The Defense Department's lawyers are
constantly consulted about military strategy and targets when time permits; and
the military has invested huge resources in developing precision-guided weapons
to reduce the loss of innocent life. "It's an embedded and intrinsic part of
American military culture post-Vietnam," said William Arkin, a senior fellow at
the Center for Strategic Education at Johns Hopkins University and senior
military adviser to Human Rights Watch.

Still, civilian casualties inevitably bring anguish and outcries. That is
particularly true now, when war's face can be instantaneously broadcast and
magnified to millions all over the globe. Indeed, there was even discussion of
charging NATO officials with war crimes for the 1999 bombing of Kosovo, which
killed about 500 civilians, although justified on humanitarian grounds. (The
charges, brought before the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
were ultimately dropped by prosecutors.)

The 20th century's experience with war has produced a web of international
treaties setting out detailed rules of armed conflict. When it comes to
noncombatants, there are two overarching principles that everyone seems to agree
on. The first is that the military can't intentionally make targets of
civilians. The second is that if commanders know that striking a legitimate
military target will kill civilians, causing so-called collateral damage, they
must weigh the importance of the military target against the loss of civilian
lives.

Just how to interpret those principles, though, and how to weigh the loss of
civilian life against other factors, like the lives of American soldiers or the
success of the entire military campaign itself, is vigorously debated.

The divisions have become so severe that over the last two years, the Carr
Center for the Study of Human Rights Policy at Harvard has sponsored a project
that brings together representatives from the military, international lawyers
and human rights groups to consider each other's vastly different legal
interpretations.

"The human rights community is absolutist at its core," said Sarah Sewall,
program director at the Carr Center and former deputy assistant secretary of
defense for peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance in the Clinton
administration. "From a military mind-set, civilian casualties are one of the
trade-offs."

She added, "It's inherently more complex than the human rights community
approaches it."

One of those complexities, said Adam Roberts, professor of international law at
Oxford University and an editor of "Documents on the Laws of War" (Oxford
University Press, 1999), is that "there are various acts which are questionable
but not plainly illegal."

The most widely accepted rules derive from the four Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which govern a range of humanitarian issues arising in wartime, from aiming at
civilians to the treatment of prisoners of war. In 1977, protocols were added to
elaborate on the conventions, and that's where bitter disagreements have arisen,
particularly with the Americans. (Although more than 150 nations have ratified
the protocols, the United States has not.) And while the United States
recognizes some of them as "customary international law," it has rejected
others, among them how to measure the military value of a target.

"It isn't like there's one set of rules," said Ken Anderson, a law professor at
American University who has written widely about the rules of armed conflict.

As even international legal scholars acknowledge, in the end you're left with
tough judgment calls. And everyone agrees it is far more difficult to make those
judgments on the ground, say when soldiers are going house to house in urban
warfare, which is what some expect to happen in Baghdad.

Creating situations that call for such excruciating decisions can be part of the
enemy strategy. American officials say, for example, that President Saddam
Hussein has intentionally placed much of his military equipment around
quintessentially civilian sites: parks, mosques, hospitals and schools. Using
the same logic, he has also stationed civilians at military sites, either to
deter an attack or to blame the United States for large civilian casualties if
it bombs those targets anyway. Both are blatant violations of international law.

But how does an attacking force weigh, say, taking out an antiaircraft weapon in
a playground against the lives of schoolchildren? "It's a balancing test between
the damage you're likely to cause, against your guess about what is the military
value of the thing you're trying to hit," Mr. Anderson said.

Scholars and military officials often split over what is the obligation of
attacking forces when the commanders know those civilians are there.
Schoolchildren are clearly still civilians, but what about people who volunteer
to stand by a military installation to deter an attack? Human rights advocates
and some legal experts, for example, say those human shields are still
civilians, so the rule of proportionality applies. The military doesn't agree.
"They lose that protection," said Maj. Ted Wadsworth, a spokesman for the
Defense Department. "They've chosen to become combatants."

Then there are "dual-use targets," like installations that are critical both to
the military and to civilians, a bridge or an electric power grid. In the 1991
Persian Gulf war, for example, the United States destroyed Iraq's power grid,
crippling its military communications. That also created severe food shortages,
destroyed water-purification and sewage-treatment plants and disrupted medical
care, a Human Rights Watch report said, suggesting the action violated the
Geneva Conventions. The United States defended hitting the targets, arguing that
it was crucial to defeating the enemy.

In a less extreme example, during the Kosovo war, NATO killed 16 civilians when
it bombed the Serbian state television headquarters in Belgrade, which many
critics said was an unlawful civilian target. NATO officials said the attack was
justified because the station was being used by the Yugoslav president, Slobodan
Milosevic, as "an instrument of propaganda and repression." Broadcasting was
only briefly interrupted, however.

Mr. Roberts of Oxford University said: "The U.S. has developed a doctrine of
targeting, which aims at resources of power of the adversary -- government
installations or residences of the ruling elite. It's a philosophy of war which
allows one to attack the sources of government power."

These dilemmas all point to another thorny question. When you weigh civilian
lives against military targets, what is the proper measure of military value? Is
it the value of eliminating, say, a particular antiaircraft weapon or the value
of the broader military strategy of eliminating all of the enemy's antiaircraft
weapons? The Defense Department says the value of any strike must be considered
in the context of the entire military campaign. After all, saving some lives in
the short run could end in prolonging the war and increasing the total death
toll.

Human rights advocates counter that the First Protocol to the Geneva Conventions
suggests the opposite: that the proper measure is whether the particular target
in each case "offers a definite military advantage." To international legal
experts like Mr. Anderson, though, both readings are possible because the
protocol itself is unclear. "I regard it as inherently ambiguous, designed to
try and satisfy two different views of this when it was drafted."

Other weapons, too, are legally disputed, like cluster bombs, land mines and
depleted-uranium-tipped missiles, which spread radioactive dust when they
explode. Critics say they are inherently threatening to civilians but are part
of the American arsenal. And there is the question of nuclear weapons. In 1996
the International Court of Justice in the Hague ruled that the use of nuclear
weapons is illegal except in "an extreme circumstance of self-defense, in which
the very survival of a state would be at stake." The United States doesn't buy
that. In its annual Nuclear Posture Review last year, defense planners called
for developing new nuclear weapons that would be better suited for striking
targets in Iraq, among other countries.

Of course many American weapons relie on advanced technology to help avoid
killing innocents. American military officials point out that while less than 10
percent of the weapons were smart bombs in the 1991 gulf war, up to 90 percent
of the weapons used in this campaign are.

But as the wars in Serbia and Afghanistan showed, air strikes cause collateral
damage. "There are always intelligence errors or missiles fall short and go
wrong," said Ruth Wedgewood, professor of international law at Johns Hopkins
University.

And even with such technology, military planners must still weigh enemy civilian
lives against their own. In Kosovo, NATO was criticized for flying its planes at
15,000 feet to ensure the safety of its pilots, at the expense of more precise
bombing that might have helped avoid killing civilians on the ground. Yet flying
at lower altitudes would have made the pilots easier targets.

In the end, no amount of precision technology can substitute for informed human
judgment when it comes to deciding when it is legitimate to kill civilians.
"Military people feel highly constrained by political sensitivities to
collateral damage concerns," Ms. Sewall of the Carr Center said. "But that's
only good if those political sensitivities translate into guidance that actually
has a positive effect on the conduct of war.

"The Department of Defense doesn't consider it part of their essential task to
account for civilian deaths, so the military system lacks empirical data about
the damage. They have legal review and political sensibilities, but whether or
not those translate into effective practices is another matter."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Homes were destroyed by a NATO missile in the center of
Pristina, Kosovo's capital, on April 7, 1999. (Reuters); NATO planes bombed two
convoys in western Kosovo on April 14, 1999, and this civilian vehicle was hit
by mistake, NATO conceded. The bodies lie along a road near Bistrazin. The
Yugoslav authorities said 75 people had been killed and 26 injured in the
attacks. About 500 civilians were killed in NATO bombings that year. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. D7); Some pothole: American-led air strikes on Oct. 18, 2001,
left this crater on a main road in Kabul. Witnesses said one woman was killed.
(Reuters)(pg. D9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%);
ETHICS (76%); LAWYERS (76%); LAW SCHOOLS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); HIJACKING (71%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (71%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL
AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  ETHICS

COMPANY: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS (80%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
(84%); JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (80%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (80%)

PERSON: EVIATAR, DAPHNE

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA (94%); IRAQ (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuba Attacks U.N. Proposal on Jailed Dissidents

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 574 words


Cuba yesterday denounced a proposed amendment to a United Nations human rights
resolution calling for the immediate release of the more than 75 Cuban
dissidents imprisoned in recent weeks.

The amendment, introduced by Costa Rica at the United Nations Human Rights
Commission meeting in Geneva, is intended to strengthen a resolution on Cuba
introduced by several Latin American nations. In criticizing the measure, Cuban
officials said the United States was forcing "vile lackeys" to condemn Havana
while ignoring what the officials said were rights abuses against prisoners of
war at the United States Naval Station at Guantanamo Bay.

Costa Rican officials said they had introduced the amendment to reflect the
recent roundup of dissidents in Cuba and the execution last week after a secret
trial of three men who hijacked a ferry in an effort to reach the United States.
Delegates to the 53-member panel debated for two hours before deciding to resume
discussion, with a possible vote on Thursday.

While the rights panel has regularly criticized Cuba, it has done so mildly,
suggesting only that the authorities allow a visit by a human rights monitor.
Cuba rebuffed that suggestion last year.

Human rights advocates said this year's resolution -- which was sponsored by
Uruguay, Peru and Costa Rica -- was weak, especially considering that the panel
began its sessions just as world leaders and rights groups were condemning the
Cuban government for its recent actions.

"The language of the resolution was extremely weak because it did not reflect
the crackdown," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of the Americas division at
Human Rights Watch in Washington. "It was a slap on the wrist. The trouble is
there a very good chance that the resolution will be approved. That would be a
shame because it totally inadequate."

Part of the reason is that Latin American nations have been reluctant to speak
out against Cuba.

Brazil announced it would abstain from the vote. President Eduardo Duhalde of
Argentina said his nation would also abstain, citing his opposition to the
American trade embargo against Cuba and the war on Iraq. "We consider the vote
to be very inopportune given this unilateral war that has violated human rights
," Reuters quoted him as saying.

Mr. Vivanco said he had spoken by telephone with people in Geneva who said that
while the debate was "nasty," only the United States and the European Union --
which is considering a trade and aid deal with Cuba -- immediately co-sponsored
the amendment.

"To raise the issue of human rights in Cuba is a problem because the Latin
countries do not want to look like puppets of the United States," Mr. Vivanco
said. "Latin America has been quiet. At the end of the day, what prevails here
is the sense that this is a U.S. issue."

Cuban officials have defended the arrests and trials as a result of provocations
by American diplomats in Cuba. They said those arrested were mercenaries and
traitors.

But even some longtime supporters of President Fidel Castro are aghast at recent
events on the island. Jose Saramago, the Nobel prize winning Portuguese writer,
declared on Monday that his close friendship with Mr. Castro had ended.

"This is my limit," he wrote in the Spanish newspaper El Pais. "From now on Cuba
will go on its path. I'm staying here. Dissent is a right that is and will be
inscribed in invisible ink in every past, present and future human rights
declaration."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (90%);
JAIL SENTENCING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
POWS & MIAS (78%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); APPROVALS (73%); IRAQ WAR (70%);
NAVIES (70%); EUROPEAN UNION (68%); POLITICS (66%); NONTARIFF BARRIERS (61%);
ARMED FORCES (55%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (57%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (59%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); LATIN AMERICA (94%); COSTA RICA (94%);
SWITZERLAND (93%); URUGUAY (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); IRAQ
(79%); BRAZIL (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%)

REGION: CUBA;  LATIN AMERICA

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Needed Human Rights Law

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 363 words


In 1996, American lawyers filed a class-action lawsuit accusing Swiss banks of
withholding the assets of Holocaust victims. Two years later, the suit was
settled, and a fund of $1.25 billion was established to pay those with
legitimate claims. The suit was filed under the Alien Tort Claims Act -- a
little-known statute that is a powerful tool for promoting human rights. But now
the Justice Department wants to end the law's use in such suits, a reversal that
would effectively grant impunity to those who abuse human rights abroad.

The law has been around since 1789, but it has been applied in human rights
cases only recently. In 1980 a federal court used the act to rule for the family
of a Paraguayan who had been tortured to death by a policeman. The court ruled
that foreigners can use the law to sue those who commit serious human rights
violations overseas. Since then, victims have sued Ferdinand Marcos, the former
Philippine president, Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, and Cuban
officials.

The world largely accepts the principle that gross abusers of human rights
cannot go free simply because they are powerful enough to avoid justice at home.
What has drawn the Bush administration's wrath are lawsuits against
corporations. Four suits are pending against energy companies, alleging all were
complicit in serious human rights abuses abroad. The Justice Department filed
its brief in a suit brought by citizens of Myanmar alleging that Unocal knew of
and profited from forced labor and other abuses during the construction of a gas
pipeline. In that and other suits, the administration has told judges that
ruling against the corporations would endanger American interests or the war on
terror. It is seeking a ruling that such suits cannot be brought under the Alien
Tort Claims Act.

Courts have ruled that companies can be held liable under the law only if they
committed crimes or knowingly collaborated in them. The possibility of lawsuits
has been a major impulse for oil and gas companies to work with human rights
groups to change their practices. To stop lawsuits under this act would be to
put abusive individuals and companies above the law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); CLASS ACTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HOLOCAUST (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (78%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (78%);
BUSINESS TORTS (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); FORCED LABOR (76%); TORTURE (76%);
TERRORISM (73%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); OIL & GAS
PIPELINES (69%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (69%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (69%); OIL &
GAS PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION (64%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  EDITORIALS;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  GAS (FUEL)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); PHILIPPINES
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Libya to Head Rights Panel Despite U.S. Opposition

BYLINE:  By BARRY JAMES,  International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 20


The United Nations Commission on Human Rights, meeting in Geneva, elected Libya
to its chairmanship today after the United States demanded and lost a vote.

The United States insisted on a vote, which was the first since the commission
was formed in 1946. The chairmanship is usually decided by consensus. It was
apparently a move to embarrass Libya's supporters.

But 33 countries voted for Libya. Only three -- the United States, Canada and,
reports said, Guatemala -- voted no. Seventeen countries abstained, including
seven members of the European Union. Diplomats said they did not want to offend
African nations, whose turn it is under a rotating system to select the new
leader.

The vote means Libya will preside over the meeting, from March 17 to April 25,
at which the commission will survey the human rights situation around the world.

Libya has been accused of abducting and torturing opponents of its government.
It has openly supported violent organizations like the Irish Republican Army,
and it is held responsible for the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie,
Scotland, in which 270 people died.

The Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, has assiduously courted African
nations with cash and political influence. He was a driving force behind the
formation of the new African Union, even paying off some of the debts of the old
Organization of African Unity, its predecessor.

Libya, still not fully free from United Nations penalties that were imposed
because of the Lockerbie bombing, was the only country nominated by the African
bloc.

The United States insisted on a vote, the State Department spokesman Richard A.
Boucher said, because Libya's "terrible conduct" should not be rewarded.

The United States has just rejoined the commission after losing its seat in 2001
in a secret vote of member countries.

The American ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, Kevin Moley, said he
was "deeply disappointed" by the outcome. "A country with this record does not
merit a leadership role," he said.

Human rights advocates said the election of a country that has not had a free
election since Colonel Qaddafi seized power in 1969 put the credibility of the
rights panel at stake.

Earlier, in a statement, Human Rights Watch said Libya's rights record over
three decades had been "appalling." Amnesty International also has expressed
concern that about 150 opponents of the government who are facing trial in Libya
later this month will not receive a fair hearing.

The Libyan representative to the Human Rights Commission, Najat al-Hajjaji, said
in a speech after her election that she would rely on the body's collective
wisdom and that she would avoid "as far as possible" making decisions on a
personal basis.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (73%);
BOMBINGS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (70%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (67%); FINES &
PENALTIES (67%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (53%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  LIBYA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); AFRICAN
UNION (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY
(56%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (54%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: JAMES, BARRY

COUNTRY: LIBYA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFRICA (94%); CANADA (92%);
SWITZERLAND (92%); NORTH AMERICA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: LIBYA

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTERROGATIONS;
Questioning Terror Suspects In a Dark and Surreal World

BYLINE:  This article was reported by Raymond Bonner, Don Van Natta Jr. and Amy
Waldman and written by Mr. Van Natta.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2641 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, March 8


The capture of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed provides American authorities with their
best opportunity yet to prevent attacks by Al Qaeda and track down Osama bin
Laden. But the detention also presents a tactical and moral challenge when it
comes to the interrogation techniques used to obtain vital information.

Senior American officials said physical torture would not be used against Mr.
Mohammed, regarded as the operations chief of Al Qaeda and mastermind of the
Sept. 11 attacks. They said his interrogation would rely on what they consider
acceptable techniques like sleep and light deprivation and the temporary
withholding of food, water, access to sunlight and medical attention.

American officials acknowledged that such techniques were recently applied as
part of the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, the highest-ranking Qaeda operative
in custody until the capture of Mr. Mohammed. Painkillers were withheld from Mr.
Zubaydah, who was shot several times during his capture in Pakistan.

But the urgency of obtaining information about potential attacks and the opaque
nature of the way interrogations are carried out can blur the line between
accepted and unaccepted actions, several American officials said.

Routine techniques include covering suspects' heads with black hoods for hours
at a time and forcing them to stand or kneel in uncomfortable positions in
extreme cold or heat, American and other officials familiar with interrogations
said. Questioners may also feign friendship and respect to elicit information.
In some cases, American officials said, women are used as interrogators to try
to humiliate men unaccustomed to dealing with women in positions of authority.

Interrogations of important Qaeda operatives like Mr. Mohammed occur at isolated
locations outside the jurisdiction of American law. Some places have been kept
secret, but American officials acknowledged that the C.I.A. has interrogation
centers at the United States air base at Bagram in Afghanistan and at a base on
Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean.

Qaeda operatives, including Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a suspect in the planning of the
Sept. 11 attacks, were initially taken to a secret C.I.A. installation in
Thailand but have since been moved, American officials said.

Intelligence officials also acknowledged that some suspects had been turned over
to security services in countries known to employ torture. There have also been
isolated, if persistent, reports of beatings in some American-operated centers.
American military officials in Afghanistan are investigating the deaths of two
prisoners at Bagram in December.

American officials have guarded the interrogation results. But George J. Tenet,
the director of central intelligence, said in December that suspects
interrogated overseas had produced important information.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld have
said that American techniques adhere to international accords that ban the use
of torture and that "all appropriate measures" are employed in interrogations.

Rights advocates and lawyers for prisoners' rights have accused the United
States of quietly embracing torture as an acceptable means of getting
information in the global antiterrorism campaign. "They don't have a policy on
torture," said Holly Burkhalter, the United States director of Physicians for
Human Rights, one of five groups pressing the Pentagon for assurances detainees
are not being tortured. "There is no specific policy that eschews torture."

Critics also assert that transferring Qaeda suspects to countries where torture
is believed common -- like Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia -- violates American
law and the 1984 international convention against torture, which bans such
transfers.

Some American and other officials subscribe to a view held by a number of
outside experts, that physical coercion is largely ineffective. The officials
say the most effective interrogation methods involve a mix of psychological
disorientation, physical deprivation and ingratiating acts, all of which can
take weeks or months.

"Pain alone will often make people numb and unresponsive," said Magnus Ranstorp,
deputy director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence
at St. Andrews University in Scotland. "You have to engage people to get into
their minds and learn what is there."

About 3,000 Qaeda and Taliban suspects have been detained since the fall of
2001. Some have since been freed. The largest known group, about 650, is being
held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. American officials said the detainees at
Guantanamo and similar military-run centers were not regarded as having valuable
information.

Senior Qaeda members, however, are interrogated by specially trained C.I.A.
officers and interpreters. F.B.I. agents submit questions but do not generally
take part, American officials said.

Starving the Senses
Deprivation And Black Hoods

Omar al-Faruq, a confidant of Mr. bin Laden and one of Al Qaeda's senior
operatives in Southeast Asia, was captured last June by Indonesian agents acting
on a tip from the C.I.A. Agents familiar with the case said a black hood was
dropped over his head and he was loaded onto a C.I.A. aircraft. When he arrived
at his destination several hours later, the hood was removed. On the wall in
front of him were the seals of the New York City Police and Fire Departments, a
Western official said.

It was, said a former senior C.I.A. officer who took part in similar sessions, a
mind game called false flag, intended to leave the captive disoriented, isolated
and vulnerable. Sometimes the decor is faked to make it seem as though the
suspect has been taken to a country with a reputation for brutal interrogation.

In this case, officials said, Mr. Faruq was in the C.I.A. interrogation center
at the Bagram air base. American officials were convinced that he knew a lot
about pending attacks and the Qaeda network in Southeast Asia, which Mr. bin
Laden sent him to set up in 1998.

The details of the interrogation are unknown, though one intelligence official
briefed on the sessions said Mr. Faruq initially provided useless scraps of
information.

What is known is that the questioning was prolonged, extending day and night for
weeks. It is likely, experts say, that the proceedings followed a pattern, with
Mr. Faruq left naked most of the time, his hands and feet bound. While
international law requires prisoners to be allowed eight hours' sleep a day,
interrogators do not necessarily let them sleep for eight consecutive hours.

Mr. Faruq may also have been hooked up to sensors, then asked questions to which
interrogators knew the answers, so they could gauge his truthfulness, officials
said.

The Western intelligence official described Mr. Faruq's interrogation as "not
quite torture, but about as close as you can get." The official said that over a
three-month period, the suspect was fed very little, while being subjected to
sleep and light deprivation, prolonged isolation and room temperatures that
varied from 100 degrees to 10 degrees. In the end he began to cooperate.

Mr. Faruq began to tell of plans to drive explosives-laden trucks into American
diplomatic centers. A day later, embassies in Indonesia and more than a dozen
other countries in Southeast Asia were closed, officials said. He also provided
detailed information about people involved in those operations and other plots,
writing out lengthy descriptions. He held out longer than Mr. Zubaydah, who
American officials said began to cooperate after two months of interrogation.

American intelligence knows a great deal about Mr. Mohammed, who has been sought
since the mid-1990's. That knowledge, an expert said, can provide leverage. "The
important thing is to construct the suspect's personal history and learn about
the person before you interrogate them," a European counterterrorism official
said. "Shock is a great technique. When we can show someone that we already know
a lot about them, including intimate personal details, they are shocked and more
likely to start talking."

The Centers
Details Emerge From the Shadows

The secret C.I.A. center at Bagram where Mr. Faruq probably remains is near the
two-story detention center where lower-level suspects are being held. Both sites
are off limits, even to most military personnel. The only descriptions of life
inside have come from released detainees.

American officials at the base say that all detainees are treated according to
international law and are held under humane conditions. Still, the Americans
expressed reluctance to describe details of the conditions because, as Col.
Roger King, spokesman for the American-led force in Afghanistan, put it: "Every
detail we give you about how we run the facility provides information to the
enemy about how to be more successful in resisting if captured."

But he did provide some information that both complemented and contradicted the
descriptions given by former detainees.

In a typical prison, where punishment is the aim, routine governs life. At
Bagram, where eliciting information is the goal, the opposite is true.
Disorientation is a tool of interrogation and therefore a way of life.

To that end, the building -- an unremarkable hangar -- is lighted 24 hours a
day, making sleep almost impossible, said Muhammad Shah, an Afghan farmer who
was held there for 18 days.

Colonel King said it was legitimate to use lights, noise and vision restriction,
and to alter, without warning, the time between meals, to blur a detainee's
sense of time. He said sleep deprivation was "probably within the lexicon."

Prisoners are watched, moved and, according to some, manhandled by military
police officials. Most detainees live on the hangar's bottom floor, a large area
divided with wire mesh into group cells holding 8 to 10 prisoners each. Some are
kept on the top floor in isolation cells.

Former detainees have given disparate accounts of their treatment, with the
harshest tales, predictably, emerging from the isolation cells. Those who have
probably been subjected to the most thorough interrogations, and the greatest
duress, have probably not been released.

Colonel King said that an American military pathologist had determined that the
deaths of two prisoners in December were homicides and that the circumstances
were still under investigation.

Two former prisoners said they had been forced to stand with their hands chained
to the ceiling and their feet shackled in the isolation cells.

One said he was kept naked except when he was taken to interrogation room or the
bathroom.

Mr. Shah, who was never in an isolation cell, said neither his hands nor feet
were ever tied, but he had seen prisoners with chains around their ankles.

Colonel King said that the building was heated and that the prisoners were fed a
balanced diet under which most gained weight. Mr. Shah said he had received
plentiful food -- bread, biscuits, rice and meat -- three times a day.

The center holds fewer than 100 people, so detainees are regularly released or
transported elsewhere to make room for more. Most probably spend two to three
months there, Colonel King said.

Mr. Shah said his interrogators used the threat of moving him to Guantanamo Bay
to try to force cooperation, warning him conditions there would not be as
pleasant.

Guantanamo Bay
Order Obscures Signs of Distress

At Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, American military officials said the population, now
relatively steady at about 650, was sorted into varying categories of
dangerousness, a change from the early days when prisoners were treated equally,
each isolated in an individual cell.

This month the military command opened a new medium-security section called Camp
Four where selected prisoners live in dormitory-style housing, congregate,
shower regularly, play board games and are able to write more frequent letters
to family members. About 20 prisoners moved in this week, and when construction
is completed as many as 200 prisoners could be housed there.

"This is designed to house people who are deemed to be less of a security risk,"
said Lt. Col. Barry Johnson, a military spokesman at the base.

But underlying the superficial orderliness are signs of deep psychological
distress among the population. There have been 20 reported suicide attempts
involving the prisoners, an extraordinarily high number compared with other
prison populations, said Dr. Terry Kupers, an Oakland psychiatrist who is an
authority on mental health in prisons.

Another suicide attempt took place on Friday, The Associated Press said today.

Except for those who are recently promoted to Camp Four, the regime for most
prisoners has been isolation in single cells. They are permitted out of the
cells twice a week, for 15 minutes each time, to shower and exercise in the
yard. They are not permitted to have physical contact with one another.

Lt. Cmdr. Barbara Burfeind, a Pentagon spokeswoman, said guards were trained to
recognize signs of deep depression and had managed to prevent suicides.


Foreign Soil
Many Definitions Of 'Acceptable'

Far less is known about the conditions for the suspected Qaeda members who have
been turned over to foreign governments, either after the United States finished
with them or as part of the interrogation procedure. Even the numbers and
locations are a mystery.

American and foreign intelligence officials have acknowledged that suspects have
been sent to Jordan, Syria and Egypt. In addition, Moroccan intelligence
officials have questioned suspects and shared information with their American
counterparts.

In one case in Morocco, lawyers for three Saudis and seven Moroccans accused of
plotting to blow up American and British ships in the Strait of Gibraltar last
summer said their clients were tortured. Moroccan officials denied that physical
torture was used but acknowledged using sleep and light deprivation and serial
teams of interrogators until the suspects broke.

"I am allowed to use all means in my possession," a senior Moroccan intelligence
official said. "You have to fight all his resistance at all levels and show him
that he is wrong, that his ideology is wrong and is not connected to religion.
We break them, yes."

In Cairo, leaders of several human rights organizations and attorneys who
represent prisoners said torture by the Egyptian government's internal security
force had become routine. They also said they believed that the United States
had sent a handful of Qaeda suspectsto Egypt for harsh interrogations and
torture by Egyptian officials.

"In the past, the United States harshly criticized Egypt when there was human
rights violations, but now, for America, it is security first -- security,
before human rights," said Muhammad Zarei, a lawyer who had been director of the
Cairo-based Human Rights Center for the Assistance of Prisoners.

Egyptian officials denied that any Qaeda members or terror suspects had been
moved to Egypt. An Egyptian government spokesman, Nabil Osman, blamed rogue
officers for abuses and said there was no systematic policy of torture.

"Any terrorist will claim torture -- that's the easiest thing," Mr. Osman said.
"Claims of torture are universal. Human rights organizations make their living
on these claims. Their job is not to talk about the human rights of the victim
but of the human rights of the terrorist or those in jail."

Mr. Osman declined to say whether Egypt had assisted with interrogations of
Qaeda suspects at the request of the Americans. He would say only that both
governments had cooperated in sharing information about terrorists and potential
terrorist activities.

"We are providing them with a wealth of information," he said.

He said many of Egypt's antiterrorism initiatives, like military tribunals, had
been imitated by the Untied States. "We set the model," he said, "for combating
terrorism."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Soldiers from a military police unit of the Puerto Rican
National Guard help provide security at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where about 650
terror suspects are being held. (Associated Press); A terror suspect, above, was
taken from the interrogation room at Guantanamo Bay last year after being
questioned. The inmates being held in facilities at the naval base there are
issued a jumpsuit, sandals, a canteen, shampoo, a sheet and a blanket.
(Reuters); (Associated Press)(pg. 18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (91%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (91%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); TORTURE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (84%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); PRISONS (72%); RANKINGS
(69%); MILITARY BASES (68%); LAWYERS (66%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (66%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (65%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (60%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (88%) VAN NATTA, DON JR; MOHAMMED, KHALID SHAIKH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%); PAKISTAN (79%);
PUERTO RICO (79%); THAILAND (52%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuban Dissidents Get Prison Terms as Long as 27 Years

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, April 7


Cuban courts today began handing out prison terms of up to 27 years to dozens of
dissidents, including journalists and librarians, who had been advocating
democratic reforms, according to human rights groups and news reports from
Havana.

The harsh sentences capped five days of trials in which state security agents
who had infiltrated dissident groups testified against their supposed colleagues
on charges of subversion and collaborating with American diplomats. Almost 80
people were arrested in an islandwide sweep that started last month and that has
been condemned by numerous human rights advocates, the European Union and
foreign leaders.

Hector Palacios, a key organizer of the Varela Project, which seeks democratic
reforms, was sentenced to 25 years. Marta Beatriz Roque, an independent
economist who angered authorities when she invited the chief American diplomat
in Cuba to her home in February, received a 20-year sentence.

Omar Rodriguez Saludes, an independent journalist who covered the news scooting
around Havana on a battered bicycle, was handed the longest sentence: 27 years.

Cuban authorities said the dissidents had conspired with James Cason, the United
States diplomat, and they brought charges against them under a law that makes
illegal any support of measures like the American trade embargo that would harm
the island's economy or sovereignty. During an appearance at the University of
Miami today, Mr. Cason had a one-word reply when asked if he thought -- as the
Cuban government had suggested -- that he provoked the crackdown by his repeated
meetings with dissidents.

"Lies," he said.

He defended his contacts with the dissidents as a normal part of his work,
saying that the American mission in Havana provided people with books, Internet
access and newspaper clippings, among other services. They did not, he said, pay
the groups or give them their marching orders, but supported their call for a
quick and peaceful transition to democracy.

"We should be clear, the opposition is not a shadow government waiting to move
into power," Mr. Cason said in his speech. "They are simply among the few who
openly say what so many others believe, that it is time for change. Because they
have become such effective advocates, the government attacks them, labeling them
subversive traitors."

International groups condemned the sentences, saying those arrested were
exercising fundamental freedoms protected by the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights, of which Cuba is a signer. Several Latin nations have introduced a
proposal to censure Cuba at the current session of the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights in Geneva.

"It's perverse that there's a massive crackdown in Cuba just at the moment that
the United Nations is examining Cuba's human rights record," said Jose Miguel
Vivanco, the Americas director of Human Rights Watch. "The commission must
condemn these abuses, and do so strongly and unequivocally."

Relatives of some dissidents denounced the lengthy prison terms as effective
life sentences. Raul Rivero, a poet and the dean of the island's independent
journalists, who was given a 20-year sentence, suffers from phlebitis and other
illnesses.

"This is so arbitrary for a man whose only crime is to write what he thinks,"
said Mr. Rivero's wife, Blanca Reyes. "What they found on him was a tape
recorder, not a grenade."

Mr. Cason said that the United States would offer moral support to those who
would assume the work of those now in jail.

The Cuban government put limits on Mr. Cason's movements after he traveled some
6,000 miles around the island in his first six months. Some have speculated the
government might decide to keep him out of the country, a possibility he
accepted.

"They can shoot the messenger if they want," Mr. Cason said. "There will be more
messengers coming."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WRITERS (89%); LIBRARIANS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); ARRESTS (76%); CONSPIRACY (76%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%) POLITICAL
PRISONERS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  NEWS AND NEWS
MEDIA

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (57%)

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (91%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (77%)

REGION: CUBA

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Accuses Both Sides in Burundi Civil War of Abuses

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 564 words

DATELINE: BUJUMBURA, Burundi, Feb. 28


A human rights group accused Burundi's army today of killing dozens of
civilians, raping women and burning and looting hundreds of houses last month,
even after signing a cease-fire with rebels to end the central African nation's
nearly decade-long civil war.

The group, Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, also accused rebels
in the largest faction of the Forces for the Defense of Democracy of killing and
raping civilians, as well as enlisting children into its fighting force.

The rebel group signed a cease-fire with President Pierre Buyoya's transitional
government that was to take effect on Dec. 31. But fighting between the
insurgents and the army has continued.

Human Rights Watch said the killings by government troops took place in the town
of Mwegereza in the eastern province of Ruyigi on Jan. 19, after soldiers
cleared rebel fighters from the area.

The soldiers killed "possibly more than 80 civilians," including a pastor and 16
women and children, the group said in its report, "Burundi: Civilians Pay the
Price of Faltering Peace Process."

Witnesses who visited the site three weeks later said it "was still a scene of
devastation, with the people gone and the houses all burned," the report said.
It cited a witness as saying "the air was unbreathable, polluted by smoke and
the stench of decomposing bodies."

Col. Augustin Nzabampema, an army spokesman, acknowledged that there had been
fighting in the area, but he said the army had not deliberately killed
civilians.

"There were reported cases of deaths caused by both army and rebels," he said.
"There may have been some civilians who were killed in the crossfire, but I have
no reports of soldiers executing civilians."

Colonel Nzabampema accused previous Human Rights Watch reports on Burundi of
being biased.

The group's report today said that rebel forces regularly raid villages in
Ruyigi, Gitega and Muramvya Provinces, killing residents and raping women while
stealing food and supplies.

A rebel spokesman, Gelase Daniel Ndabirabe, denied the allegations and said the
people in Ruyigi support the insurgents.

"I know from experience that if the army blindly shot into civilians, they did
it is because they know people there are our supporters," he said. "How can we
rape women and steal from our own people?"

More than 200,000 civilians have been killed since the conflict between Hutu
rebels and the Tutsi-dominated army broke out in October 1993 after Tutsi
paratroopers assassinated the country's first democratically elected leader,
Melchior Ndadaye, a Hutu.

Burundi's Tutsi minority has effectively controlled the nation of six million
people for all but a few months since independence in 1962.

The Forces for the Defense of Democracy suspended talks with the government last
week, accusing the army of attacking its positions and preventing food provided
by international donors from reaching rebels.

Under the cease-fire agreement, an African Union observer force and an African
peacekeeping mission are supposed to be deployed in the central African nation.

No troops for the peacekeeping mission have been deployed, however, and the
observer force is not operational because details of its mission still have to
be worked out.

"Protecting civilians needs to be the top priority of the new African
peacekeeping force," said Alison De Forges, Human Rights Watch's senior adviser
on Africa.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ARMIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); HOMICIDE
(89%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); ASSASSINATION (77%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

CITY: BUJUMBURA, BURUNDI (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: BURUNDI (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Faults Turkish Trial Of a Kurd

BYLINE:  By FRANK BRUNI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, March 12


The European Court of Human Rights ruled today that Turkey did not give a fair
trial in 1999 to Abdullah Ocalan, a Kurdish rebel leader who is serving a life
sentence in an island prison where he is the only inmate.

While the ruling by the court in Strasbourg, France, does not compel the Turkish
government to give Mr. Ocalan a new trial, it threw a fresh spotlight on
Turkey's human rights record, which European leaders have cited as an obstacle
to the country's bid to join the European Union.

The ruling also came just a day after the collapse of negotiations to unite the
Turkish and Greek sectors of Cyprus, a development that could further hamper
Turkey's frustrated desire for union membership.

Before his capture four years ago, Mr. Ocalan was the leader of the Kurdistan
Workers Party, or P.K.K., which waged a militant struggle during the 1990's for
a separate Kurdish state in southeastern Turkey. The Turkish government blamed
Mr. Ocalan for the deaths of as many as 30,000 people during that conflict.

He was convicted of treason and sentenced to death, but that punishment was
later changed to life in prison. Turkey abolished the death penalty last year as
it sought to bring its laws into conformity with European Union requirements.

By a vote of 6 to 1, the European court ruled today that Mr. Ocalan's trial was
flawed, citing his restricted access to lawyers and the presence of a military
judge during a part of the proceedings against him.

"The applicant was not tried by an independent and impartial tribunal," the
court said in its ruling, referring to Mr. Ocalan. The court added that Turkey
had violated articles in the European Convention on Human Rights that mandate
adequate time and conditions for the preparation of a defendant's case.

"The applicant did not have a fair trial," court said.

Turkish government officials disputed that assessment and indicated that they
would appeal the ruling to a higher chamber of the European court.

Mr. Ocalan had initially petitioned the European court to lift his death
sentence, but he also took issue with the conditions of his trial and
imprisonment, saying that he had been treated in an "inhuman and degrading"
fashion. He lives in solitary confinement on the island of Imrali, south of
Istanbul in the Sea of Marmara.

But the European court ruled that the circumstances of his incarceration were
not impermissibly severe.

For years now, Turkey has lobbied to join the European Union, but its human
rights record has been a persistent sticking point.

So has the divided status of Cyprus, and a senior European Union official was
quoted today as saying that the failure of negotiations to unite Cyprus would
not help Turkey's case.

"Ankara would have been well advised if they had more seriously considered the
consequences of the failure of the talks for their own ambitions for E.U.
accession," said Gunther Verheugen, the union's enlargement commissioner, in an
interview published today in a German newspaper.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); PRISONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); EUROPEAN
UNION (89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LOBBYING (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); JUDGES (73%); APPEALS (73%); PETITIONS (73%); TREASON (73%); ISLANDS &
REEFS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); LABOR UNIONS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  KURDS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (84%)
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS; EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: BRUNI, FRANK; OCALAN, ABDULLAH

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%); ANKARA, TURKEY (79%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (92%); MEDITERRANEAN SEA (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); CYPRUS
(93%); FRANCE (92%)

REGION: TURKEY;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwe Opposition Reported to Be Targets of Violence

BYLINE:  By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, March 27


In the days after a crippling strike by opponents of President Robert Mugabe of
Zimbabwe, the government there has struck back with a wave of violence and
intimidation that has brought condemnation from governments and human rights
groups around the world.

Human rights workers and diplomats say that with the world's attention focused
on war in Iraq, Mr. Mugabe has unleashed Zimbabwe's armed forces and militia
against his own people, even as the country prepares for two important
parliamentary elections on Sunday.

Internet reports from Harare describe hospital wards full of people suffering
from severe burns and broken fingers and toes. Photographs show men and women
with swollen lash marks across their backs and chests. Opposition leaders report
that more than 1,000 people have fled their homes and that more than 500 people
have been arrested.

The police confirmed that they had arrested hundreds, adding that those detained
had incited violence. Some of them, the police said, burned buses and cars. The
police officials denied accusations of brutality.

Human rights groups, however, say most of those arrested are leaders and
supporters of Zimbabwe's main opposition party, the Movement for Democratic
Change. The prisoners, human rights officials say, are often beaten and detained
in their homes.

The deepening tensions followed a two-day strike by the opposition that halted
most business and industry in Zimbabwe. The action was considered the largest
public protest against Mr. Mugabe, 79, since he was re-elected last year in a
contest that was marred by charges of fraud and intimidation.

Political analysts and opposition leaders issued forecasts for more political
storms ahead. In a speech last Friday, Mr. Mugabe boasted that he could be a
"black Hitler, tenfold."

The State Department has called on the Zimbabwe government to "cease its
campaign of violent repression," and to bring to justice the perpetrators of
"serious and widespread human rights abuses."

South African leaders, long advocates of what they call "quiet diplomacy" with
Zimbabwe, began on Wednesday to turn up the volume, with expressions of concern
by President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa to Parliament. A South African diplomat
in Harare said President Mbeki had ordered them to "get to the bottom of the
accusations and report back."

Amnesty International, in a report on Friday, issued a warning that said: "The
alarming escalation in political violence is a clear indication that the
Zimbabwe authorities are determined to suppress dissent by any means necessary,
regardless of the terrible consequences. We look upon the next 10 days with
fear."

On Sunday, voters in two important townships currently controlled by the
opposition are supposed to go to the polls to elect new representatives to the
Zimbabwean Parliament.

In a news conference today in Harare, opposition leaders showed reporters copies
of the government's voter rolls, and said that dozens of people on the lists did
not exist. Government officials dismissed those charges.

Monday will mark the deadline set by the opposition for Mr. Mugabe to accept and
begin addressing a list of 15 demands, including disbanding government militias,
restoring freedom of the press and releasing all political prisoners.

Mr. Mugabe, who has governed Zimbabwe since the end of white-minority rule more
than 20 years ago, played down the impact of the strike and dismissed his
opponents' demands, saying he would not obey "pathetic puppets" of the West.

He also ordered security forces to crack down on those using violence against
the government, accusing the opposition of employing mob aggression under the
guise of defending human rights.

The oppositon, emboldened by the success of its two-day strike, has promised
"mass action," against Mr. Mugabe. Morgan Tsvangirai, leader of the Movement for
Democratic Change, said the violence by soldiers and militia had deepened the
country's "crisis of governance."

"No amount of brutality and arrests will discourage people from engaging in an
agenda they have determined whose time has come," said Mr. Tsvangirai, who is
currently on trial on charges of treason. "The more the repression the more it
will rebound."

In a full-page newspaper advertisement today, his party issued a call to the
armed forces, urging them to serve the people, not the president.

"To us in the M.D.C., the uniforms of the army should be a symbol of national
pride, evoking a sense of security rather than terror," read the political ad.
"The M.D.C. says no to any attempt to pit the heavily armed security forces
against defenseless people."

Perhaps the most devastating impact of Zimbabwe's political conflict has been on
its economy, marked by an inflation rate now at more than 150 percent, with
unemployment at 70 percent, severe shortages of gasoline and more than 60
percent of its population -- estimated at 11.6 million -- in need of food aid.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Zimbabwe highlighting Harare: Diplomats in Harare tell of
reports of violence against opponents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); POLITICS (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%); BONE FRACTURES (75%); BURN INJURIES
(75%); POLICE FORCES (73%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (60%);
HOSPITALS (55%); MOTOR VEHICLES (53%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: THABO MBEKI (58%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (94%); JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (99%); SOUTH AFRICA (93%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: WAR CRIMES;
U.S. Is Preparing to Try Iraqis for Crimes Against Humanity and Mistreating
Prisoners

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Senior administration officials said today that they were collecting evidence in
Iraq of war crimes including the apparent execution of Americans held prisoner
and the deceptive use of white flags. The evidence will be used to prosecute
Iraqis after the war in military tribunals, they said.

The officials also said that they were planning for a second set of trials at
the conclusion of the war that would hold Iraqi officials to account for crimes
against humanity, war crimes and even genocide over the past 20 years.

The trials for crimes that may have been committed before the war, the officials
said, would probably be conducted by tribunals established with United States
help but run by Iraqi lawyers and judges now in exile.

"There will be a time line dividing the two groups of war crimes," a senior
administration official said. "We will prosecute them for crimes committed
during this war," the official said, and a body of Iraqis will conduct the
trials concerning acts that occurred before the war.

The officials said there was evidence in the current war that Iraqi officers
have been engaging in activities that are explicitly prohibited by the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and a predecessor, the Hague Convention of 1907.

The officials said that the execution of prisoners was prohibited by the Third
Geneva Convention, Article 13, which also covers other mistreatment including
the parading of prisoners before television cameras.

The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, usually a critic of the Bush
administration, has applauded the effort to investigate and prosecute war
crimes. Elissa Massimino, the group's Washington director, said that it was
apparent that the Iraqis were engaging in wide-scale violations of the Geneva
Conventions. Ms. Massimino said that the assertions by other groups that the
United States had also paraded prisoners of war were wrong.

She said there was a significant difference between the photos of captured
Iraqis taken by media organizations and the Iraqis' presentation of United
States prisoners.

"U.S. officials may have been insufficiently energetic in pushing away a free
press from the prisoners, and they should do a better job," Ms. Massimino said.
"But the Iraqis' failure to protect the prisoners of war being paraded in
situations where they were obviously in fear and pain," violates the Geneva
Conventions, she said.

Ms. Massimino also said that her group was so far unaware of any allied
violations of the rights of Iraqi prisoners.

The use of a flag of surrender to lure enemy troops into a sense of security is
explicitly prohibited by the Hague Convention, the administration officials
said.

Other violations the officials said that seem to have occurred include the use
of human shields, forced conscription, preventing the civilian population from
fleeing, fighting in civilian clothes and using protected zones like hospitals
for cover.

The officials said today that they did not believe that setting aflame Iraq's
oil wells was a war crime, even though Donald H. Rumsfeld, the secretary of
defense, has said that it is.

As to past crimes, United States war planners and lawyers are contemplating some
kind of prosecution for as many as 200 high-ranking Iraqi officials on whom they
have compiled dossiers.

Much of that information has been collected by Indict, a London-based human
rights organization that has received millions of dollars from the United States
government.

Indict has become the principal repository for information about past crimes,
including documents airlifted out of Iraq by the United States military in 1992.

The documents were obtained by Kurdish militia who briefly occupied Iraqi
government positions in the northern cities of Erbil, Kirkuk and Suleimaniya and
raided the offices of military and Baath party security offices.

The documents were presented to Congress in 1992 after negotiations between the
Kurds and Peter W. Galbraith, who was then a staff aide on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.

Mr. Galbraith, a board member of Indict, said in an interview that there had
been a recent increase in interest in the documents, which have been reviewed
and catalogued by Middle East Watch, a human rights group, but have largely lain
dormant for more than a decade.

"We were begging people to pay attention to this material," Mr. Galbraith said.
"Now they're coming to us."

"It's a treasure trove of material that provides an open-and-shut case about the
crimes of this regime," said Mr. Galbraith, who is also a former ambassador to
Croatia.

The material, Mr. Galbraith said, includes an audiotape of Ali Hasan al-Majid,
Saddam Hussein's cousin, ordering the use of chemical weapons in the Anfal
campaigns against Kurdish troops. Anfal was the name given to a series of eight
military offensives conducted in 1988 that human rights groups have equated to
genocide and said should be prosecuted under the 1948 Genocide Convention.

In addition to the documents brought out earlier, Indict and other groups have
solicited on their Web sites personal accounts of human rights violations.

Ann Clwyd, a member of Parliament in Britain and the chairwoman of Indict, wrote
earlier this month in The London Times about some of the accounts, including
that of a man who said he witnessed Qusay Hussein, one of Mr. Hussein's sons,
supervise the mutilation of prisoners, leading to their deaths.

Qusay Hussein and his older brother, Uday, Mr. Hussein's sons, are among the 12
people the United States has put on a list of high-ranking people who would be
prosecuted for war crimes if they survive the war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); POWS & MIAS (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAWYERS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); JUDGES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (97%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Government in Guatemala Is Accused of Backing Crimes

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 392 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA CITY, April 9


An alliance of social groups has accused the Guatemalan government of being
behind a string of burglaries and attacks intended to intimidate human rights
groups in the country.

In a written statement on Tuesday, the alliance said the attacks left many in
the groups terrified that they would be the targets of violence. One alliance
leader said he believed the crimes were related to creation of a state
commission to investigate civil rights abuses.

On Monday, thieves raided the GuatemalaCity home of Mario Polanco, a director of
the Mutual Support Group, which is for relatives of people who died or
disappeared during the country's civil war, from 1960 t0 1996.

That attack came hours after assailants broke into the offices of the country's
human rights ombudsman in Puerto Barrios, 150 miles northeast of Guatemala City.

On Friday, kidnappers abducted Diego Xon, a Mayan priest who was active in the
Mutual Support Group in the largely Indian province of Quiche, in central
Guatemala.

Mr. Xon was well known for his condemnation of a plan to pay Guatemalan peasants
who joined paramilitary forces and helped the government carry out
anti-insurgency campaigns at the height of the war. About 200,000 people, mostly
Mayan peasants, were killed before peace agreements ended the fighting.

The statement said government officials indirectly organized these and other
recent attacks and demanded that the authorities "investigate, identify and
prosecute those responsible for these crimes, which together provide evidence of
continuous pressure and systematic policies" against human rights groups.

Alejandro Perez, a spokesman for President Alfonso Portillo, could not be
reached to comment.

Gustavo Meono, director of a group founded by Rigoberta Menchu, the winner of
the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize, said tge violence demonstrated "that these types of
attacks are not isolated incidents, nor are they the product of common crime."

Mr. Meono said the homes and offices of human rights activists are often raided
by thieves who "come for information and take files and computer hard drives."

He added, "These kinds of attacks happen over and over again."

Mr. Meono said criminals associated with the government launched new attacks
because a state commission had been created to investigate illegal groups and
clandestine networks that violate human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BURGLARY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (72%); NOBEL PRIZES (70%); AWARDS & PRIZES (68%); POLITICS (64%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (51%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (90%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Arrests 2 Rights Workers in New Crackdown on Activists

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, May 9


Israel increased its pressure on foreigners in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
today, arresting a human rights worker and a pro-Palestinian activist and
imposing new restrictions on travel to Gaza.

In the West Bank town of Beit Sahur, near Bethlehem, Israeli troops raided an
office of the International Solidarity Movement, a pro-Palestinian group that
advocates using nonviolent means to impede Israeli Army actions in the occupied
territories.

Miranda Sissons, an Australian research worker with Human Rights Watch, had
stopped briefly at the office to pick up some documents and was arrested, said
Hanny Megally, the executive director of the group's Middle East and North
Africa Division.

"It happened to be the wrong time and the wrong place," he said.

Tom Wallace, a spokesman for the International Solidarity Movement, said the
Israelis also arrested an American volunteer with his group, whom he identified
only by her first name, Kristin, from Chicago.

Both women were being held tonight pending deportation, the Israeli police said.
The police said they had violated a military order banning them from that area.

Mr. Megally said Ms. Sissons would appeal her deportation order. She was being
held in a detention center in Hadera, in northern Israel, he said.

The arrests came a day before Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is scheduled to
arrive to press a new peace initiative known as the road map.

On Thursday, Human Rights Watch issued a report by Ms. Sissons criticizing the
plan as slighting human rights issues.

Mr. Wallace said soldiers also seized several computers and video equipment from
the movement's office. A Palestinian secretary for the group was briefly held
and released.

The Israeli Army says activists with the movement endanger themselves and
Israeli soldiers, but the group says the government is trying to prevent
scrutiny of Israeli actions.

Israeli Foreign Ministry officials said last week that the army would begin
arresting activists who interfered with it, after a suicide bomber killed three
people and wounded 55 in an attack on a Tel Aviv jazz club. A second would-be
bomber fled after his explosive failed to detonate, and he remains at large.

The two men had attended an event in Gaza sponsored by the International
Solidarity Movement but were not affiliated with the group, officials of the
organization said.

Mr. Wallace said there were about 30 volunteers now in the West Bank and Gaza.

"It ebbs and flows, and this is an ebb," he said.

On March 16, an American member of the group, Rachel Corrie, 23, was crushed to
death by an Israeli Army bulldozer as she tried to stop it from demolishing a
home in Rafah. Witnesses said Ms. Corrie had been clearly visible, but the army
said its investigation showed that the driver never saw her.

Two other members of the group were shot and seriously wounded last month.

The Israeli Army also said today that it had begun requiring foreigners seeking
to enter the Gaza Strip to get permission from the military and to sign a waiver
absolving the army of any responsibility in the event they are hurt or killed.

Mr. Wallace said two British members of his group who refused to sign the form
had also been arrested by the army.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); EYEWITNESSES (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (61%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (61%); PEACE PROCESS (53%); SPONSORSHIP (50%) PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%) INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY MOVEMENT; HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: BENNET, JAMES; SISSONS, MIRANDA

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(92%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia to Shut Monitoring By Europeans In Chechnya

BYLINE:  By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 31


Russia announced today that it would shut down the mission in Chechnya of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, ending any permanent
international monitoring in the republic after the mission's mandate expires
tonight.

Also today, a Russian military court acquitted an army colonel, Yuri D. Budanov,
who was accused of murdering an 18-year-old woman in Chechnya nearly three years
ago. The move ended a long, contentious trial that was considered a test of the
country's willingness to prosecute abuses by the military.

Representatives of the 55-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation,
which is devoted to managing conflicts and other crises across Europe and
Central Asia, negotiated intensely to renew the mission. But Russian officials
insisted that the mandate be limited to providing relief aid.

The small mission, in the northwestern Chechen city of Znamenskoye, has overseen
dozens of relief and economic projects, but the group has also criticized
Russian forces for abuses against civilians.

Human Rights Watch in New York said the Russian decision, following the closure
of Chechen refugee camps in the Russian region bordering Chechnya, "raises
serious human rights concerns."

"Closing down the O.S.C.E. mission is part of Russia's strategy to cut off
scrutiny of human rights conditions in Chechnya and portray the situation as
normalizing," said Elizabeth Andersen, executive director of the Europe and
Central Asia division of Human Rights Watch.

Rights advocates in Russia were similarly dismayed over the acquittal of Colonel
Budanov, which followed a finding by psychiatrists that he was temporarily
insane when he seized Elza Kungayeva from her home, took her to his quarters,
cut off her clothes with a knife, beat her and then strangled her before
ordering her body hidden.

The court in Rostov, in southern Russia, ordered Colonel Budanov to undergo
psychiatric treatment, but it was not clear for how long.

"What can be said about justice in Chechnya?" Arsen Sakalov, a leader of the
Chechnya Justice Initiative, a legal advocacy organization, said in an interview
from the neighboring republic, Ingushetia. "Everything that happens proves that
there is no justice there."

In a case that had attracted intense scrutiny, the verdict appeared timed to
minimize public attention. The court announced its decision late this afternoon
after many Russians had already left work to devote themselves to New Year's
Eve, the most thoroughly observed of holidays here. Wednesday and Thursday are
public holidays.

The parents of the dead woman did not attend the proceedings today. They now
live in a Chechen refugee camp near Ingushetia's capital and could not be
immediately reached for comment. The family's lawyer, Abdullah Khamsayev, said
he would continue to press for Colonel Budanov's prosecution, appealing to
Russia's highest court and, possibly, to the European Court of Justice.

Russian forces have been repeatedly accused of grave abuses during the war in
Chechnya, but few have ever been seriously investigated, let alone prosecuted,
according to Russian and international rights groups.

Colonel Budanov was the highest-ranking officer tried on criminal charges
stemming from those abuses. The case against him dragged on for more than two
years.

The colonel and his lawyers acknowledged that he had killed Ms. Kungayeva but
said he did so in an emotional rage, believing that she was a sniper who had
killed members of his unit. He had been drinking heavily. Charges that he had
also raped her were dropped early on, even though an initial autopsy concluded
that she had been raped.

Late last week, an assistant to the chief military prosecutor, Col. Aleksandr A.
Derbenev, questioned the psychiatric evaluations, saying he believed that
Colonel Budanov was in control of his actions. The Kungayev family's lawyer also
argued that the fact he ordered subordinates to bury Ms. Kungayeva's body
indicated that he knew he had committed a crime.

Colonel Derbenev called on the court to sentence Col. Budanov to 12 years in
prison for murder; if convicted, he faced a maximum of 20 years.

Despite public outrage over the killing, Colonel Budanov won broad sympathy and
support, especially from active and retired military leaders, who argued that he
was unfairly prosecuted for extremes that occurred in war.

Asked how an officer suffering from insanity could have been allowed to serve in
the army, Arkady G. Baskayev, a former commander now in Parliament, told the
Ekho Moskvy radio station today, "The fact is that in Chechnya and the war there
you have particular conditions in which very different things happen."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (84%); ARMIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); MURDER (77%); ACQUITTAL (77%); MILITARY COURTS
(77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); VERDICTS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); REFUGEES (75%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (74%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (73%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (72%); INTERVIEWS (70%); EXECUTIVES
(69%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (65%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY & COOPERATION IN EUROPE (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (83%) ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); EUROPE (96%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%);
UNITED STATES (77%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuba Arrests More Dissidents Amid Outcry

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 21


Cuban authorities continued their islandwide roundup of dissidents, journalists
and other opposition figures today, even as representatives of Latin American
nations introduced a resolution at the United Nations Human Rights Commission
condemning the country's human rights record.

Diplomats and dissidents said at least 72 people, and possibly as many as 87,
have been arrested since the crackdown began on Tuesday. They face criminal
charges for collaborating with American diplomats opposed to President Fidel
Castro.

Several high-profile dissidents have been arrested, including Raul Rivero, the
dean of the country's independent journalists. Opposition supporters said the
crackdown had battered the Varela Project, a petition drive seeking political,
civil and economic freedoms.

Cuban authorities said those arrested were traitors organized and paid by the
United States, specifically by James Cason, the chief American diplomat in
Havana. Mr. Cason has held numerous high-profile meetings with dissidents, and
has made some strongly critical statements against the government.

The sweep, widely seen as the largest since the mid-1990's, has drawn sharp
rebukes from human rights defenders, journalists' associations and international
figures, including former President Jimmy Carter, who met with many of those now
detained during his visit to Cuba last May. A handful of leading dissidents,
including Oswaldo Paya, leader of the Varela Project, remain free but under
police surveillance.

"The international community supports their rights to the protections afforded
by the Cuban Constitution," Mr. Carter said in a statement. "I call on the Cuban
government to respect those rights and to refrain from detaining or harassing
citizens who are expressing their views peacefully."

Peru introduced a resolution critical of Cuba at the United Nations human rights
meeting in Geneva today, and that may complicate Cuban efforts to seek trade and
aid from the European Union.

"This is the most serious setback in years," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, the
Americas director for Human Rights Watch. "Yet they calculated that it was more
important to remind those pushing for change inside the island that the
repressive regime sets the rules of the game."

Juan Hernandez Acen, the spokesman for the Cuban Interests Section in
Washington, likened the arrests to the United States' crackdown on terrorists
after the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.

"These people have not been arrested for what they think," Mr. Hernandez said.
"They were arrested because they are directly linked to the active conspiracy
and subversion being done by James Cason."

Wayne Smith, the chief American diplomat in Havana during the Carter
administration, said Mr. Cason had provoked the Cuban government into
overreacting.

Cuban officials said the opposition was a small group. But Arturo Valenzuela, a
former member of the National Security Council, said Havana nonetheless felt
threatened.

"The fact the government has made these arrests means these people are much more
dangerous that it has let on," he said. "It shows they are a threat to the
regime."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Raul Rivero, right, dean of Cuba's independent journalists, is
among the high-profile dissidents who have been arrested in an islandwide sweep.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (76%); CONSPIRACY (76%); PETITIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (69%); TERRORISM
(60%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (79%); FIDEL CASTRO (59%)

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (92%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); LATIN AMERICA (91%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Stems Suicide Bombings, but at a Cost

BYLINE:  By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1407 words

DATELINE: NABLUS, West Bank, April 4


Amid a wave of suicide bombings last summer, Ali Ajouri, a young militia leader,
dispatched a pair of young attackers who blew themselves up in a rundown Tel
Aviv neighborhood in July, killing two Israelis and three foreign workers.

The attack was similar to dozens of others that preceded it. But the Israeli
response -- singling out Mr. Ajouri, his family and his city -- was startlingly
different. It provided one of the first examples of the relentless,
uncompromising approach that the Israeli government says has significantly
reduced suicide bombings since they reached a frenzied peak a year ago.

At 3 a.m., two days after the Tel Aviv bombing, Israeli forces were at the front
door of the Ajouri family's three-story cinderblock home in the Askar refugee
camp in the West Bank city of Nablus. The more than 20 members of the extended
family were ordered outside in their pajamas, and troops brought the house
crashing down with explosives.

While Mr. Ajouri remained in hiding, Israel's crackdown continued with the
arrests of three of his siblings and their 66-year-old father on the suspicion
of complicity in the attack.

The father and one brother were released. But a military court convicted one of
Mr. Ajouri's sisters, Intisar, 35, of sewing bomb belts for the attackers and
ruled that a brother, Kifah, 30, also assisted. Both were deported to the Gaza
Strip, where they are living today in the basement of a Red Cross office.

Three weeks after the Tel Aviv bombing, the Israelis located Mr. Ajouri, 23, as
he and a fellow militant in the Aksa Martyrs Brigades moved one night between
two villages north of Nablus. Attack helicopters and armored vehicles unleashed
blasts of gunfire, killing them both.

Israel's tactics have drawn criticism from the Palestinians, human rights groups
and even the United States, Israel's closest ally. The measures -- house
demolitions, mass arrests, nightly raids, curfews, stringent travel restrictions
and the construction of a fence separating Israel from the West Bank -- have
raised questions about what is a legitimate response to suicide bombing.

But for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's government and the country's security
forces, the bottom line is that the measures have been increasingly effective
against Palestinian militants.

In the 30 months of the current conflict, Palestinian bombers unleashed almost
90 attacks. But in the past four months, they have struck in Israel just three
times.

"The methods we've used have proved themselves successful over the past year,"
said Capt. Jacob Dallal, an army spokesman. "We're still seeing dozens of
attempted attacks each month, but we've found ways to stop almost all of them."

The Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, has condemned suicide bombings. But Israel
says his security forces have never made a serious effort to crack down on the
three groups responsible for almost all of the attacks -- Hamas, Islamic Jihad
and Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades.

Palestinians have criticized Israel's tactics as unduly harsh and sweeping,
complaining at the injustice of taking aim at all of Palestinian society, not
just militants.

But the militants themselves concede that the measures have made it harder to
stage attacks. "We still have the men and the weapons," said a leader of the
radical Islamic group Hamas, who asked to be identified as Abu Ahmed. "The
problem now is getting them to the target."

During the most intensive wave of attacks, in March 2002, Israel seemed
overwhelmed by the onslaught. The 16 suicide bombings that month killed 80
Israelis, prompting Mr. Sharon to send the army charging into Palestinian cities
throughout the West Bank.

The troops withdrew six weeks later, but as bombings increased the soldiers
returned in June and have remained. The net result is that bombings are down,
and Palestinians frustrations are up.

The latest arrest sweep came in response to a suicide bombing last Sunday in the
coastal town of Netanya, which killed the attacker and wounded more than 30
Israelis at a cafe.

On Wednesday, Israeli troops entered a refugee camp in Tulkarm, a West Bank town
not far from Netanya, and ordered all boys and men from age 15 to 45 into the
center of the camp.

At least 1,000 Palestinians were rounded up, with almost all sent in trucks to
another refugee camp and told not to return home for three days, as Israeli
forces continued searching. Many slept in olive groves.

Israel said today that it had captured the man it was seeking, Anwar Aliyan, the
local leader of Islamic Jihad, the group that carried out last Sunday's attack.
The troops then pulled out and the male residents returned.

Back in Nablus, Mr. Ajouri's father, Muhammad, said he and his family were not
aware of his son's role in Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a band of fighters loosely
linked to Mr. Arafat's Fatah movement.

Mr. Ajouri left the family home -- abandoning his new bride -- and had no
contact with his family in his final four months, according to his father.

Muhammad Ajouri said he did not support his son's actions, though a picture of
Mr. Ajouri, clutching an AK-47 rifle, rests on the windowsill of the family's
home, which has been largely rebuilt.

"I often questioned Ali about what he was doing, but he was secretive and
wouldn't answer," Muhammad Ajouri said. "He chose his own path."

Since the United States attacked Iraq more than two weeks ago, Israel has been
mostly calm, with no Israelis killed in political violence. However, more than
20 Palestinians, both militants and civilians, have been killed by the Israeli
Army during the same period.

The United States State Department's annual human rights report, released this
week, said Israel's overall record in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip was poor,
and accused Israel of "numerous, serious human rights abuses."

Since March 2002, the number of Palestinians in custody has reached more than
5,000, according to B'tselem, an Israeli human rights group.

The figure includes those convicted of involvement in political violence, as
well as some 1,100 in "administrative detention," which allows them to be held
without charge.

Israel says the intelligence gleaned from detainees has helped the security
forces capture more than 150 would-be suicide bombers.

"You need good, fresh intelligence to act against the terrorists, and the only
way to get it is to have a strong presence in the West Bank," said Boaz Ganor,
head of Israel's International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism.

"Intelligence grows old very quickly because every time you make arrests or kill
someone involved in the suicide attacks, these people are replaced very quickly
by new faces," he said.

Palestinians have consistently supported the use of suicide bombings in the
current uprising, with 70 percent to 80 percent approving of them in past and
current opinion polls.

Today, however, the debate has grown more complicated, with moderates saying the
attacks undermine the Palestinian cause, while militants claim that extreme
tactics are needed to keep pressure on Israel.

On the streets of Nablus, during a noisy funeral for a Hamas leader killed in an
Israeli raid, militants said the issue remained unresolved.

A leader of Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades said the group had relented to pressure
from the Palestinian Authority and agreed not to carry out attacks in Israel for
now.

"But Israel keeps killing our people, so it will be hard for us to keep this
pledge," said the man, who gave his nom de guerre, Abu Mujahid. Two grenades
were strapped to his belt, and a pistol was tucked inside it.

Meanwhile, the Hamas leader, Abu Ahmed, said his group would press ahead with
its bombing campaign, though he acknowledged Israel had made it extremely
difficult.

Israel has faced great challenges in preventing attacks from the West Bank,
because the border exists only on maps. Israel's web of checkpoints blocks the
roads, but suicide bombers often need travel only a few miles over dirt trails
to reach Israeli cities.

Over the past year, Israel has begun erecting an elaborate high-tech fence
designed to keep Palestinians out. But the project could take years, and
Palestinians are protesting Israeli plans to route the barrier into the West
Bank in many areas to protect Jewish settlements.

"The fence is important, but there will always be loopholes," said Mr. Ganor,
the counterterrorism expert. "Realistically, the aim is to limit attacks as much
as possible, but it's impossible to stop them completely."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A security fence separates the Israeli town of Kfar Sava from
the Palestinian town of Qalqilya in the West Bank. Israel's tactics have drawn
criticism from the Palestinians, human rights groups and even the United States.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (93%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
FAMILY (77%); ARMIES (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
DEPORTATION (72%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (68%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (68%);
CURFEW (67%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (67%); MILITARY COURTS (66%); HELICOPTERS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (94%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing United Nations: Protesting Cuba's Place On Rights Panel

BYLINE:  By Daniel B. Schneider (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 115 words


The United States walked out of a meeting to protest Cuba's election to the
United Nations Commission on Human Rights for another three-year term.

Sichan Siv, the American representative to the United Nations Economic and
Social Council, which oversees the rights group, said after the vote: "This is
an outrage for us. We view Cuba as the worst violator of human rights in this
hemisphere." Regional groups decide who fills seats. Latin America chose six
countries, including Cuba, for six open seats, and all six were elected by
acclamation. Cuba began its recent crackdown on dissidents as the Human Rights
Commission was holding its annual meeting in Geneva.   Daniel B. Schneider (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); POLITICS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (85%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CUBA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC & SOCIAL COUNCIL (84%) UNITED NATIONS;
UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SCHNEIDER, DANIEL B; SIV, SICHAN

COUNTRY: CUBA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: CUBA

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Rights Stuff

BYLINE:  By Eugene R. Fidell;  Eugene R. Fidell practices law in Washington. He
is president of the National Institute of Military Justice.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 2; Book Review Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 687 words


TAKING LIBERTIES
Four Decades in the
Struggle for Rights.
By Aryeh Neier.
Illustrated. 406 pp. New York:
PublicAffairs. $30.

MOST autobiographers probably hope they'll end up being loved. It's not clear
how many readers of "Taking Liberties" will love Aryeh Neier -- but there's
little question that they'll admire him. Neier (whom J. Edgar Hoover thought
"too rigid" and George Soros has described as "very pure") is one of the world's
leading civil liberties and human rights figures. He has been the head of the
New York and American Civil Liberties Unions and Human Rights Watch, and (since
1993) president of the Soros Foundations and the Open Society Institute. It's
difficult to imagine better vantage points from which to have witnessed New
York, American and world history since the 1960's. What emerges here is a subtle
intelligence joined with an iron dedication to improving civil society.

He is not shy about either taking credit for his organizations' achievements or
naming names when colleagues let him down or public officials behaved badly. But
he is also capable of generous praise and fair-minded judgments of his
opponents. Take Henry Kissinger. He and Neier were on opposing sides on a
variety of issues, yet Neier calls his analysis of the International Criminal
Court and jurisdiction over war crimes cogent. In the next breath, however, he
suggests parenthetically that Kissinger's own conduct would not come within the
reach of the court because the treaty that created the body is not retroactive.

Some of the organizational history Neier traces -- does it really matter today
why Charles Morgan Jr. left the A.C.L.U. or why a Human Rights Watch staff
member was dismissed? -- is of less interest than his subtle and detailed
reporting on the extraordinary range of initiatives and crises with which he has
been involved, from civilian review of police misconduct in New York to genocide
in the Balkans and Chechnya. Still, "inside baseball" can provide a useful
window on what it means to run an important nonprofit organization. Examples
include Neier's accounts of how the A.C.L.U. dealt with the Nazi march in
Skokie, Ill., and with disclosures of its own staff's cooperation with the
F.B.I.

Given the increasingly powerful role groups like Neier's play domestically and
(thanks in large measure to him) internationally, his insights into the public
interest sector matter. He chronicles the challenge faced by the leader of any
large nonprofit: how to reconcile the time-consuming and (for many) disagreeable
tasks of fund-raising, board relations and administration with substantive work.
Neier has seen it all, moving from a local (albeit large) A.C.L.U. affiliate
that relied on member contributions to Human Rights Watch, which looked to
foundation funding, to his present job with Soros. Neier's relief at not having
to worry about funding is evident.

Of course, such a trajectory presents its own challenges. Soros has been
described as the only private person with a foreign policy; Soros's biographer,
Michael T. Kaufman, calls Neier his secretary of state. Neier says there has
been little friction between him and Soros, but surely any at all has an impact.

If funding is the major stressor for nonprofit leaders, the need for a
first-rate staff must be a close second. Here Neier seems to have been extremely
fortunate. Few of his hires over the years appear to have been improvident,
while a remarkable number were inspired: many people who worked for him have
gone on to distinguish themselves in government as well as in the public
interest world.

Neier includes a few funny anecdotes (as well as some perceptive and often
powerful character sketches), and reveals a reflective side in discussing the
death of Fred Cuny, a Soros representative, on a mission to Chechnya that Neier
initiated. But over all, he comes across as one tough hombre, so much so that he
sounds almost defensive when he tells the reader at the very end that he and his
wife enjoy the New York City Ballet and vacations on Nantucket. Don't worry
about not loving Neier; he probably hasn't let it get to him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); WAR CRIMES
(75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%);
FUNDRAISING (74%); HISTORY (73%); MISCONDUCT (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(72%); LITERATURE (72%); GENOCIDE (70%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(69%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (67%); POLICE FORCES (66%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(64%); BASEBALL (60%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  REVIEWS

ORGANIZATION: OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE SOROS (70%) FIDELL, EUGENE R; NEIER, ARYEH

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUMAN RIGHTS;
Amnesty Calls World Less Safe

BYLINE:  By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 287 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 28


The world has become more dangerous, and governments more repressive, since the
effort to fight terrorism began after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the United
States, the human rights group Amnesty International said today.

Releasing its annual report, the group singled out the United States for
particular opprobrium, condemning its detention of 600 foreign nationals at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a "human rights scandal" and calling on the government
to release or charge those held there.

"What would have been unacceptable on Sept. 10, 2001, is now becoming almost the
norm," Irene Khan, Amnesty's secretary general, told reporters.

"The great supporters of human rights during the cold war now quite readily
either roll them back in their own countries or encourage others to do so and
turn a blind eye," she said.

In Washington, Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, denied that United
States was violating the detainees' rights.

"I dismiss that as without merit," he said, according to The Associated Press.
"The prisoners in Guantanamo are being treated humanely. They're receiving
medical care. They're receiving food. They're receiving far better treatment
than they received in the life that they were living previously."

But the report said that the problems were not confined to the United States, or
to Britain, which it also criticized for post-Sept. 11 antiterrorism legislation
that it said had allowed 11 foreign nationals to be interned without charge in
high security prisons.

"The 'war on terror,' far from making the world a safer place, has made it more
dangerous by curtailing human rights, undermining the rule of international law
and shielding governments from scrutiny," Ms. Khan said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); COLD WAR (78%); PRISONS
(77%); LEGISLATION (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); RULE OF LAW (72%); SCANDALS
(71%); CORRECTIONS (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: IRAQ;
Rights Group Says U.S. Soldiers Twice Used Excessive Force

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 17


A leading human rights group today accused United States troops of using
excessive force in two April shootings that killed 20 Iraqis and wounded at
least 86. Commanders said their soldiers were responding to hostile fire from a
crowd of protesters in Falluja, a city of 300,000 about 35 miles west of
Baghdad.

The group, Human Rights Watch, said researchers found few bullet holes that
would suggest that the crowd of protesters fired on the soldiers using a school
as a base. But they found more than 100 bullet holes on seven buildings across
the street. The evidence, the report said, was inconsistent with American
statements that the soldiers responded with "precision fire" when they were
allegedly attacked.

The group called for the military to begin an inquiry into whether members of
the 82nd Airborne Division used excessive force and violated international
humanitarian law.

"U.S. military and political authorities who placed combat-ready soldiers in the
volatile environment of Al-Falluja without adequate law- enforcement training,
translators and crowd-control devices followed a recipe for disaster," the
report said, adding that the unit had no tear gas or other tools for crowd
control.

Since the attacks, Falluja has become one of the most volatile cities in Iraq.
Ambushes on American forces by unknown gunmen have left four American soldiers
dead and 21 wounded.

The report gave starkly different accounts of the first shooting on April 28.
Soldiers were quoted saying they fired for 30 seconds after seven men fired at
them, five from the crowd and two on roofs across the street. A statement issued
by United States Central Command the day after that shooting said that
"approximately 25 armed civilians" fired on the soldiers.

But Iraqis told Human Rights Watch that the soldiers fired for 10 minutes and
shot Iraqis who came to the aid of wounded people. Iraqis also said that
American soldiers prevented ambulances that were clearly marked from entering
the area. Seventeen people were killed and more than 70 were wounded in the
incident, Iraqis said.

In a second shooting on April 30, soldiers from another unit in the 82nd
Airborne said they returned fire after being shot at while moving through
Falluja in a convoy. Iraqis said they threw rocks at the Americans but never
fired. Three Iraqis were killed and at least 16 were wounded, Iraqis said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%);
GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); RIOTS (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%);
TERRORISM (73%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (72%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (69%)
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: ROHDE, DAVID

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: IRAQ;  FALLUJA (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 3, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Languishing Civil Rights Agency Gets New Life Under Bloomberg

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 992 words


Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has doubled the number of investigators and increased
the budget of the city agency responsible for enforcing local civil rights laws,
a body that some say was deliberately weakened by former Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani.

The agency, the Human Rights Commission, won a slight budget increase from Mr.
Bloomberg this fiscal year even as the mayor was cutting most other agencies.
The number of investigators and staff lawyers at the agency rose in 2002 to 28
from 11 in 2001. And the mayor appointed Patricia L. Gatling, a former
prosecutor in the Brooklyn district attorney's office, as the chairwoman, and
ordered her to shake things up.

He took symbolic steps as well, inviting Ms. Gatling to join police and fire
officials at City Hall when he held a year-end briefing on public safety to show
that he views the commission as a law enforcement agency.

The move to bolster the agency is one of several areas in which Mayor Bloomberg,
who ran on a platform of building on Mr. Giuliani's legacy, has switched gears
on the policies of his predecessor while continually praising him. Since taking
office, Mr. Bloomberg has backed away from Mr. Giuliani's deals to use city
money to build baseball stadiums and a new stock exchange; given power back to
business improvement districts; raised taxes; and allowed the Police Department
to shrink.

The commmission was the subject of a scathing report by the New York City Bar
Association a month before Mr. Bloomberg took office. The report said that the
agency had been subjected to "crippling" budget cuts, especially by the Giuliani
administration, and charged that it was unable or unwilling to use its law
enforcement powers to fight housing and employment discrimination. The
commission has also been criticized by conservatives who say its functions would
be better handled by other agencies.

Aides to Mr. Giuliani said that he never tried to weaken the commission. "Mayor
Giuliani's commitment to the Human Rights Commission was made manifest with his
charter commission, which made it a permanent agency," said Sunny Mindel, a
spokeswoman for Mr. Giuliani. "In addition, in looking at the Mayor's Management
Reports, it is clear that the commission was successful in clearing its
inherited backlog."

But when Ms. Gatling started at the rights commission last February, she said,
she found a backlog of about 5,000 cases.

"A lot of these cases were cases that were filed before we even got out of law
school," Ms. Gatling, 45, said. So Ms. Gatling, who unlike some of her
predecessors had law enforcement background, put her staff to work.

Now there are fewer than a thousand old cases remaining. And the commission has
acted on many. It levied a $20,000 fine on a hospital in a 12-year-old case of
discrimination based on sexual orientation. It won a $70,000 settlement for an
Arab-American who was rejected by a co-op board. And it settled a 13-year-old
case against a fertility clinic, that, of all things, discriminated against
pregnant workers.

The commission also won a $4,000 settlement in a 15-year-old housing
discrimination case. "I just figured nothing was ever going to happen with
this," said the complainant, Andrew Burt, 42, who said he and his wife had been
denied an apartment in Sunnyside, Queens, because he is white and she is black.

The infusion of resources and energy is beginning to transform the agency.

"Anything they're doing is a step forward from where it was in the late 90's,"
said Craig Gurian, the principal author of the Bar Association report, and a
co-author of the city's 1991 human rights law. "In the previous administration
there was paralysis."

When Mr. Giuliani took office, he weighed abolishing the commission and giving
its functions to other agencies. Before he left office, though, he supported the
charter revision that made the commission permanent. During his term, he cut
funds to the commission substantially, leaving it more reliant on federal money.
The Bar Association found that the number of city-financed positions at the
commission fell by 76 percent in the 1990's, to 36 from 152.

Mr. Bloomberg has made the commission a priority from the start. In his
inaugural address, he pledged not to "allow any form of bias to drain our energy
or divide our communities." Asked about Mr. Bloomberg's commitment to the
agency, his press secretary, Edward Skyler, said, "One of the reasons New York
City is the world's second home is because the Human Rights Commission has made
it clear we have no tolerance for discrimination or bigotry."

The commission, which dates back to 1944, has stepped up its law enforcement
arm. But it is also working on its other mission: outreach, teaching new
immigrant employers and employees about workers' rights and assembling a
database of wheelchair-accessible apartments.

But Mr. Gurian said that the commission still lacked the resources to fulfill
its mission. He pointed to census data released in 2001 that showed that New
York was one of the 10 most segregated regions in the nation, neighborhood by
neighborhood. .

Ms. Gatling said that the agency was already using its power more, using its
subpoena power and the threat of subpoenas to get people to respond to its
inquiries. And she said that the agency was stepping up its undercover testing
to see if landlords, real estate agents or employers are discriminating.

Now the agency is revamping its satellite offices, consolidating some and
opening others so that it will have an office in every borough, staffed by
lawyers. And now, Ms. Gatling said, the offices will have computers that can
communicate with headquarters.

"We used to talk about quality-of-life cases with the Police Department and the
D.A.'s office," Ms. Gatling said. "But these are real quality-of-life-cases,
because these go to the core of whether or not somebody's going to be able to
even go to the grocery store, or live in a neighborhood where they choose."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (91%); BUDGETS (91%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); MAYORS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION
(89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); CITIES (79%); POLICE FORCES (79%);
FINES & PENALTIES (78%); BUDGET CUTS (78%); SCHOOL BUDGETS (78%); APPOINTMENTS
(77%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%); EMPLOYMENT (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (71%); EMPLOYMENT
DISCRIMINATION (68%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (67%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (65%);
BASEBALL (65%); CONSERVATISM (62%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%) CIVIL
RIGHTS;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING;  APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES;
DISCRIMINATION;  COMPANY AND ORGANIZATION PROFILES

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (NYC)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (93%); RUDY GIULIANI (89%) BLOOMBERG, MICHAEL R
(MAYOR); COOPER, MICHAEL; GATLING, PATRICIA L (CHAIRWOMAN); GIULIANI, RUDOLPH W
(MAYOR)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesian Province Enjoying First Signs of Peace

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: LHOKSEUMAWE, Indonesia, Jan. 12


Children are playing outside again, street vendors are selling soda and couples
are strolling on the rutted walkways, simple pleasures that perhaps spell some
return of normalcy to Aceh, the northern Indonesian province torn apart by
conflict for nearly 30 years.

The first blush of peace in this city is particularly welcome to residents who
have missed using the central park, a graceful retreat of green trees, sand pits
and slides that had long been too dangerous for residents to frequent for fear
of ambush by soldiers or extortion by guerrillas.

"We have been waiting for this moment for years," said Cut Syamsurniati, the
leader of the human rights organization Rehabilitation Action for Torture
Victims in Aceh, as she strolled in the shade, her face wreathed in smiles.

A peace accord signed in Geneva on Dec. 9 by the Indonesian government and the
separatist group in this province, the Movement for a Free Aceh, has worked
better than expected, Acehnese people and Western diplomats say.

The number of reported killings of civilians has plummeted. Twelve war-related
civilian deaths were reported during the first month of the accord, compared
with a monthly average of 87 in 2002, according to David Gorman, a negotiator
for the Henry Dunant Center, the Swiss-based private group that mediated the
peace deal. So far, armed clashes have been reduced to occasional skirmishes, he
said.

Most significantly, the government has permitted foreign monitors to visit Aceh
(pronounced AH-chay) for the first time. Previously the Indonesians insisted
that Aceh was an internal matter, a posture that diplomats said kept the dirty
war and its human rights abuses by both sides -- murders, kidnappings, torture
-- hidden from the world.

Behind the scenes, the United States encouraged both sides to go to the peace
table. Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the retired former head of the Central Command, is
an adviser to the Henry Dunant Center and was critical to reaching agreement on
the final details in Geneva last month.

Now the United States Agency for International Development is financing a public
information campaign intended to embolden civilians to call a hot line with
complaints about violations of the accord.

A settlement of the conflict would mean less trouble for the large Exxon Mobil
natural gas plant near here, which has been a longtime target of the guerrillas.

The Bush administration, which is considering a renewal of military ties with
Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation and a place where Islamic
militancy has shown some signs of spreading, would welcome improved behavior
from the armed forces and the police as well.

But it remains unclear whether the progress of the first month reflected the
heady days of a skimpy peace or the long slog to an enduring reconciliation.

The American ambassador to Indonesia, Ralph L. Boyce, said in Aceh on Tuesday
that fulfillment of the peace deal would be a "long-term problem."

A leader of the rebels, Isnandar Al-Pase, said in an interview that his group
was relatively pleased with the specifics of the accord. Moreover, he said, "I
am happy when I see our people happy."

The accord makes considerable demands on both sides, with the most difficult
tasks to start early next month. The Indonesian Army is to relocate its forces
to defensive positions, meaning among other things that it should take down
roadblocks.

The most vicious element of the police force, commonly known as Brimob, is to be
melded into the regular Indonesian police under the leadership of a newly
installed police general, Bachrumsyah Kasman.

For their part, the rebels are expected to deposit their weapons at sites
designated by the rebels but open to inspection without notice by the Henry
Dunant Center's monitors.

Gen. Tanongsuk Tuvinun of Thailand, who arrived last month to head teams of
monitors from Thailand and the Philippines, said he was upbeat so far. "In this
one month we have established credibility," he said. But that credibility "will
go down" quickly, he warned, unless more foreign monitors arrive and unless a
couple of sticking points in carrying out the accord are resolved.

Most critical for cementing the good feelings is a quick infusion of money to
rebuild schools, which were a target of the war, and to reconstruct villagers'
homes that were burned by the army as it hunted suspected rebels. The World Bank
has pledged money, but how fast and how much is still undecided, said Andrew
Steer, the bank's representative in Indonesia.

Another early problem is how and where to set up "peace zones" that the peace
accord says are to be established in "locations of conflict."

General Tuvinun said he had been meeting privately with both sides to find
agreement on at least a first peace zone. Neither side wanted to give up a
supposed territorial advantage. He said he was now considering imposing a zone.

In some contested rural areas, the signs of peace have been promising enough for
people to take matters into their own hands and return home from camps of the
displaced.

In the village of Indrajaya in the Pidie district, about an hour's drive south
of the provincial capital, Banda Aceh, Muhammad Ali and his wife, Nurlaila, were
reunited in their house last week. Mr. Ali said he ran away four years ago after
the army came looking for him as a suspected member of the rebel movement. They
harassed his wife, so two years ago she ran away too, he said.

In the last few weeks the local soldiers have been less abusive, the villagers
at Indrajaya said. They said that instead of routine intimidation during
patrols, soldiers were now riding through on motorbikes, their weapons no longer
so visible.

Further south, along the main dirt track into the village of Cempedak, about 10
miles south of Lhokseumawe, soldiers guarded four roadside posts. This has been
one of the most violent areas in the war. A few hundred yards off the track,
three workers of Ms. Syamsurniati's group were shot and killed by Indonesian
soldiers in December 2000. No case has been brought against the troops.

As she traveled down the track, Ms. Syamsurniati noted that the soldiers
appeared to be less threatening. Before, she had to ask permission to go to
Cempedak, and soldiers would stop her at each roadside post. Now they just waved
her on from the comfort of their shacks.

In the village itself, people milled around on the main center, and at the
corner coffee shop the tables were crowded, even at dusk. "We can sit here until
late at night," said Zakana, a rice farmer. But the owner, Lutan, said gunfire
could still be heard some days, forcing customers to flee.

Mr. Zakana said: "It's still not completely normal. If you go to the rubber
fields, the soldiers come and ask for money." General Tuvinun said he considered
such reports of extortion an encouraging sign.

"Prior to the signing there were a lot more serious incidents," he said, citing
killings and rapes. "All those serious cases have gone down," he said. Now
people are daring to come out and talk about extortion."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali, his wife, Nurlaila, and their 6-month-old son in
their home village, Indrajaya. Mr. Ali said that he had run away after the army
came looking for him as a suspected rebel, and that his wife ran away later.
(Jane Perlez/The New York Times) Chart/Map: "TIMELINE -- A Long Conflict"Here
are important events in the separatist struggle in Aceh, a province in northern
Indonesia. 1976 -- The Movement for a Free Aceh is formed. 1977 -- Aceh declares
independence but the Indonesian Army suppresses it. 1989 -- Separatist movement
rises again. AUGUST 1998 -- Indonesia human rights report chronicles widespread
killings, torture and disappearances in Aceh. MARCH 2001 -- Exxon Mobil suspends
natural gas operations in Aceh because of increasing combat between insurgents
and government troops. JULY 2001 -- Indonesia government launches military
offensive in Aceh to crush the independence movement. AUGUST 2001 -- Gen.
Anthony C. Zinni, a Bush administration envoy, begins to help broker a
cease-fire agreement. DEC. 9, 2002 -- Insurgents and the Indonesian government
sign a peace agreement in Geneva that provides for limited autonomy. Map of
Indonesia highlighting Aceh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TORTURE (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); TEMPORARY STAND RETAILING (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%); CHRONOLOGIES (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(75%); ARMED FORCES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (68%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (68%);
RELIGION (64%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (50%) GEOGRAPHIC PROFILES;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

COMPANY: EXXON MOBIL CORP (52%)

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (52%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (52%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (52%)

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; ZINNI, ANTHONY C

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (93%)

STATE: SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); SWITZERLAND (93%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  ACEH PROVINCE (INDONESIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Retreats on Charges of Threats by Guatemalan Squads

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 350 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Jan. 21


Amnesty International has backed off its highly publicized demands that United
States and Guatemalan authorities investigate allegations that Guatemalan death
squads had threatened and attacked one of its researchers in her hometown of
Forks, Wash.

The reversal comes after the rights group received a report from a private
detective it hired to conduct a four-month investigation into claims that
Barbara Bocek, the researcher, had staged the attacks. Amnesty officials said
they would no longer pursue her allegations, although they refused to release
the findings to protect her privacy.

"We believe it would not be fruitful to press the authorities for further review
of this matter and have decided to take no further campaigning action on Barbara
Bocek's case at this time," the group said in a statement released today.

The group also said that it was revising the procedure it used to issue
international appeals for letter-writing campaigns, and that it was going to
step up its work in Guatemala. "This has prompted some important institutional
self-reflection on the way we carry out our work," said Linda Hartke, the
group's chairwoman.

"We have devoted considerable time and energy, and no one wants to see it have
to happen without any learning from this," she said. "There is a commitment on
our part to ensure we learn in a way that strengthen and enhances our work."

Leading human rights advocates in Guatemala refused to comment publicly on
Amnesty's statement. However, Victoria Sanford, an American anthropologist who
has assisted in exhumations of mass graves from the country's 36-year civil war,
faulted the group for not providing a complete explanation.

"The credibility of human rights organizations rests upon their willingness to
come forward to denounce violations when they have taken place and to tell the
truth when they have not," said Ms. Sanford, an assistant professor at the
University of Notre Dame. "Failing to do so casts doubt on valid human rights
claims. Just as we expect the press to run corrections, we expect the truth from
human rights organizations."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INVESTIGATIVE SERVICES (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ANTHROPOLOGY &
ARCHAEOLOGY (72%); CIVIL WAR (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)
HOAXES;  THREATS AND THREATENING MESSAGES;  ASSAULTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: BOCEK, BARBARA; GONZALEZ, DAVID

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: GUATEMALA;  FORKS (WASHINGTON)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debating Belgium's War-Crime Jurisdiction

BYLINE:  By DAPHNE EVIATAR

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1471 words


For two and half years in the late 1980's, Souleymane Guengueng was imprisoned
in Chad, tortured and starved as he watched fellow inmates die around him.
Packed into a 7-by-3-foot windowless cell that he shared with eight other
prisoners, he pledged to inform the world of the ruthlessness of Chad's
dictator, Hissene Habre, if he survived.

Now, 12 years later, Mr. Guengueng, a 53-year-old accountant, is trying to do
just that.

Since his release following Mr. Habre's overthrow in 1990, Mr. Guengueng has
been documenting the abuses of the former regime, hoping to force Mr. Habre --
accused of some 40,000 political killings during his eight-year rule -- to stand
trial. Mr. Guengueng couldn't bring a case in Chad, because many of the
torturers from the old regime remain in government. And Senegal, where Mr. Habre
now lives, refused to prosecute. But Mr. Guengueng and others have a case
pending against him -- in Belgium.

Over the last decade, the Belgian justice system has become a magnet for human
rights advocates and atrocity victims around the world because of its unusually
liberal law granting its courts "universal jurisdiction" -- which means it can
prosecute anyone who has committed genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity anywhere in the world. Although other countries have similar laws,
Belgium's is particularly broad, and its judges are unusually willing to use it.

By the end of the 1990's, some 25 cases were pending there, charging the most
heinous international crimes against leaders like Yasir Arafat and Fidel Castro.
But now, that law is the subject of a bitter legal and political dispute, which
it may not survive.

The controversy started in 2001, when the survivors of the 1982 massacres at the
Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut by pro-Israeli Christian Lebanese
militia filed a criminal complaint in Belgium against Israel's prime minister,
Ariel Sharon, who was minister of defense in the early 1980's. Soon, the law
that had won widespread praise was being attacked by lawyers, business leaders
and foreign governments -- in particular, the United States and Israel.

Last summer, a Belgian appeals court dismissed the case against Mr. Sharon,
deciding for the first time that Belgium can proceed only against accused
criminals who are physically on its territory. That decision sparked a
contentious debate in Belgium. At the moment, the country's highest court is
preparing to hear an appeal by the Palestinians while human rights advocates
lobby the Belgian Parliament to restore the law's original scope. Belgian
business groups and American and Israeli diplomats are urging the opposite
result. Two bills -- both of which would nullify the court's decision in the
Sharon case and substantially restore the original law -- are pending in
Parliament. Last week the Belgian prime minister, Guy Verhofstadt, said he
supported those amendments, and on Wednesday the Senate Justice Commission voted
in favor of them.

Although this case is now making headlines in Europe, the idea of "universal
jurisdiction" was already the subject of intense debate in the scholarly world.

No one argues with the goal of ending impunity for the world's worst human
rights criminals. The question is how. How do you ensure due process? How do you
balance achieving justice against practical political considerations? "What do
you do when there's tension between the ideals of justice and the need for
peace, democratization and stability?" asked Gary Jonathan Bass, author of "Stay
the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals" and assistant
professor of politics at Princeton University. Winning peace may require making
a deal with the devil, Professor Bass explained -- allowing a tyrant to get
away, literally, with mass murder.

In Chile, in return for his surrender of power in 1990, the dictator Augusto
Pinochet received immunity from prosecution as "senator for life." This week,
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld suggested that providing amnesty for Saddam
Hussein would be a "fair trade" to avoid a war.

Others scholars, meanwhile, question whether the law can be fairly applied. "It
might be applied only against weak and vulnerable countries, or politically
applied and therefore create unenforceable claims and discredit the process,"
said Richard Falk, professor of politics and international law at Princeton and
author of numerous books on international justice. "The question is, Is it
better to do what you can even if it's very modest, or to try to do nothing and
avoid double standards?"

Originally used to prosecute pirates, the principle of universal jurisdiction
allows any country to prosecute a small number of crimes -- regardless of where,
when or by whom committed -- that are considered so heinous, dangerous and
internationally condemned that they offend all of humanity. Although arguably
the basis for Israel's trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961, it seemed largely
forgotten until 1998, when a Spanish judge invoked universal jurisdiction to
extradite Mr. Pinochet from London to stand trial in Spain.

Scholars' recent interest in universal jurisdiction, Professor Falk said, is a
byproduct of the cold war's end, when security, for a time, seemed less pressing
and humanitarian concerns commanded attention. "Beginning with the former
Yugoslavia, criminal accountability for crimes of state leaders became an
important international concern," he said. That led to the two ad hoc United
Nations tribunals that were created after the genocides in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, and culminated last year in the surprising creation of the
International Criminal Court.

But this court doesn't eliminate the need for using domestic courts to pursue
international outlaws, legal experts say. "The I.C.C. only has jurisdiction over
crimes committed in a country or by nationals of a country that has ratified the
statute," said Reed Brody, special counsel for Human Rights Watch and a lead
lawyer on the Habre case. Many countries -- including the United States, Israel,
Russia and China -- have not. (The United States wants all Americans exempted
from prosecution, arguing the court might stage politically motivated trials of
its senior leaders). Furthermore, the new court can prosecute crimes committed
only after it came into existence -- on July 1, 2002.

In the hopes of creating consensus on how to pursue universal justice, 30 law
professors, judges, diplomats and lawyers from around the world met at Princeton
two years ago to draft a set of principles to guide judges and legislatures. The
resulting "Princeton Principles on Universal Jurisdiction," which will be
published with a collection of essays by the University of Pennsylvania Press,
reflect the broadest version of Belgium's law. The guidelines encourage domestic
courts worldwide to prosecute heinous war criminals even if they have no
connection whatsoever to the country sitting in judgment -- so long as they
provide "international due process norms" and other safeguards.

Such formulations don't solve the current dispute in Belgium, though. "Belgium
is a small country," said Michele Hirsch, who represents Israel in the Sharon
case. "We cannot be the judge of the world."

To the law's supporters, though, it is a moral imperative. "Genocide and crimes
against humanity should not be accepted in the world today, just as terrorism
isn't accepted," said Senator Alain Destexhe, a member of the Belgian
Parliament. "Universal jurisdiction is a strong political commitment for peace,
stability, rule of law and democracy."

Mr. Destexhe insists the law's critics, including the United States, are being
unnecessarily alarmist. "The objective is to go after the worst criminals in the
world who commit crimes against humanity and genocide. It's not to go after the
U.S."

One of the two amendments approved by the Senate Justice Commission on Wednesday
would require that in the future, for victims to file a case without prior
approval from a judge, the victims or the accused must have a connection to
Belgium. The other would prohibit prosecuting government officials while they're
in office, a change demanded last February by the International Court of Justice
in the Hague.

At the moment, victims like Mr. Guengueng are fighting to pursue their cases.
"Many people have exposed themselves to physical and emotional intimidation in
coming forth to testify against the former regime," he wrote in an editorial
published in the Belgium newspaper La Libre Belgique in November. "They had
faith in Universal Jurisdiction." he added. "The victims of Hissene Habre's
repressive regime depend on Belgium to exercise this moral obligation."

Despite the legal hurdles, Mr. Guengueng remains optimistic. As he said during a
recent trip to New York, "I still believe justice will be done."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hissene Habre, Chad's former leader, who has been accused of
political killings. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. B7); Massacre in Beirut refugee
camps, 1982: Palestinians killed by pro-Israeli Lebanese Christian militia.
(Associated Press)(pg. B9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
JURISDICTION (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SETTLEMENTS
& DECISIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(87%); APPEALS (84%); STARVATION (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); LITIGATION (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (74%); LOBBYING (73%); PENDING LEGISLATION (72%); REFUGEES (72%);
APPEALS COURTS (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); LAWYERS (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(69%); GENOCIDE (69%); SUPREME COURTS (69%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (69%); REFUGEE
& RELIEF CAMPS (66%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (50%) EVIATAR, DAPHNE

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%)

COUNTRY: LEBANON (94%); ISRAEL (94%); BELGIUM (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ethical War? Do the Good Guys Finish First?

BYLINE:  By EMILY EAKIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1166 words


President Bill Clinton sent American troops into Haiti in 1994, declaring that
his goals were "to stop the brutal atrocities" of a dictatorial regime and to
bring democracy to the Haitian people. Capt. Lawrence P. Rockwood, an
intelligence officer in the United States Army, took the president at his word.

After arriving in Haiti with his unit, he received reports of human rights
abuses at the local jails. Political prisoners were being starved, tortured and
-- as Raoul Cedras's regime entered its desperate final days -- murdered.

Captain Rockwood appealed to his superiors for permission to inspect the jails.
His superiors turned him down. His job, they said, was to protect American
troops, not local civilians. After nearly a week spent futilely trying to press
his case, the captain filed a formal complaint with an army inspector general.
He accused eight superiors of failing to pursue the president's directives and
of indifference to human rights violations. Then he grabbed his flak jacket and
rifle and set off to inspect the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince alone.

By the next day, the captain was on a plane headed back to the United States,
where he was tried by court-martial, convicted of several charges (one, conduct
unbecoming an officer, was later dismissed) and discharged from military
service.

Pondering such morally complex incidents from the annals of modern combat and
debating the lessons they provide for the current crop of military leaders and
foot soldiers is the aim of a new scholarly publication, the Journal of Military
Ethics.

"I think something like this could happen" in Iraq, said Stephen D. Wrage, a
professor of political science at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis,
who presents Captain Rockwood's story as a case study in the journal's inaugural
issue. "What we were concerned about in Haiti, we're concerned about now."

As Mr. Wrage tells it, the captain's tale is an open-ended thought problem about
the moral dilemmas of war: do soldiers owe their commanders unquestioned
obedience at all times? Do they have a moral duty to uphold human rights? And
what happens when military orders and the demands of conscience come into
conflict?

At his trial, Captain Rockwood quoted his father, a soldier who had helped
liberate the Nazi concentration camps and who told him such places were the
"result of cynicism and blind obedience to authority." The captain also said he
admired Count von Stauffenberg, the German Army officer who was executed for
trying to assassinate Hitler, and Hugh C. Thompson, the American helicopter
pilot who, seeing the My Lai massacre in progress, ordered his door gunner to
aim his weapon at United States troops.

Those facts don't excuse the captain's conduct, Mr. Wrage suggests, but they
help make his case rich fodder for ethics classes at American military
academies, where it is routinely taught.

Determined skeptics -- like Groucho Marx, who joked that "military justice is to
justice what military music is to music" -- can roll their eyes. But serious
talk about the proper moral conduct of combat has been around almost as long as
war itself.

The immediate impetus for the journal, which made its debut last spring, was the
1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo. Observing the ethics controversy that the NATO
bombing provoked, Bard Maeland, a chaplain in the Norwegian army, decided that a
scholarly forum for such debate was urgently needed. "I found there was nothing
like a journal of military ethics in English," said Dr. Maeland, who became the
journal's co-editor after persuading an Oslo publisher to take on the project
and the Norwegian Ministries of Defense and Foreign Affairs to provide financial
support.

The first two issues -- a third has just been published -- are awash in
references to ancient Greeks: Plato, Alcibiades, Thucydides, Laches, Nicias. And
when it comes to the ground rules for military uses of deception, Hugo Grotius's
1625 treatise, "On the Law of War and Peace," remains a standard reference. (His
view is essentially that spelled out by the Geneva Convention more than 300
years later: " 'Ruses of war,' such as involve the use of camouflage, decoys,
mock operations and misinformation are not prohibited because, while they may
cause an adversary to act recklessly, they do not constitute acts that an
adversary should not expect to occur as part and parcel of war.")

Occasionally, Greek terminology gives the journal an archaic air. "Did NATO's
air strikes against Yugoslavia, undertaken without a mandate from the Security
Council, constitute a valid instance of epieikeia?" asks Gregory Reichberg, a
senior researcher at the International Peace Research Institute in Oslo, in one
essay. (Epieikeia, Greek for equity, was used by Thomas Aquinas to designate a
ruler's right to exercise moral authority in the absence of legal imperatives.)

"We are consciously committed to showing the moral tradition relating to war is
very old and embedded in Western culture," explained James Turner Johnson, a
professor of religion and political science at Rutgers University and the
journal's co-editor. Among armies operating today, he said, the United States
has led the way in making ethical concerns a priority, and not just in cadet
classrooms.

"It's pretty clear if you look around at the various militaries," Mr. Johnson
said. "People think war is mainly about the technology, but the point is that
it's not the technology that determines whether a particular war is discriminate
or indiscriminate. It's the strategy and tactics behind that, and the training
aimed at discriminating between combatants and noncombatants. The U.S. military
has always said we do not directly target noncombatants."

Consider, for example, the protocol surrounding target selection, a topic
covered at length in the journal's second issue. American military policy
requires legal advisers to approve combat targets in advance. As a consequence,
soldiers can find themselves within range of enemy forces but without permission
to strike. This situation occurred repeatedly during the war in Afghanistan,
where, according to American Air Force officials, clearance delays and denials
allowed important Taliban and Qaeda members to escape unscathed.

The problem, the officials complained at the time, was that the military's
Central Command was overly concerned about killing civilians. "The whole issue
of collateral damage pervaded every level of the operation," The Washington Post
quoted one officer saying in November 2001. "It is shocking, the degree to which
collateral damage hamstrung the campaign."

But in the journal, scholars defended the policy, arguing that its ethical
advantages outweighed its tactical costs. As Michael N. Schmitt, director of the
Executive Program in International and Security Affairs at the George C.
Marshall European Center for Security Studies in Garmisch-Partenkirchen,
Germany, put it: "Legal advisers are crucial clogs in any mature targeting
system."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Capt. Lawrence P. Rockwood, who was court-martialed by the Army
after trying to investigate human rights in Haiti. (Associated Press)(pg. B9);
The Journal of Military Ethics often refers to ancient Greek philosophers like
Plato, above, in a painting by Puvis de Chavannes. (Bettmann Archive)(pg. B11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); PRISONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); POLITICS (79%); MURDER (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (78%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); STARVATION (76%); POLITICAL SCIENCE
(76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); MISCONDUCT (75%); NAVIES (73%); VIETNAM WAR
(72%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); CASE
STUDIES (69%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (66%); HOLOCAUST (60%); HELICOPTERS (50%)
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  ETHICS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR AND REVOLUTION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF ARMY (58%) JOURNAL OF MILITARY ETHICS

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (89%) EAKIN, EMILY; ROCKWOOD, LAWRENCE P

CITY: ANNAPOLIS, MD, USA (75%); PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI (58%)

STATE: MARYLAND USA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); HAITI (94%); IRAQ (79%); GERMANY (51%)

REGION: HAITI

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Sentences General in East Timor Attacks

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 350 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, March 12


An Indonesian general was sentenced today to five years in jail for failing to
prevent two deadly attacks against civilians during East Timor's break with
Indonesia in 1999. He is the highest-ranking officer to be convicted over the
violence.

The officer, Brig. Gen. Noer Muis, is among 18 Indonesian officials and
militiamen who have been tried over the violence, which erupted before and after
a United Nations-sponsored independence referendum on Aug. 30, 1999. The special
human rights court in Jakarta has acquitted 12 defendants. Two lower-ranking
officers and two civilians have been sentenced to prison terms ranging from 3 to
10 years. Two other trials are still in progress.

Human rights activists have criticized the trials, saying they are intended to
defuse an international drive to set up a United Nations war crimes trial for
East Timor.

General Muis, who was Indonesia's last military commander in East Timor, was
accused of allowing pro-Jakarta militias in the town of Suai to attack a church
in which 27 people died on Sept. 6, 1999.

On the same day, the court said, the general stood by as hundreds of pro-Jakarta
militiamen and police officers invaded the home of a Roman Catholic bishop,
Carlos Belo. At least 15 civilians died in that attack.

"The defendant did not kill anyone, but he failed to prevent and stop the
attacks," Justice Adriani Nurdin told a human rights tribunal in Jakarta. "The
defendant's action has resulted in many victims and has created a negative image
of Indonesia in the eyes of the world."

General Muis has consistently denied any wrongdoing and said he would appeal.
That would allow him to remain free until the Supreme Court rules on his case.

Like most of the officers on trial, the general has remained in the service. He
now teaches a human rights course at the military's academy.

Nearly 2,000 civilians were believed killed and 250,000 forced to flee their
homes when troops and their militia proxies launched a campaign of terror aimed
at forcing people to vote for continued union with Indonesia. East Timor gained
full independence in May.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (75%); ARMED FORCES (73%); REFERENDUMS (71%); ACQUITTAL (70%); SUPREME
COURTS (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (67%); RELIGION (67%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(67%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: MUIS, NOER (GEN)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Arrests Man Suspected of Assassinating Prime Minister

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 25


Serbia's new leader said today that the police had arrested a man suspected of
assassinating Zoran Djindjic, the reform-minded former prime minister who was
shot to death earlier this month.

Zoran Zivkovic, the new prime minister, identified the suspect as Zvezdan
Jovanovic, the deputy commander of an elite special police unit formed by former
President Slobodan Milosevic. The unit remains operational and has close links
to criminal networks. Mr. Djindjic was shot twice in the chest by a sniper
outside his office on March 12.

The men accused of ordering Mr. Jovanovic to pull the trigger remain at large,
but the police have questioned more than 3,500 suspects from the Serbian
underworld since Mr. Djindjic was assassinated. More than 1,000 individuals
remain in custody, including senior members of Mr. Milosevic's security
apparatus who know most about his connections to paramilitary formations during
the Balkan wars of the 1990's.

The investigation, conducted under a state of emergency that gives wide powers
of arrest and restricts news media freedoms, has raised hopes that the
government may finally be making progress in weeding out Milosevic-era holdovers
from the security forces and other positions of power.

The arrest of an assassination suspect may not count for much in that broader
battle, but it is nonetheless significant after a decade of unsolved
high-profile murders in Serbia.

"This is not the end of the investigation," said Mr. Zivkovic, a close ally of
Mr. Djindjic who is eager to demonstrate his credentials as a reformer. "We are
happy with what has been done, but we won't be satisfied until all those
involved in this murder are arrested and tried."

Many international observers are relieved to see the vacuum left by Mr.
Djindjic, who centralized power around himself, being filled by a concerted
government crackdown on the alliances of war criminals and underworld gangs that
have long held sway here.

But there is also criticism of the methods being used.

In a letter to Mr. Zivkovic released today, Human Rights Watch, an organization
based in New York, urged the government to be more restrained, both in its
actions and its language. Threats from the interior minister, Dusan Mihajlovic,
to "liquidate everybody who resists the police" were a source of concern, Human
Rights Watch said, as was a ban on reporting about the reasons for the
introduction of the state of emergency.

"Even in these difficult times -- maybe even especially now -- the authorities
must uphold human rights and the rule of law," said Elizabeth Andersen, the
director of Human Rights Watch's Europe and Central Asia division.

A senior figure in Mr. Zivkovic's Democratic Party said the rebuke was
unwarranted.

"No one should worry that during the state of emergency there could be an
unacceptable suspension of human rights," said Boris Tadic, who is also the
defense minister of the union between Serbia and its coastal neighbor,
Montenegro.

"Had we not declared it after Djindjic's assassination, we would have been
considered completely abnormal," he said.

"The state of emergency will last one month, possibly two. It cannot last
forever."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The suspect, Zvezdan Jovanovic, was part of a special police
unit. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSASSINATION (95%); PRIME MINISTERS (92%); ARRESTS (91%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MURDER (89%); STATES OF
EMERGENCY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); POLICE FORCES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (73%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(73%); POLITICS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); RULE OF LAW (68%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%) ASSASSINATIONS AND
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  ORGANIZED CRIME;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; JOVANOVIC, ZVEDAN; ZIVKOVIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN);
DJINDJIC, ZORAN; SIMPSON, DANIEL

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); CENTRAL
ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (59%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Their Day in Court

BYLINE:  By Susan Dominus;  Susan Dominus, a contributing writer for the
magazine, last wrote about the mother of the accused terrorist Zacarias
Moussaoui.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 2974 words


Since October, amid ever-louder discussions of bombing plans and interrogation
techniques, a different sort of conversation began trickling out of the Bush
administration. A plan -- or something slightly less concrete than a plan,
perhaps a will -- to see the upper tier of Saddam Hussein's court tried for war
crimes and crimes against humanity was starting to take shape. In the
intervening months, the debate has been joined by members of international
bodies, legal scholars and interested political entities.

Recently, the Bush administration has indicated who the top targets of
prosecution would be: at a minimum, six of the so-called dirty dozen, 12 senior
Iraqi officials who, along with other officials, are said to have particularly
gruesome records of torture, chemical attacks, mass disappearances and
indiscriminate civilian killings. By the first night of the war, of course, it
became clear that the United States' first priority was "taking out" the
highest-ranking Iraqis, starting with Saddam himself. And as of this writing, it
is unclear how many in this group remain alive.

Should some or all of these men survive, however, the question remains as to
just how their trials might proceed. On what system of justice, let alone what
continent, might they take place? The debate has been active, among both
interested observers and the government officials who will eventually set the
policy. And given the potential of such trials to determine, or even distort,
the historical record, for nationals and for the rest of the world, the debate's
resolution has a lot riding on it. "If you ask the average person why we got
involved in World War II, they'd say Pearl Harbor, but also because the Germans
were killing people in concentration camps," says Charles Forrest, chief
executive officer of Indict, a human rights group that has been compiling
evidence of Iraqi war crimes since 1997. "In fact, when we got involved in the
war, the existence of the concentration camps weren't common knowledge. It was
Nuremberg that brought all of that out into the open." Forrest and others say
they believe that a few well-structured prosecutions of Iraq's leadership circle
could do much to detail, for Iraq and the world, the history of Saddam's rule.
They could also bolster the case for the American invasion in the first place.

There is no one obvious pattern that war-crimes prosecution of Iraqis would
necessarily follow. The best-known recent war-crimes prosecutions -- those that
have dealt with atrocities in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia -- were conducted
under international oversight. This was a matter of principle, a belief that
only international bodies could confer the kind of moral legitimacy that such
trials -- which are, after all, significantly about public display -- require.
But obviously this is not a view that the Bush administration, which has
rejected the International Criminal Court and extricated itself from
international agreements, shares. Washington is no more likely to leave the
trials of Iraqi war criminals to the United Nations than it was to leave the war
itself to it.

Beyond the question of international justice, however, there are several
practical considerations, in this as in all such prosecutions. How much money
might this form of justice be worth to whoever's financing it? Is there still
too much fighting going on to hold the trial in Iraq itself? How many educated
lawyers could be rounded up among the citizenry? What form of justice would most
persuade the victims to let the law, rather than civilian violence, punish the
accused? Finally, for an administration that has made no secret of its belief in
the justice and efficacy of the death penalty, there is one additional
consideration: in which kind of court would the prosecutors most likely win not
only convictions but also executions?

Among the probable targets for war-crimes prosecutions, Saddam and his two sons,
Qusay and Uday, are the most familiar. But other high-ranking Iraqis are largely
unknown to Americans. Whatever else they may accomplish, trials for war crimes
and crimes against humanity would provide one of the first public glimpses at
the dozens and dozens of men who have carried out Saddam's policies. It is
certain to make for gruesome testimony, an accounting of crimes that sound like
the darkest of comic-book conjurings: hospital-bed assassinations; murder and
torture practiced with chilling, casual regularity; frequent mass executions;
and prison purgings.

Since the gulf war, numerous nonprofit organizations have compiled legal
evidence against the men who committed these acts. Organizations like Indict,
established in 1997, the Iraq Foundation and Human Rights Watch have been
steadily building cases, relying on witness testimony, declassified intelligence
reports and chunks of the 18 tons of Iraqi government documents seized by Kurds
in 1991, which now reside in a warehouse at the University of Colorado at
Boulder.

Among those files, for example, are documents that point to the responsibility
of Ali Hassan al-Majid, an Iraqi military commander, for attacks that killed as
many as 100,000 Kurds. (In case documentation didn't clearly enough establish
the basis for his nickname, Chemical Ali, he was also captured on tape at a
Baath Party meeting saying, "I will bury them with bulldozers. . . . I will kill
them all with chemical weapons.") Several witnesses place Saddam's sons, Uday
and Qusay, in the room where political prisoners suffered long agonizing deaths,
were thrown into acid baths, put feet first into a plastic-shredding machine,
drowned by forced intake of water.

And the ranks of potential defendants extend far beyond those four men. High on
the United States' list, for example, is Mohammed Hamza al-Zubaidi. Indict has
testimony from survivors, defectors and Shiite rebels, all of whom say Zubaidi
played a key role in suppressing the 1991 Shiite uprising.

Another leading target might be Barzan al-Tikriti, a half-brother of Saddam's.
Though he served as Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, he may be
charged with the disappearance (and presumed execution) of several thousand
Kurdish men, as well as the personal torture of a few special enemies. At his
instruction, one victim testified, a guard "began to beat me with a wooden cane
on the soles of my feet. They took off my uncle's blindfold so he could see. . .
. Barzan al-Tikriti was in a fierce rage. . . . Suddenly he stabbed me in the
back with what could have been a screwdriver. . . . When I was stabbed for the
second time, I lost consciousness." Barzan's prosecution could yield information
about the whereabouts of the Kurdish dead, as well as of Saddam's fortune, which
Barzan was thought to oversee during his Geneva years. Given his ties to the
West, however, it may not come to that: he is one of the figures considered most
likely to strike a deal with prosecutors.

Others who have been targeted include Aziz Salih Numan, the second governor of
Iraqi-occupied Kuwait, and Izzat Ibrahim, who was also active in punishing army
deserters during the Iran-Iraq war. "They had used helicopters and dropped nets
to capture people," reads testimony taken earlier this year. "When we got to the
base, Izzat Ibrahim was sitting on a stage. . . . Seventeen prisoners were
brought out and tied to posts. . . . Officials shot them with Kalashnikov
rifles. The bodies were then dragged away. Then, strangely, four Gypsy dancing
girls were brought to dance for those watching. They danced while the next 17
prisoners were brought and tied to the posts and left while they were executed.
When the bodies had been taken away, the dancers returned. In total this
happened 10 times -170 men were killed in front of us."

To many observers outside the Bush administration, the case for placing any
eventual prosecutions under international oversight is clear: that is the model
most likely to meet the standards of impartiality and justice on which the
American legal system prides itself. Some also argue that it's the model most
likely to further America's long-term strategic goals. Ruth Wedgwood, a
professor of international law at Johns Hopkins, explains why the decision about
how to proceed is so significant: "If the project here is to try to make Iraq a
model for a more libertarian Middle East, you don't want to start out with
evidently unfair trials."

Very clearly, the most vocal members of the Bush administration see things
differently. Testifying before Congress in February, Pierre-Richard Prosper, the
administration's ambassador at large for war crimes issues, suggested that the
war-crimes tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia were "too slow" and
"too removed from the everyday experience of the people and the victims." As
Charles Forrest of Indict says, "There's no way they're going to let these guys
stand there on some platform in a space-age courtroom, justifying themselves
before the world the way Milosevic has for years on end." Critics also point out
that United Nations tribunals are not set up to handle the kind of delicate
intelligence information that might come out of Iraqi prosecutions.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has always been explicit about his
intention to see anyone who committed crimes against United States troops in the
current war prosecuted in a military court or tribunal. (He even included, among
such crimes, the destruction of the oil fields, though that was largely regarded
as a deterrent, not a plan.) Even as the war got under way, says Kenneth
Anderson, an international-law professor at American University who discussed
post-Saddam justice with administration officials from various agencies, "there
were military lawyers with the troops in Iraq tracking every weapon fired at
U.S. troops. Not just to figure out where the chemical weapons might be but also
to gather evidence tracing responsibility back to the commander in charge of
that region."

Crimes against humanity -- especially crimes committed by Saddam's regime over
the course of the last 30 years -- pose the more difficult problem. Because the
crimes in question were not perpetrated against Americans, America's interest in
seeing them prosecuted is far less compelling than it would be in the case of
battlefield atrocities. The main benefit, presumably, would be the chance to
influence public opinion, in Iraq or the wider world. But if the best anyone can
hope for is a guilty verdict that much of the world will, in any case, regard as
rigged, is it worth the burden -- the hassle, really -- of undertaking the
prosecutions?

Following this logic, in recent months an unexpected argument has begun to be
heard, from deep in the administration, for not going it alone. According to one
senior official, the Bush administration is currently considering turning select
members of the Iraqi leadership over to a Kuwaiti court, or a mixed
Iraqi-Kuwaiti court, which could prosecute war crimes the Kuwaitis suffered
during 1991. "It shifts the focus," says Anne-Marie Slaughter, dean of the
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and an advocate for
the I.C.C. "It allows a group of Arabs to try Arab war criminals. It would
address the dangerous perception that this is U.S. imperialism. You can see it
making sense if you think that you can go back and make the world focus on
1991."

Another plan that seems to be gaining steam, however, is just to turn the whole
process over to the Iraqis, offering guidance only behind the scenes. "The
Iraqis are the ones who will ultimately have to live with the consequences,"
says a senior administration official, "and they should be able to make their
own decisions about the trade-offs in these complex moral questions." Whatever
they choose, he says, "I think it's better for the society in whose name the
crimes have been committed to make the decision." That argument, however, may
change when the first Iraqi generals start looking to trade intelligence
information for immunity. Iraqi courts, focused on prosecuting Saddam's
henchmen, would presumably be less interested in such deals than would
Americans. And the independence of the Iraqi courts might not survive that
conflict.

Still, there has been at least some movement to prepare Iraqis for their own
court. Back in September, the State Department convened a group of about 30
"free Iraqis" in Sicily called the Transitional Justice Working Group, a branch
of the larger Future of Iraq project. The members of the working group included
a number of expat corporate lawyers, as well as Charles Forrest of Indict and
Cherif Bassiouni, a respected legal scholar who was born in Egypt. Together,
they came up with a plan to prosecute Iraqi war criminals in Iraq and under
Iraqi law.

The plan reflects concerns that are strikingly different from those of the
international legal community. Whereas advocates of bringing prisoners to The
Hague worry that any trial run by Americans would be (or at least be perceived
as) unduly harsh, the working group was worried that American justice would be
too mild -- that it would appear the Americans were protecting them with their
version of due process," according to Salem Chalabi, a London-based lawyer.

Nor did the working group place much stock in the powers of the international
community to bring the Iraqi regime to justice. "The international community has
done nothing on human rights abuses in Iraq," says Sermid al-Sarraf, an attorney
in California who attended the Sicily conference. "And Milosevic is a boy scout
compared to what Saddam's done to his people and his region."

A plan for an Iraqi-run court has certain practical drawbacks, chiefly the time
it would take to get it up and running. David Scheffer, former United States
ambassador at large for war crimes issues, points out that trying the former
regime on its own turf "means you have these very destructive individuals still
in Iraqi territory," possibly maintaining a hold over the popular imagination.
"There is value to showing justice at home -- I don't want to underplay that,"
he adds. "But there is considerable doubt that you could have a credible
domestic court process quickly in a country trying to drag itself out of more
than 30 years of lawlessness." Complicated legal questions arise as well when
time goes on: according to the Geneva Convention, P.O.W.'s can be held until
"the cessation of hostilities." After that they must be charged with a specific
crime or be released.

But the Iraqi exiles have another urgent interest in keeping the trials under
Iraqi (or Iraqi-American) control, one that would put them at odds with the
United Nations: they want to make sure that those found guilty can suffer the
death penalty. Chalabi, whose uncle Ahmed Chalabi is a leading American
candidate to lead postwar Iraq, couches it in terms of cultural sensitivity: "As
Westerners and so on, we'd like not to have the death penalty," he says. "But
it's part of Iraqi criminal code, and you can't eradicate it easily. It's deeply
ingrained in Iraqi culture."

Of course, the death penalty is deeply ingrained in American culture as well.
And that might be among the more compelling reasons that the current
administration would endorse an Iraqi court. It also assures that they will
insist on retaining control, or at least primary oversight, for whatever trials
ensue. "There's the sense," says Kenneth Anderson, "that it would be the
grossest act of colonialism for the U.N. to come in and rob the Iraqis of the
death penalty at the time when it's most appropriate."

Or, as David Rivkin, a Washington attorney who is a veteran of both the Reagan
administration and that of George Bush Sr., says, in response to concerns about
the quality of the Iraqi judiciary, "Try them for a week, give them a chance to
say what they have to say and then execute the senior ones. Is there any doubt
they're guilty?"

With the goal of preparing Iraqi judges to handle the coming prosecutions, the
State Department is playing host to a group of expat Iraqi jurists in a
Washington hotel. There, representatives of the Department of Justice will lead
a crash course in international law. The schedule reads as follows: Day 1:
International law. Day 2: International human rights law. Day 3: Due process,
investigations. Day 4: Due process, the trial. Day 6: Military justice. Day 7:
Ethics. Day 8: Judicial administration. Day 9: Train the trainers.

As Professor Bassiouni points out, that's a far cry from the way America rebuilt
the judicial system of other vanquished enemies. By 1942, he says, three years
ahead of D-Day, the United States was already planning the denazification of
Germany. The Transitional Justice Working Group, by contrast, was formed only
eight months ago. And the jurists in question may not be quick studies.
"Somebody who came out of an Iraqi legal education in the Saddam regime did not
come out with an education that was, shall we say, intellectually open,"
Bassiouni says pointedly.

Bassiouni favors a tribunal that employs Iraqi judges along with experienced
jurors from other Arab nations, with plenty of guidance from international
experts. Even that model, he concedes, would have certain drawbacks in a country
that's been through as much as Iraq. But he offers a powerful reminder of just
how important it is to try to find the right approach. "If we assume 500,000
people were tortured," he says, "another 100,000 people killed, under the
Baathist regime, all of those victims' families are going to expect some type of
justice. Where is that going to happen? If it doesn't happen, will we see
revenge killings breaking out across Iraq? If occupation forces prevent them,
won't the people say, 'Didn't you come to bring us justice, and now you're
preventing us from having it'?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Photomontage by Josh Gosfield Members of Saddam Hussein's
so-called dirty dozen. Top row: Ali Hassan al-Majid, also known as Chemical Ali;
Izzat Ibrahim, a leader of Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council; Uday, Saddam's
older son. Middle row: Qusay, Saddam's younger son; Aziz Salih Numan, the second
governor of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait. Bottom row: Tariq Aziz, deputy prime
minister; Barzan al-Tikriti, a former ambassador to the United Nations in
Geneva; Taha Yassin Ramadan, vice president.; Hermann Goring (left) and Rudolf
Hess on trial for Nazi atrocities, Nuremberg, Sept. 30, 1946. (PREVIOUS PAGE,
CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT: KARIM SAHIB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE; FALEH
KHEIBER/REUTERS/CORBIS; JASSIM MOHAMMED/THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; HUSSEIN MALLA/THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS; BERNAMA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE; DONALD STAMPFLI/THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS; FRANCOISE DE MULDER/CORBIS; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS. CENTER: INA/THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WORLD WAR II (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); HISTORY (76%); TORTURE (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%);
TERRORISM (73%); GENOCIDE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); EXECUTIVES
(62%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  IRAQ-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) DOMINUS, SUSAN; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); HUSSEIN,
UDAY; HUSSEIN, QUSAY

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
KUWAIT (79%); GERMANY (73%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Zimbabwe: No U.N. Censure Over Rights

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 58 words


The United Nations Human Rights Commission blocked a bid by the European Union,
with the backing of the United States, to condemn alleged human rights abuses by
the government of President Robert Mugabe. African and Asian countries on the
commission rallied around a South African proposal for a "no action" motion.
South Africa favors diplomacy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); EUROPEAN UNION (85%); POLITICS (84%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
US-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-ZIMBABWE;  EUROPE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-ZIMBABWE;
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (91%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS;
EUROPEAN UNION; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MUGABE, ROBERT (PRES)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%); AFRICA (92%); ASIA
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: ZIMBABWE;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuba Rejects Visit From Rights Investigator

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 211 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, April 19


Cuba says it will not allow a visit by a United Nations envoy to look into
accusations of human rights abuses on the island following the most severe
crackdown in decades on opponents of President Fidel Castro.

Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque said in a news conference late Friday that
Cuba also reserved the right to shut down the American diplomatic mission.

Cuba accuses it of leading efforts to undermine the Cuban government.

In the last month, despite widespread international criticism, Cuba has rounded
up 75 dissidents and imprisoned them for terms of up to 28 years in an effort to
stamp out budding pro-democratic opposition to Mr. Castro.

Last week, Cuba shocked human rights organizations with the execution by firing
squad of three men who hijacked a Havana Bay ferry in a failed bid to cross the
Florida Straits to the United States.

Mr. Perez Roque said the executions were regrettable but necessary to prevent
further hijackings and the development of a mass exodus of illegal migrants from
Cuba to Florida.

Cuba is facing growing international isolation. It is now considering the
withdrawal of a request to join a European Union preferential trade and aid
treaty with former colonies because of criticism in Europe of its human rights
record.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
HIJACKING (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (54%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED
STATES FOREIGN SERVICE

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (90%); PEREZ ROQUE (72%) CASTRO, FIDEL (PRES)

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (91%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (70%)

REGION: CUBA

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Briefly Noted;
U.N. SEES ABUSES IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 159 words


The United Nations and an Afghan human rights group accused fighters in
northwestern Afghanistan of violating human rights during clashes in March,
including the execution of 26 people whose bodies were found with their hands
tied. In a joint statement, the United Nations mission in Afghanistan and the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission urged the authorities to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

United Nations officials and the representatives of the government-appointed
Afghan rights group traveled to Badghis Province after fighting erupted in the
area between suspected Taliban forces and soldiers loyal to the local governor,
Gul Muhammad Khan. The delegation confirmed that at least 38 civilians,
including 3 women and 12 children, were killed as homes and shops were looted in
Akazi village. In the same area, local forces pursing Juma Khan, a senior
commander in the region under the former Taliban regime, executed 26 prisoners.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); ARMED FORCES (68%); TERRORISM (66%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: KHAN, GUL MUHAMMAD

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  BADGHIS (AFGHANISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: THE OVERSEER -- Man in the News;
At the Helm in Shattered Iraq: Lewis Paul Bremer III

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


It should not have been lost on anyone that President Bush introduced his new
special envoy to Iraq, Lewis Paul Bremer III, this week as a "can do" person who
"goes with the full blessings of this administration."

It was a not-so-subtle reference to the running feud between the State
Department and the Pentagon over control of the reconstruction of Iraq, which
Mr. Bremer, a retired Foreign Service officer and counterterrorism official,
will now oversee. Navigating Washington's bureaucratic shoals will be nearly as
challenging as getting Iraq's historically fractious Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish
communities to work together in Baghdad.

The president turned to Mr. Bremer because he is widely viewed as having both
the diplomatic polish and the neoconservative credentials to win support from
both the State Department and the Pentagon, senior administration officials
said.

"He's somebody everyone can work with," said Under Secretary of Defense Dov S.
Zakheim, the Pentagon comptroller. "Look at the fact that there's been no
backbiting about him. That's a miracle in this town."

But Mr. Bremer's appointment has raised concerns among some human rights
advocates. As chairman of the Congressionally appointed National Commission on
Terrorism in 2000, Mr. Bremer advocated dropping Central Intelligence Agency
guidelines restricting the recruitment of sources with records of human rights
abuses, over the protests of human rights groups.

"His willingness to strike a deal with an abusive figure could be problematic in
Iraq, if he takes a similar approach," said Kenneth Roth, executive director of
Human Rights Watch.

Some Congressional Democrats have also questioned whether Mr. Bremer, a
61-year-old who has not been involved in a major reconstruction project before,
has the proper experience and personality to lead the endeavor in a country as
large and complex as Iraq.

But his friends say Mr. Bremer brings the right mixture of personal charm and
organizational efficiency to the task.

"He's smooth but he's tough," said Richard Fairbanks, a former ambassador who
has known Mr. Bremer since college. "That's the thing people misjudge about him.
Beneath that boyish, smiling exterior, he's got steel."

Diplomats in Foggy Bottom signed off on Mr. Bremer because he was one of them
for 23 years, serving as a senior aide to two secretaries of state and as an
ambassador to the Netherlands before retiring as President Reagan's ambassador
at large for counterterrorism in 1989.

Aides to Mr. Bremer, who is known by his friends as Jerry, said he would not
answer questions for this article.

Born in Hartford, Mr. Bremer received a bachelor's degree from Yale University
and a master's in business administration from Harvard.

He joined the Foreign Service shortly after graduate school, serving in Asia,
Africa and Europe. He was ambassador to the Netherlands in 1983 until 1986, when
he was named ambassador at large for counterterrorism.

After retiring from the State Department in 1989, he became managing director at
Kissinger Associates, the global consulting firm run by former Secretary of
State Henry A. Kissinger. At the State Department, Mr. Bremer served as Mr.
Kissinger's executive assistant in the 1970's.

Mr. Bremer is married to Frances Winfield and has a son and a daughter.

One month after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, Mr. Bremer was named chairman
and chief executive of Marsh Crisis Consulting company, which advises companies
in handling natural disasters, lawsuits and terrorism.

For many years, Mr. Bremer has been warning of the threat of radical Islam to
the United States and its allies. In an 1995 article in New Perspectives
Quarterly, he described a new form of "decentralized, religion-motivated
terrorism" that was fueled by hatred of Americans and bent on destroying
American society in a "holy war."

"It is logical for these groups to attack American itself," he wrote.

He was particularly wary of Iran, calling it a major sponsor of terrorist
groups. During deliberations over the final report for the National Terrorism
Commission, he pushed for strong language chastising the Clinton administration
for not doing enough to press Iran to help in the investigation of the bombing
at Khobar Towers in 1996 that killed 19 American military personnel, members
said.

"U.S. efforts to signal support for political reform in Iran could be
misinterpreted in Iran or by U.S. allies as signaling a weakening resolve on
counterterrorism," the report said.

Over the years, Mr. Bremer has not been known to single out Iraq or its
president, Saddam Hussein, as major terrorist threats. On the terrorism
commission, Mr. Bremer was more concerned about criticizing Pakistan's leaders
for providing safe havens to terrorists than about attacking Mr. Hussein,
commission members said.

But his views turned more hawkish on Iraq after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001,
as he gained national prominence as a terrorism expert among journalists and
television talk show hosts.

"We're in for a major war here one way or the other," he told an interviewer
from The San Diego Union Tribune in September 2001, referring to Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: L. Paul Bremer in the Oval Office after his appointment on
Tuesday. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION
(71%); CONSTRUCTION (71%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (68%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (65%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (60%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%) DAO, JAMES; BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); BREMER, L PAUL 3D

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); NETHERLANDS (85%); ASIA (79%); EUROPE
(79%); AFRICA (77%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Burmese Women Are Reporting Systematic Rapes by Military

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, May 11


Women from the Shan minority and other ethnic minority groups in northeastern
Myanmar are telling stories of rapes by the military that are sometimes
characterized by sadism and that human rightsgroups say appear to be authorized
and systematic.

The State Department investigated the reports, which it called "appalling," and
said it found them credible.

The military government of the former Burma has denied that rape is tolerated,
asserting that any perpetrators are harshly punished, and calling the reports
fabrications by domestic and foreign enemies of their government.

"Isolated rape cases may have happened in certain areas, as is happening in many
other countries around the world," the Myanmar government said in a statement
last month. "But 'systematically using rape as a weapon of war' is just too
ridiculous."

The minister for labor, U Tin Win, said, "Severe punishment is always handed
down to any member of the armed forces who rape women, be they officers or other
ranks or privates.

"The Myanmar society upholds very high standards of decency and culture under
the all-encompassing fold of Buddhist teachings," he said.

However, the reports have been supported by widespread and consistent
descriptions given by victims and witnesses, including members of separate
ethnic groups.

The government must contend with three separate and mutually corroborating
reports -- the initial collection of accounts by a Shan human rights group a
year ago, an unusual follow-up investigation by the State Department and most
recently a report by an independent human rights group.

"Women are raped during forced labor assignments, they are raped while farming,
they are raped in their own homes and raped also when they are trying to flee to
Thailand," said Veronika Martin, an author of the most recent study, by the
human rights group Refugees International, based in Washington.

That report, released last month, made the point that the allegations came from
a range of ethnic groups and that the rapes -- sometimes conducted on military
property by high-ranking officers -- appeared to be officially sanctioned.

It documented accounts of 43 rapes among women from the Karen, Karenni, Mon, and
Tavoyan groups as well as the Shans. It said 75 percent of the women interviewed
reported knowing someone who had been raped.

"Aside from the fact that rapes are happening across ethnic boundaries, our
report also showed that rape is happening on a widespread basis and is not the
result of rogue groups or occasional unruly soldiers," Ms. Martin said.

Because military units are often stationed near villages for long periods and
use local people as forced laborers, the report said, three-fourths of the women
interviewed were able to identify their attackers by their battalion number.

The initial allegations were made last year by the Shan Women's Action Network,
a private human rights group based on the Thai-Myanmar border, which described
rape as a systematic weapon of war.

Its report said it had documented 173 incidents of rape or sexual violence
against 625 women and girls committed by soldiers from 52 military battalions
between 1992 and 2001.

It alleged that 25 percent of the rapes resulted in death and that 83 percent
were committed by officers.

In December, the State Department issued a statement saying that it was
"appalled by the reports" and that its own interviews in three separate
locations appeared to confirm them.

It said its investigators had talked to 12 women who said they had been gang
raped by Burmese soldiers during the past five years.

"All of the victims under 15 appeared severely traumatized by their experiences,
were disturbed mentally and spoke in whispers, if at all," the State Department
said. "The older women sobbedviolently as they recalled horrific incidents of
their own rapes, as well as brutal rapes, torture and execution of family
members."

The Refugees International report included graphic accounts by a number of
women.

One, named Thay Yu, said she had witnessed the rape of a woman who was heading
for the Thai border with her family, like tens of thousands of other refugees
who have fled war, forced relocations and military abuses over the years.

The woman's husband was forced to watch as she was raped, sexually mutilated and
killed, according to this account. The soldiers then killed him as well.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ETHNICITY (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); REFUGEES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); FORCED LABOR (88%); DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUPS (79%); WOMEN (79%); WITNESSES (76%); WRITERS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS
(68%); RELIGION (52%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (52%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SEX
CRIMES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WOMEN;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: REFUGEES INTERNATIONAL (59%) REFUGEES INTERNATIONAL; STATE
DEPARTMENT

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); THAILAND (92%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unreconstructed

SECTION: Section 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 160 words


Barry Bearak (June 1) does a solid job describing Afghanistan's plight of poor
governance, rights-abusing warlords like Ismail Khan and failed international
promises. Human Rights Watch has documented many of the same problems over the
last year.

However, Bearak is wrong to suggest that Afghans don't rank democracy high on
their wish list and to claim that Afghans associate democracy with Western
decadence. The truth today is that thousands of Afghans -- journalists,
political organizers, female activists -- are trying to make their voices heard
in Afghanistan but are being threatened and sidelined by warlords like Ismail
Khan.

Human rights and development is not a zero-sum game. No one should be forced to
choose between human rights and, say, electricity or parks. Ismail Khan's
abusive human- rights record is made no less execrable because he throws a few
dollars of illegally obtained customs revenue at local infrastructure.

John Sifton
New York

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZING
(69%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (65%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Groups Overseas Fight U.S. Concerns in U.S. Courts

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: LA LOMA, Colombia


In March 2001, during what union members describe as a labor dispute, two union
leaders were pulled off a company bus after itleft the coal mining compound here
and were shot dead by paramilitary gunmen. Six months later another union leader
was also assassinated.

For Colombia, such killings are routine; nearly 90 percent of union leaders
reported killed worldwide die here. Few of the murders are ever resolved.

But the company involved, Drummond, is American, and last year an American labor
rights group filed suit in a United States district court charging that the
killers "were acting as employees or agents" of the company.

Drummond, based in Birmingham, Ala., denies any involvement. "We're not
disputing the plaintiffs' claim that it was paramilitary terrorists," said
William Jeffress, a Washington lawyer representing the company. "But we do
dispute the outrageous accusations that these people were working with
Drummond."

The case is one of a growing number of lawsuits that are stirring a fierce
debate over whether American companies should be liable -- in American courts --
for rights abuses committed on or near their foreign installations.

The outcome could have important implications not only for Drummond, a
68-year-old, family-owned company, but also for several dozen American
multinationals being sued under a formerly obscure law, the Alien Tort Claims
Act, which was once used to combat piracy.

Today the 214-year-old statute is being used to wield lawsuits for alleged
complicity in human rights abuses against some of the best known names in
American business: ExxonMobil, ChevronTexaco, Del Monte, Citigroup and Bank of
America.

Five of the companies being sued operate here in Colombia, including two
bottlers affiliated with Coca-Cola that have been accused by the same labor
group of using paramilitary groups to kill union leaders.

The companies deny the charges and are fighting them in court.

The Bush administration has come to the defense of some companies, particularly
in the energy sector, and spoken out forcefully against the lawsuits, arguing
that they interfere with foreign policy and open multinational companies to
frivolous or irrelevant grievances.

In May the Justice Department submitted a strongly worded brief in favor of the
oil company Unocal, which is challenging a suit filed in 1996 in the federal
Court of Appeals in San Francisco accusing it of using slave labor in Myanmar,
formerly Burma. The administration argued that the alien tort law had been
"commandeered" to allow cases that had "no connection whatsoever with the United
States."

Last year the State Department similarly asked a court to dismiss a suit against
ExxonMobil in Indonesia, saying it could hurt the fight against terrorism.
Washington also raised concerns over a suit against the Rio Tinto mine in Papua
New Guinea, and the case was dismissed.

Human rights groups called the Unocal brief a "frontal assault" on the use of
the law and contend that the concerns are a smokescreen to protect companies
with ties to the Bush administration, particularly in the energy industry. They
argue that the suits provide a measure of accountability for corporations that
have profited from ties with repressive governments or illegal groups. In many
of these countries, they add, suits filed in American courts are the only avenue
for justice.

"You have to go look for help in the United States, to file a suit, because you
cannot do that here," said a relative of one of the union leaders killed here,
who asked not to be identified for fear of being harmed. "Here, how could we
ever win?"

In all, 26 suits have been filed in the past decade, many with the
Washington-based International Labor Rights Fund as lead counsel. Half have been
dismissed; the others face obstacles as plaintiffs begin the arduous process of
proving links between company policy and abuses.

Terry Collingsworth, director of the rights fund, said the purpose of the suits
is not to win damages, but to change business practices. "We aren't doing this
to make those victims millionaires," he said in an interview in Washington. "We
want to see those companies change."

Drummond is no stranger to violence in Colombia. Leftist rebels have bombed
company trains that transport coal from the Pribbenow mine to the coast on 40
occasions in the eight years the company has operated here. Drummond, like other
energy companies, pays the government to provide protection; several hundred
soldiers are stationed inside company installations.

Even as Drummond has been embroiled in the lawsuit, it has tried to maintain a
good image. The company has spent $4.5 million on social programs and for
projects like paving roads and upgrading schools. Negotiations over contracts
have been peaceful, and wages for many of the company's 1,800 workers -- 1,200
of them in unions -- can be five times the national minimum wage.

"We want to be seen as good neighbors," said Augusto Jimenez, president of
Drummond operations here.

The company has largely shifted its operations from Alabama to this stiflingly
hot region, attracted by huge deposits of high-quality coal and low labor costs.
It has invested $1 billion, and with two more mines set to open within five
years, it is positioning itself to double its output and greatly increase its
exports to Europe and the United States.

But in interviews here, union officials said some of that success stemmed from
what they alleged is an association with paramilitary gunmen, who in 39 years of
conflict in Colombia have fought leftist rebels and killed hundreds of union
leaders.

The lawsuit charges that Drummond intimidated the union by permitting "known
paramilitaries to freely enter their mining facilities" and by allowing
pamphlets to be passed out accusing labor leaders of being part of a "guerrilla
union."

Union leaders repeated the allegations in interviews, and company officials
denied the assertions.

The suit contends that the union was left rudderless, to Drummond's benefit,
after Valmore Locarno, the president of the local, and Victor Orcasita, the vice
president, were killed. Mr. Locarno's successor, Gustavo Soler, was killed half
a year later. Since then, at least one union leader escaped assassination, and
others have fled the country.

Union leaders, who say they still fear for their lives, have garnered the
support of the local miners' union in Alabama, which says 2,000 miners have been
laid off there since the 1980's as Drummond's interest in Colombia has grown.

"I could end up like Gustavo Soler," said Humberto Suarez, now vice president of
the union here. "You have to keep your head down."

Drummond's president in Colombia, Mr. Jimenez, and other officials strongly
denied the charges, and said that the union has had good relations with
management. "I will just say the complaint is full of lies," said Mr. Jeffress,
the company's lawyer, "and if we have to try the case, we will prove it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Humberto Suarez, vice president of the mining union in La Loma,
Colombia, with the portraits of three union leaders killed by gunmen in 2001
(from left): Valmore Locarno, Victor Orcasita and Gustavo Soler. (Carlos
Villalon/Getty Images, for The New York Times) Chart: "Human Rights in the
Courts"Rights groups and others have brought 26 cases against multinational
companies under the Alien Tort Claims Act, accusing them of complicity in human
rights violations. Here are three cases; the companies deny the charges. THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF SUDAN, ET AL. V. TALISMAN ENERGYAccuses the company of
aiding the Sudanese military in genocide against the non-Muslim population by
helping build infrastructure and providing logistical support that played a part
in the killings. VILLEDA, ET AL. V. FRESH DEL MONTE PRODUCESeven former
Guatemalan trade union leaders claim that security forces hired by the company
tortured, kidnapped, detained, initimidated workers and denied them the right to
organize. LUIS ALBERTO GALVIS V. OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP. AND AIRSCANColombian
villagers accuse the companies of helping the Colombian military plan a bombing
raid that killed 17 civilians, including six children. (Source: International
Labor Rights Fund) Map of Colombia highlights La Loma: Three union leaders have
been killed at a mine in La Loma.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); LABOR DISPUTES & NEGOTIATIONS
(91%); LABOR UNIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); COAL
MINING (90%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TORTS (88%);
ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (78%); MINES & MINING (78%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
COMPANY STRUCTURES & OWNERSHIP (73%); FAMILY COMPANIES (73%); LAWYERS (72%);
LEGISLATION (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); BANKING & FINANCE (70%); APPEALS COURTS (70%);
FOREIGN POLICY (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (65%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (60%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (60%); MURDER (57%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  COAL;  MINES AND MINING;  LABOR;  OIL
(PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  SLAVE LABOR;  THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

COMPANY: RIO TINTO GROUP (58%); CHEVRON CORP (54%); EXXON MOBIL CORP (54%); BANK
OF AMERICA CORP (54%); CITIGROUP INC (54%); COCA-COLA CO (53%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOR RIGHTS FORUM (59%) DRUMMOND CO; UNOCAL CORP;
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

TICKER: RIO (NYSE) (58%); RIO (LSE) (58%); RIO (ASX) (58%); CVX (NYSE) (54%);
XOM (NYSE) (54%); BAC (NYSE) (54%); BAC (LSE) (54%); 8648 (TSE) (54%); C (NYSE)
(54%); C (BMV) (54%); 8710 (TSE) (54%); KO (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS212221 GOLD ORE MINING (58%); NAICS212210 IRON ORE MINING (58%);
NAICS212112 BITUMINOUS COAL UNDERGROUND MINING (58%); SIC1041 GOLD ORES (58%);
NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (54%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL
GAS EXTRACTION (54%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (54%); SIC1311 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (54%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (54%);
NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (54%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL
BANKING (54%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (54%); NAICS523120
SECURITIES BROKERAGE (54%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD ISSUING (54%); NAICS312111
SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS &
CARBONATED WATER (53%)

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BIRMINGHAM, AL, USA (79%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); COLOMBIA (96%); MYANMAR (93%); SUDAN (92%);
INDONESIA (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); PAPUA NEW GUINEA (79%)

REGION: UNITED STATES;  COLOMBIA;  MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru Court Throws Out Stringent Antiterror Laws

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Jan. 3


In what it called perhaps the most important ruling in its history, Peru's top
court struck down some of former President Alberto K. Fujimori's tough
antiterror laws today, potentially paving the way for top rebel leaders and
hundreds of others to be granted retrials.

The 60-page ruling was in response to a petition from 5,000 people, mostly
relatives of detainees, calling for four of Mr. Fujimori's laws to be declared
unconstitutional. Full details are to be released after the court notifies the
petitioners and Congress. The court president, Javier Alva Orlandini, said the
ruling brought Peru fully in line with international human rights requirements.

Although a flood of retrials was expected, Lori Berenson, a New Yorker serving a
20-year prison term in Peru for a conviction on terrorism charges, is not likely
to be retried.

Mr. Fujimori, who fled the country in 2000 at the height of a corruption
scandal, signed the four legislative decrees in 1992, when he temporarily closed
Congress. Since then, Peru has allowed summary trials of rebel suspects,
sometimes by hooded military judges.

"We have carefully analyzed each of the norms contained within the four
legislative decrees," Mr. Alva Orlandini told reporters. "Some clauses and some
articles have been declared unconstitutional, and one decree has been thrown out
altogether."

Mr. Fujimori, who is in self-imposed exile in Japan, defended the laws on his
Web site today, saying they had been necessary to fight rebels. About 30,000
people died and 7,000 disappeared at the hands of rebels or state forces in the
1980's and 90's.

Peru has about 2,500 people in prison on terror charges, but has pardoned
several hundred.

"No one who has been tried or sentenced will walk free," Mr. Alva Orlandini
said. "They will have the possibility of a trial with all guarantees established
by the Constitution and by international treaties."

The decree that was thrown out allowed suspects to be tried for treason, a
provision that Mr. Fujimori has vehemently defended.

But Mr. Alva Orlandini rejected his arguments. "You don't fight terrorism with
state terrorism," he said. "I deny Fujimori the moral authority to comment on a
legal system he violated with his coup."

The court also found life sentences unconstitutional, but it stopped short of
eliminating them. Instead, it ordered Congress, which now has the task of
updating Peru's antiterror laws, to legislate a revision of sentences after 30
years served.

Human rights advocates and jurists say it will trigger a flood of retrials,
including those of rebel leaders like Abimael Guzman, head of the Shining Path
guerrilla group, which was one of Latin America's bloodiest insurgencies at its
height and remains on an official United States list of terror organizations.

But Mr. Alva Orlandini said he did not think the ruling applied to Ms. Berenson,
33, who was sentenced to a life term as a leader of the Tupac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement by a military court in 1996. That conviction was
overturned in 2000, and after she was convicted in a civilian retrial in 2001,
she was sentenced to 20 years in prison for the lesser crime of terrorist
collaboration.

The law under which she was convicted at that trial has not been thrown out,
although the court has challenged some aspects of it.

Ms. Berenson says she is innocent, but Peru's Supreme Court upheld the civilian
court sentence on appeal. Her case is now before the region's top human rights
court, in Costa Rica.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PETITIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%); SENTENCING (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); TREASON
(78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LEGISLATION (77%);
COUPS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CORRUPTION (74%); JUDGES (73%);
WAR & CONFLICT (70%); PARDONS (68%); SCANDALS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K; BERENSON, LORI

CITY: LIMA, PERU (58%)

COUNTRY: PERU (97%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA (73%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leopoldo Galtieri, 76, of Falklands Rout, Dies

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, Argentina, Jan. 12


Gen. Leopoldo F. Galtieri, the former Argentine military dictator who led his
country into a disastrous war with Britain over the Falkland Islands in 1982,
died here early this morning of heart and respiratory problems, a hospital
official said. He was 76.

Argentina's ill-fated attempt to occupy the remote and disputed Falkland Islands
in the South Atlantic Ocean brought about the rapid downfall of the
dictatorship. The junta was later found responsible for the death and
disappearance of up to 30,000 people in Argentina's so-called Dirty War.

General Galtieri suffered from pancreatic cancer and had been under house arrest
since July after being accused of human rights abuses committed during the
1976-1983 military junta. Specifically, he was charged with being involved in
the disappearance of children born to leftists between 1981 and 1982. He had
also been found guilty of kidnapping and torturing 20 members of the Montoneros,
a left-wing guerrilla group.

During the junta's rule, thousands of dissidents were drugged and thrown alive
from aircraft into the sea or rivers. Others were buried in secret graves that
have still not been found. Babies born to detainees were often stolen and the
prisoners killed.

General Galtieri and other junta leaders were tried for human rights crimes
shortly after democracy was restored in 1983. General Galtieri was convicted in
1986 for negligence during the war in the Falkland Islands. But the leaders were
given amnesties and freed in the late 1980's and early 1990's.

After his amnesty, General Galtieri lived in relative seclusion in a suburb of
Buenos Aires, the capital. His latest detention was ordered last year on the
basis of a ruling that the amnesty itself was unconstitutional.

General Galtieri is described by historians as an alcoholic who sought to divert
attention from an economic collapse by grabbing the Falklands, islands to which
Argentina has long laid claim and calls the Malvinas. He was forced to resign
after Britain defeated Argentina in the war and reasserted its sovereignty over
the Falklands.

Rex Hunt, the former governor of the Falklands, credited the dictator with
ensuring that the islands stayed under British control.

"Had it not been for Galtieri's folly, in making that absolutely blatantly
unprovoked military invasion of the Falklands, I think the Falkland Islands
might well by now have been part of Argentina," he told Sky News Television.

General Galtieri's departure after the war paved the way for democratic
elections in Argentina a year later. He later admitted he had thought Britain
would not put up a fight for the islands.

The 74-day war, in which nearly 1,000 died, began when the Argentine Army
occupied the islands on April 2, 1982. Argentina lost about 650 soldiers during
the conflict, and the government was accused of sending poorly equipped and
ill-trained soldiers into battle.

The Falkland Islands remain a source of disagreement between Argentina and
Britain. Signs posted along highways throughout Argentina proclaim "The Malvinas
are Argentine."

General Galtieri is survived by his wife, Lucia Gentile, and three sons.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Military

PERSON: Gen. Leopoldo F. Galtieri

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Leopoldo F. Galtieri, center, with Adm. Jorge Anaya, left,
and Gen. Basilio Lami Dozo at their trial for crimes against human rights.
(Reuters, 1985)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); MILITARY RULE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); AMNESTY (87%); HISTORY (78%); ARMIES (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); TORTURE (76%); HOUSE ARREST (75%); CORRECTIONS (74%); INFANTS &
TODDLERS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%);
MILITARY TRAINING (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); ARRESTS (69%); ELECTIONS
(61%); GOVERNORS (61%); ENDOCRINE SYSTEM DISORDERS (55%); CANCER (55%); EMPLOYEE
TERMINATION (50%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

GALTIERI, LEOPOLDO (GEN)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (91%)

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (92%)

COUNTRY: FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) (99%); ARGENTINA (98%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%)

REGION: ARGENTINA;  FALKLAND ISLANDS;  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Guatemala: Call For Panel On Human Rights

BYLINE:  By David Gonzalez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 100 words


Human rights groups, including Amnesty International, have joined their
Guatemalan counterparts in calling for an international commission to
investigate persistent rights violations.

The Guatemalan human rights ombudsman, Sergio Morales, asked that the government
allow the Organization of American States and the United Nations to set up such
a panel. Since the end of the civil war in 1996, former members of the military
close to the current government have been linked to politically motivated
assassinations and threats against people seeking to prosecute war crimes.
David Gonzalez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY
FORCES

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(84%); UNITED NATIONS (58%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Chechens Suffer, U.S. Looks Away

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 181 words


To the Editor:

"A Sham Referendum in Chechnya" (editorial, Jan. 14) notes that Russia is trying
to stage an end to the war.

Shutting down human rights monitors, prematurely closing refugee camps and
drastically restricting press coverage are part of the plan.

This should fool no one, but Russia has waged this war in a virtual vacuum while
the world pays scant attention to what Human Rights Watch has just labeled the
"most intense human rights crisis" in Europe and Central Asia. Having failed to
achieve a military solution, Russia has succeeded in isolating the Chechens.

Call people terrorists often enough and the world buys it, especially after
9/11. Russian brutality and lack of support have led some Chechens to adopt
desperate measures that hurt their cause. Yet whatever the Chechens are, Russia
created them in two centuries of oppression.

You advise a political solution, but without any pressure, especially from the
United States, Russia will instead give the world a piece of theater while the
Chechens go on suffering.

ROBERT J. GRAHAM
Catskill, N.Y., Jan. 15, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); REFUGEES (88%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); REFERENDUMS (73%); POLITICS (73%); TERRORISM
(68%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: GRAHAM, ROBERT J

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Mother's Plea: Backbone on Libya

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 159 words


To the Editor:

As the mother of a son on Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, blown out
of the skies by Libyan terrorists, I applaud your editorial ("Payoff for Colonel
Qaddafi," Jan. 23) criticizing the selection of Libya as chairman of the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights.

It is important for the world to understand the depth of Libya's violations of
human rights, starting with terrorist bombings that deprived so many innocents
not only of their human rights, but also their lives.

It is a disgrace that a rogue terrorist state was elected to the chairmanship of
a human rights commission, and that America had so few friends to stand with it
in opposition.

If America's moral compass were working, the United States delegation would have
called the election a sham and walked out in protest. We seem to have big voices
when it comes to Iraq but wimpy whispers when it comes to Libya.

KATHLEEN R. FLYNN
Montville, N.J., Jan. 23, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); BOMBINGS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (58%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Iraqis' Use of Poison Gas

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 163 words


To the Editor:

Re "A War Crime or an Act of War?" (Op-Ed, Jan. 31):

Stephen C. Pelletiere writes that Iran, not Iraq, might have been responsible
for the 1988 gassing of Kurdish civilians in Halabja.

Human Rights Watch researchers interviewed survivors from Halabja and reviewed
18 tons of Iraqi state documents to establish beyond doubt that the attack was
carried out by Iraq.

Iraqi forces used mustard and nerve gases, as well as mass executions, to kill
some 100,000 Kurds in the genocidal 1988 Anfal campaign. The commander, Gen. Ali
Hassan al-Majid, said of the Kurds, in a taped speech obtained by Human Rights
Watch: "I will kill them all with chemical weapons! Who is going to say
anything? The international community?"

The evidence is incontrovertible: Iraq is responsible for the crime of genocide,
committed against its own Kurdish population. The gassing at Halabja was part of
that crime.

KENNETH ROTH
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, Feb. 3, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CHEMICAL
& BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%);
TERRORISM (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%) KURDS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 21, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Middle East: Egypt: Police Criticized On Child Arrests

BYLINE:  By Steven Lee Myers (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 84 words


The group Human Rights Watch criticized the Egyptian police in a report on
Wednesday, saying that street children and truants were being arrested on the
basis that they were "vulnerable to delinquency," even if they had committed no
crime. The report's author, Clarisa Bencomo, said many of those arrested,
ostensibly for their own protection, were often held for longer than 24 hours
and faced beatings or sexual abuse in detention centers by police officers or
adult prisoners.   Steven Lee Myers (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); CHILDREN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); POLICE
FORCES (88%); CHILD ABUSE (88%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); SEX OFFENSES (86%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (86%); MISCONDUCT (86%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CHILDREN AND
YOUTH;  CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE

COUNTRY: EGYPT (90%)

REGION: EGYPT

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE SUSPECT;
Questioning to Be Legal, Humane and Aggressive, The White House Says

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU with ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1299 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


Khalid Shaikh Mohammed's American captors are likely to use tactics like sleep
deprivation and psychological manipulation in trying to pry information from
him, officials said today. But the White House promised that Mr. Mohammed, the
terrorist mastermind, would be treated humanely.

"The standard for any type of interrogation of somebody in American custody is
to be humane and to follow all international laws and accords dealing with this
type subject," the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said to reporters.
"That is precisely what has been happening and exactly what will happen."

Mr. Mohammed, captured on Saturday in Pakistan after a yearslong pursuit, is in
the custody of the C.I.A. at an undisclosed site outside Pakistan, officials
said. American officials said they believed that Mr. Mohammed could provide them
with a potential trove of information about his boss, Osama bin Laden, and Al
Qaeda.

The officials added that they expected the Central Intelligence Agency to use
every means at its disposal, short of what it considers outright torture, to try
to crack him.

Human rights advocates said they were concerned that the United States might
violate the spirit, as well as the letter, of international accords by
subjecting Mr. Mohammed to extreme treatment or by turning him over to a country
that it knows will be willing to torture him.

With 3,000 terrorist suspects detained since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the
C.I.A. has questioned many top-level figures from Al Qaeda at a detention center
at the Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan and locations in Pakistan. Officials said
Ramzi bin al-Shibh, another important Qaeda supervisor, who was arrested in the
fall, was secretly taken to Thailand for questioning before the United States
moved him to another undisclosed location.

The United States is holding 650 people captured in Afghanistan, many of them
considered lower-level members of the Taliban and Al Qaeda, at the Guantanamo
Bay Naval Base in Cuba.

In seeking information from Qaeda members, the United States has deprived
suspects of sleep and light, kept them in awkward physical positions for hours
and used psychological intimidation or deception to confuse and disorient them,
officials said.

"There are a lot of ways short of torturing someone to get information from a
subject," a United States official said today. "Keep in mind that this is a guy
who was not only the mastermind of 9/11, but was also actively involved in
plotting future and ongoing terrorist operations. This is a guy who potentially
has information about planned terrorist operations that could save American
lives. Everyone would understand the wisdom of finding out whatever information
we can from him."

In the case of Abu Zubaydah, an important lieutenant to Mr. bin Laden who was
shot in the chest, groin and thigh a year ago when he was apprehended in
Pakistan, American questioners teased him with occasional painkillers to try to
cull information, officials said.

Mr. Zubaydah apparently gave investigators false information that led the
Justice Department to issue warnings that were later discredited. But he also
gave valuable leads that helped in identifying Mr. Mohammed and Jose Padilla,
who was arrested last year in Chicago in a reported conspiracy to detonate a
"dirty bomb."

In another high-profile case, lawyers for John Walker Lindh, an American who was
sentenced to 20 years in prison for fighting with the Taliban, said he made
incriminating statements about his activities with the Taliban in Afghanistan
only after American special forces had subjected him to "torturous conditions."

The lawyers said Mr. Lindh, "wounded, starved, frozen and exhausted" after being
captured in December 2001, was blindfolded, stripped naked and bound with duct
tape to a stretcher, with a bullet left in his leg.

American officials dispute those statements, saying he had been well treated.

Washington is also known to have turned terrorist suspects over to countries
like Egypt, Jordan and Morocco that are more willing to use more aggressive
questioning, what human rights lawyers have called torture, in efforts to break
suspects.

"I am allowed to use all means in my possession" in interrogating a suspect, a
senior Moroccan intelligence official said in an interview. "You have to fight
all his resistance at all levels and show him that he is wrong, that his
ideology is wrong and is not connected to religion. We break them, yes. And when
they are weakened, they realize that they are wrong."

Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, the ranking Democrat on the
Senate Intelligence Committee, has suggested that the United States might
consider turning over Mr. Mohammed to a country that does not have legal
restrictions against torture.

"I wouldn't rule it out," Mr. Rockefeller said on Sunday on "Late Edition With
Wolf Blitzer" on CNN. "I wouldn't take anything off the table where he is
concerned, because this is the man who has killed hundreds and hundreds of
Americans over the last 10 years."

An aide to Mr. Rockefeller said today, however, that the senator was not
condoning the idea of turning Mr. Mohammed over to a country that uses torture,
nor does he think the United States will opt to do that.

Under an international treaty on torture and American criminal law, United
States officials are prohibited from using torture against suspects. In the
treaty, torture is defined as the infliction of "extreme pain or suffering,
whether physical or mental."

When the United States ratified the antitorture treaty in 1994, Congress also
passed a law making torture committed in the United States or by an American
anywhere a felony punishable by 20 years in prison. Torture resulting in death
can give bring the death penalty.

Legal scholars said if American officials were seeking to avoid those
restrictions by winking at rough questioning by officials of other nations to
whom they have delivered suspects, they may still be violating the treaty.

"If the United States is turning people over to people who might torture them,"
said Harold Hongju Koh, a professor of law at Yale and a State Department
official in the Clinton administration, "that is a violation of our obligations
under the torture convention, which prevents us from returning people to
conditions of torture."

Yale Kamisar, a professor of criminal law at the University of Michigan, agreed.

"The United States is just as responsible as if it had done the torture itself,"
Professor Kamisar said. "I don't think the government gains anything by
winking."

Elissa Massimino, director of the Washington office of the Lawyers Committee for
Human Rights, said, "If the C.I.A. is saying, 'We're not really involved in the
interrogation, we're just standing outside the room and passing questions,' they
are not absolved."

The treaty makes no exceptions for combating terror.

Precisely what constitutes torture is a subject of dispute. The Israeli Supreme
Court and the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, have ruled
that many sorts of intensive questioning, including sleep and sensory
deprivation, extreme temperatures, withholding of medical treatment, violent
shaking and making prisoners assume awkward positions can amount to torture.

Human Rights Watch, a public interest group in New York, wrote to President Bush
in December to protest reports of extreme tactics. It director, Kenneth Roth,
said today that he was concerned that with a possible war in Iraq, American
captives might be more likely to face torture as a result of Washington's
silence on the issue.

"The next time Americans are taken as prisoners of war and the Pentagon seeks
decent treatment," Mr. Roth said, "the opposing nation will say, 'What Geneva
Convention? You ripped it up at Guantanamo Bay.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John D. Rockefeller IV raised an option on torture.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); SLEEP
DISORDERS (89%); TORTURE (87%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TALIBAN (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (71%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (70%); ARRESTS (65%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%); JAY ROCKEFELLER (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (87%);
THAILAND (53%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 19, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IMMIGRATION;
New Asylum Policy Comes Under Fire

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 329 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


The Bush administration's decision to begin detaining asylum seekers from Iraq
and 33 other countries where Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups have operated
met with harsh criticism today from civil liberties groups and immigration
lawyers.

The administration said the policy, announced on Monday as one of a number of
counterterrorism measures imposed in anticipation of a war with Iraq, should
affect fewer than 600 immigrants a year, most of them Iraqi.

But civil liberties groups and immigration-law specialists said the wording of
the administration's announcement was so broad that it could ultimately require
the imprisonment of thousands of asylum seekers, including Iraqis persecuted and
even tortured by the government of Saddam Hussein.

"This sends a message to people who are the victims of human rights abuses that
we are going to put you into detention if you come from the very countries that
the U.S. has identified -- that President Bush has identified -- as having
torture chambers and committing egregious human rights abuses," said Bill
Frelick, director of the refugee program for Amnesty International USA.

Under the policy, asylum seekers from the designated countries, who would
otherwise have gone free while their claims of persecution were reviewed by
federal immigration authorities, will remain in custody throughout the
processing period. That period can last several months, in some cases more than
a year.

At a news conference today, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said the
detention policy was being imposed to prevent terrorists from trying to enter
the United States by making asylum claims.

"We want to make absolutely certain during this period of time you are who you
say you are," Mr. Ridge said. "We'll be looking, obviously scrutinizing all
asylum seekers at this time, but there are countries that we believe are
supportive of Al Qaeda or countries where we know there is an Al Qaeda network
or other terrorist organizations."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); IMMIGRATION (94%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (94%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;
ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL
AND CHEMICAL WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (82%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (55%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); SHENON, PHILIP; RIDGE, TOM
(SEC)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico Indicts Former Chief of Secret Police

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, March 28


A former secret police chief has been charged with murdering three leftists
during the "dirty war" prosecuted by the Mexican government from the late 1960's
into the 1980's, in what may be the beginnings of a breakthrough for the rule of
law in Mexico.

Federal prosecutors brought the charges against Luis de la Barreda Moreno, the
chief of the once-feared Federal Security Directorate from 1970 to 1977. At
least 275 people, perhaps twice that number, disappeared during the dirty war,
and Mr. de la Barreda is the first secret police official charged with murder
from crimes committed during that period.

He did not respond to the accusations and has until April 14 to file a reply in
court.

The agency he once led, the Federal Security Directorate, created in 1947 and
disbanded in 1985, was a violent and corrupt arm of the Institutional
Revolutionary Party, which ran the country from 1929 to 2000.

It was used as a weapon against thousands of political opponents of the
government, and its tools included wiretapping, spying, jailing without trial,
torture and killing.

Mexico's government never acknowledged that such a war was fought until after
the election of President Vicente Fox, who broke the former governing party's
lock on power in 2000. Mr. Fox has backed a federal investigation of the
disappearances and deaths.

The government's own human rights commission has documented the case against Mr.
de la Barreda. He now stands formally accused of the torture and killing of
Jesus Piedra Ibarra, a prominent member of a radical left-wing group who
vanished in 1975, and of playing a role in the deaths of two other leftists,
Jose Ignacio Olivares Torres and Salvador Corral Garcia.

The commission's records on the disappearance of Mr. Ibarra provide a chilling
example of the power of the state in the 1970's and 1980's. They also show that
leftist guerrillas like Mr. Ibarra were blamed, often correctly, for attacking
army and police patrols and sometimes killing them.

Mr. Ibarra was a medical student when he was arrested by state police officers
on April 18, 1975. He was taken to a remote ranch where he was beaten and
tortured, transported to a military camp in Mexico City, and then held in a
series of secret prisons, the human rights commission said. The last time anyone
reported seeing him was in 1984. His body has never been found.

Although the Federal Security Directorate no longer exists, the use of torture
continues in Mexico, according to a new report by Amnesty International. The
human rights organization said this week that Mexico's criminal justice system
continued to "perpetuate a culture of impunity for torturers" among police
officials and army officers serving in law enforcement roles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MURDER (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
TORTURE (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMIES
(89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%);
PRISONS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); MISSING
PERSONS (75%); POLITICS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(72%); ASSASSINATION (72%); WIRETAPPING (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(64%) MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATIONS;  POLICE;  TORTURE

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (58%) WEINER, TIM; DE LA BARREDA, LUIS; PIEDRA
IBARRA, JESUS

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (92%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (98%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Chechnya: War Crimes Trials Proposed

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 117 words


The Council of Europe, the Continent's main human rights watchdog, called for
the creation of an international tribunal to try war crimes committed in the
Russian republic of Chechnya.

"Those responsible for past human rights abuses committed by both sides to the
conflict must be brought to justice without further delay," the council said.
Russian troops are alleged by Chechens and human rights groups of killing,
raping and torturing civilians in searches for rebels. Russian officials, in
turn, point to accusations against the insurgents, including kidnapping and
violence against pro-Moscow Chechens. The head of the Kremlin-backed
administration in Chechnya denounced the council proposal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR
(88%); TORTURE (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (85%); HOMICIDE (85%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (93%) COUNCIL OF EUROPE

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Global Catalog of Wrongs

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 461 words


Around this time each year, the State Department produces a remarkable document
detailing the human rights practices and problems of almost every country in the
world. Dispensing with the niceties of diplomatic language, the report looks at
friend and foe alike with candid scrutiny.

Among the nations that come in for criticism are a number of members of
President Bush's Coalition of the Willing for the invasion of Iraq --
embarrassing company in a campaign whose aims include liberating the Iraqi
people from dictatorship. Uzbekistan routinely tortures detainees and some have
died in custody. Eritrea has ended freedom of the press and restricts religious
freedom. Azerbaijan arbitrarily detains dissidents and rigs elections.
Significant violations are noted in such other coalition members as Colombia,
the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Macedonia, Rwanda, Uganda and Ethiopia. In all
seven, the overall human rights situation was rated as poor.

Of course, the "axis of evil" also rightly comes in for plenty of scorn. The
White House's main security concern has been these countries' weapons programs
and alleged links to terrorism. But Iraq, North Korea and Iran also victimize
their own people. Baghdad has ordered executions without trial, political
murders, torture and deadly persecution of Shiite Muslims. North Korea is an
absolute dictatorship with detention camps, torture and harsh prison conditions,
including deliberate starvation. Iran, relatively better, is still horrific,
with arbitrary arrests, disappearances and sadistic punishments like stoning and
flogging.

Several other governments deserve dishonorable mention. Myanmar, formerly Burma,
is responsible for punitive rape by soldiers, forced relocation of ethnic
minorities, forced labor and conscription of children. Turkmenistan's
self-glorifying autocrat models his repressive rule on Stalin's.

China is much freer than before. But its sheer size makes it the world's No. 1
quantitative violator of human rights. Beijing executed more than 3,000 people
last year, many without due process. It uses torture, forced confessions,
imprisonment in psychiatric hospitals and lengthy detentions with no right to
communicate with family members or lawyers.

The report cites several countries for withholding sleep and food to extract
confessions, techniques some have charged American authorities with using in
Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. These methods are correctly listed under
the heading of "Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment and
Punishment." Washington should reject them and should refuse to hand over
prisoners to countries that routinely use torture. The rights report must become
a tool not just for documenting abuses, but also for combating them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
CORRECTIONS (87%); ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRUEL &
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); STARVATION (75%); PRISONS (75%); TERRORISM (75%);
ARRESTS (75%); FAMILY (75%); RELIGION (74%); DUE PROCESS (73%); FORCED LABOR
(73%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (72%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (72%); JAIL SENTENCING (70%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (70%);
ELECTION FRAUD (69%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (69%); RELOCATIONS (67%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(66%); MURDER (55%); ETHNICITY (50%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (50%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  EDITORIALS;
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (66%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (77%); BEIJING, CHINA (52%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MYANMAR (92%); CUBA (92%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); UZBEKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (92%); AZERBAIJAN (91%); CHINA (79%); ERITREA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
RWANDA (79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); UGANDA (79%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%);
TURKMENISTAN (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  UZBEKISTAN;  AZERBAIJAN

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Filming Rwandans' Efforts To Heal

BYLINE:  By NANCY RAMSEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 882 words


Anne Aghion made her first documentary, "The Earth Moved Under Him: A Portrait
of Managua," in Nicaragua's capital in the mid 1990's, more than 20 years after
its devastation by an earthquake.

"Smack in the center of the city was this huge lot with carcasses of buildings,
little shacks and this lush tropical vegetation that had grown after the
earthquake," Ms. Aghion recalled. "People were living there. It made me wonder,
How do you go on after so many layers of destruction? There was the Somoza
dictatorship, the earthquake, the Sandinista revolution. How do you survive? How
do you pick up after a cataclysm?"

In November 2000 Ms. Aghion went to Rwanda to ask similar questions of a country
of eight million people coming to terms with the 1994 genocide, which took the
lives of at least 500,000 ethnic Tutsi and moderate Hutu over the course of 100
days. (Alison Des Forges, an adviser to Human Rights Watch and a leading expert
on the killings, said that the commonly used figure of 800,000 deaths was too
high.)

Ms. Aghion went from the capital, Kigali, into the countryside of rolling green
hills and subsistence farming to "a gorgeous place, high up on a hilltop" where
nearly a thousand people had gathered for a preliminary step of the
community-based system of justice known as gacaca (pronounced ga-CHA-cha). The
word means "grass" in Kinyarwanda and refers to the notion of justice on the
grass. With more than 100,000 cases to be adjudicated, the government had turned
to a system that was used to settle disputes between neighbors in precolonial
Rwanda.

Ms. Aghion filmed as a charismatic prosecutor with a regal bearing ran the
proceedings. Prisoners were presented one by one. Anyone who had an accusation
against the prisoner was invited to speak; if no one spoke, the prisoner was
freed.

"At one point a woman with a baby on her back came out of the crowd and spoke to
the prosecutor in a low voice," Ms. Aghion recalled. "After she finished, he
addressed the crowd. 'This woman has allowed me to tell you that during the
genocide this man sequestered her for days on end, that during the day he would
go out and kill, and at night he would return to rape her.' "

"Nobody gasped," Ms. Aghion said. "In Rwanda you can have huge crowds and
silence. Rwandans are disciplined, respectful of authority and able to remove
themselves from their emotions. That's why genocide worked so well. People did
what they were told to do."

Tomorrow night Ms. Aghion's "Gacaca: Living Together Again in Rwanda?" will be
shown in Manhattan at the Gramercy Theatre (127 East 23rd Street) in a weeklong
series of documentaries, "Sundance at MoMA: Illuminated Voices." It will also be
shown in June at the Human Rights Watch International Film Festival at Lincoln
Center. "Gacaca" was filmed largely in April 2001 in the Ntongwe district, two
hours by car south of Kigali. The film follows the prosecutor Ms. Aghion met the
previous year as he explains to groups of people how gacaca will work and
presents various prisoners to the assembled crowds; away from the groups,
individuals speak to the camera.

Referring to a particular prisoner's return to the community, a father asks, "If
he returns, can I accept him when he killed my six children?" A young man
recalls witnessing his father's murder and running to the marketplace: "They
were killing people, but I couldn't find anyone to kill me."

Euphrasie Mukanwemera recounts in horrifying detail how her baby was grabbed off
her back, flung to the ground and beaten to death. Annonciata Mukanyonga's
children were murdered. "Leave her," she heard the killers say, "she is sadness
incarnate, she will die of sorrow."

Ms. Des Forges, the adviser to Human Rights Watch and author of "Leave None to
Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda," said: "What I find extraordinary about
Anne's film is that she stayed around and listened long enough. The kind of
attention that Rwanda has received after the genocide has been dominated by
people who came from the outside, who formed quick judgments about good guys and
bad guys."

"Gacaca" has been shown in many places -- the Kennedy School of Government at
Harvard; on French, Swedish, and Finnish television; and perhaps most
significantly in a little church in Ntongwe.

A hundred people showed up for that screening. Among them was Annonciata
Mukanyonga, the mother who was left to "die of sorrow" by her children's
killers.

"She was the one for whom it was most difficult to tell her story," recalled Ms.
Aghion, 43, who lives in New York. "While we were filming, she kept telling us,
'Come back tomorrow, come back next week.' One day I more or less said to her,
'Do you want to tell your story or not?' And she sat down and talked."

In the film she tells of trying to flee, of witnessing the mass killings.
"Looking out on the hills, you could think that they were just cutting banana
trees," she says. She speaks briefly but eloquently about the process of
reconciliation, about how Rwandans are already feeding and educating the
children of those who killed. "After the screening, as Annonciata was leaving
the church, I went over to her and asked her what she thought of the film," Ms.
Aghion said. "She told me, 'It was difficult for me to talk about what happened,
but now I understand why I did it.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A prosecutor in Rwanda, Jean Marie Mbarushimana, right, asks
the people if a prisoner, Vital Sindikubwabo, should be released. The answer
this day was no, he should await trial. (Gacaca Productions/Dominant 7
Productions)(pg. E3); Prisoners in a communal lockup in the Ntongwe district of
Rwanda are shown in Anne Aghion's film about genocide and a local justice
system. (Gacaca Productions/Dominant 7 Productions)(pg. E1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%);
NATURAL DISASTERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
RURAL COMMUNITIES (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); NICARAGUA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Three Leaders to Push Zimbabwe for Talks

BYLINE:  By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, May 4


Presidents of three African nations are scheduled to travel to Zimbabwe on
Monday to push for talks between the government of President Robert Mugabe and
opposition leaders.

The meeting comes at a time when Zimbabwean society has been battered by a
combination of economic crises and political conflicts, marked by severe
shortages of food and fuel and by strikes that have temporarily shut down most
major businesses and industries.

In South Africa and other nations, outrage has mounted over reports of
systematic human rights violations by the government, including the arrest and
torture of hundreds of opposition supporters in March.

Bheki Khumalo, a spokesman for President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, confirmed
that Mr. Mbeki would go to Zimbabwe, along with President Olusegun Obasanjo of
Nigeria and President Bakili Muluzi of Malawi, who is chairman of a South
African task force on Zimbabwe.

Responding to news reports that the three leaders planned to urge Mr. Mugabe to
step aside and allow the establishment of a transition government, Mr. Khumalo
said: "The issue of when and whether President Mugabe retires is a matter for
President Mugabe to decide. What we can do is go there, hear what is happening
and see what can be done to get the parties back to negotiations. It is clear
that they have to work together."

Still, hopes are high among Mr. Mugabe's opponents that the one-day visit will
start a process of political and economic change. It will be the first visit by
Mr. Mbeki and Mr. Obasanjo, two of the continent's most influential heads of
state, in more than 18 months. For Mr. Mbeki, the crisis in Zimbabwe has evolved
from a top foreign policy priority into one of his most vexing domestic
quandaries.

Mr. Mbeki has offered support to Mr. Mugabe's government, publicly playing down
reports of official abuse in Zimbabwe and saying his government prefers to
pursue a policy of "quiet diplomacy."

Once a model of progress and prosperity in a region ravaged by war and famine,
the country has fallen into turmoil. Unemployment is above 60 percent. Inflation
has reached record levels. Industries struggle against rolling blackouts and
fuel shortages. Meanwhile, sharp declines in agricultural production have left
most of the country's 11.6 million people in need of assistance.

Mr. Mugabe, 79, has governed Zimbabwe since the end of white-minority rule in
1980. He won elections last year in a contest that was dogged by charges of
vote-rigging and violence. Several Western governments and human rights groups
have accused him of using fraud and repression to retain his power.

On Friday, Amnesty International issued a report charging Mr. Mugabe with
enacting measures that gave legal cover to abuses of the press and other
independent groups.

"The Zimbabwean authorities, particularly the police, are using repressive
legislation to systematically harass, arrest and torture with impunity those
perceived to be supporting political opposition and exposing human rights
violations," the organization said.

Talks between the leading opposition group, the Movement for Democratic Change,
and the Mugabe government ended last year when the group challenged the
legitimacy of the Mugabe government in court. The government countered by
charging the group's president, Morgan Tsvangirai, with treason.

In recent weeks there seems to have been a cautious but notable thawing on both
sides. Mr. Mugabe indicated in a rare television interview his willingness to
meet with opposition leaders if they dropped their lawsuit.

In a statement last week the opposition group indicated a willingness to begin
"serious and sincere" negotiations with the governing Zimbabwe African National
Union Patriotic Front, if the government agreed to disband militias that have
been charged with systematic harassment, imprisonment and torture of government
opponents.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ENERGY SHORTAGES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (79%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%); FAMINE (78%); ELECTION FRAUD
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SHORTAGES (77%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (77%);
INFLATION (77%); ECONOMIC NEWS (77%); COMMODITIES SHORTAGES (76%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (76%); BUSINESS INTERRUPTIONS (76%); FOOD CRISES & SHORTAGES (72%);
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (72%); FOOD CHARITIES (72%); ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION &
DISTRIBUTION (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); LEGISLATION
(63%); POWER FAILURES (60%); AGRICULTURE (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: THABO MBEKI (79%)

CITY: JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (97%); SOUTH AFRICA (94%); AFRICA (92%); MALAWI (92%); NIGERIA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial of Palestinian Leader Focuses Attention on Israeli Courts

BYLINE:  By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, May 4


Marwan Barghouti, the Palestinian leader charged with orchestrating 26 killings
in the current violence between Israel and the Palestinians, was ushered into
District Court today in his brown prison uniform and unleashed what has become
his familiar objections.

"You don't have the right to try me," Mr. Barghouti, the West Bank chief of
Yasir Arafat's Fatah movement, told the three-judge panel. "This is a violation
of international law and the Geneva Convention."

Judge Sara Sirota, presiding over the panel, said, "We've heard you before, Mr.
Barghouti." In response to his unsolicited comments, she had him removed from
the courtroom several times as testimony proceeded without him.

This case is the centerpiece of an Israeli effort to show it can counter
violence and still run an open legal system that meets internationally accepted
standards. Mr. Barghouti, whose trial began a month ago, is the most prominent
Palestinian figure ever brought before an Israeli civilian court.

Israel has previously handled such cases in its military courts in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, where the rules are somewhat more favorable to the
prosecution. Military prosecutors filed 5,500 criminal cases against
Palestinians last year. While many are still not resolved, the conviction rate
in military courts has been running at 97 percent in recent years, according to
military officials.

Israel asserts that even its most widely debated practices to try to stem
violence can withstand legal scrutiny -- the killings of dozens of Palestinian
militants, the detention of suspects without charges and the demolition of
family homes that belonged to those accused of carrying out attacks against
Israelis. But Palestinians and human rights activists say these actions are
legally unacceptable, and often amount to collective punishment of Palestinians.

The American justice system is facing similar questions about the treatment of
defendants in terrorism cases, in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks.

Lior Yavne, a spokesman for the Israeli human rights group B'tselem, said that
"inside Israel proper, you have a law-abiding state, a proper liberal
democracy."

"But once you cross into the Palestinian territories, the situation changes
immediately," he said in reference to the West Bank and Gaza. "Whatever is
convenient to do in the occupied territories, Israel does without concern for
international legal norms."

Israeli civilians have faced attacks for decades, and in hundreds of legal
rulings, the courts have confronted the toughest issues about what is a
justified Israeli response.

The Israeli Supreme Court outlawed torture in 1999, though critics say it still
takes place. The justices have upheld detention without trial and house
demolitions, while setting criteria to limit the practices. The court is
preparing to rule on a petition objecting to singling out individual militants
for attacks, which Palestinians call assassinations.

"We have recognized the power of the state to protect its security and the
security of its citizens on the one hand," Aharon Barak, the chief justice of
Israel's Supreme Court, wrote in the Harvard Law Review last November. "On the
other hand, we have emphasized that the rights of every individual must be
preserved."

One of the most unusual aspects of Israeli law is the rapid access that
petitioners, including Palestinians, can gain to Israel's highest court. In
April 2002, during the fiercest fighting of the current conflict, in the Jenin
refugee camp in the West Bank, the high court was receiving and ruling on
petitions almost daily.

One evening, Palestinians in the West Bank, working with Israeli lawyers,
petitioned the court to halt the army's use of attack helicopters in the refugee
camp. The next day, after hearing the army's case, the court upheld the use of
helicopters.

Mr. Yavne, the human rights worker, said the high court takes pride that
Palestinians can petition. "But when you look at the rulings, in most cases, the
court supports the state's position," he said.

Yitzhak Zamir, a retired Supreme Court justice, said he did not know of any
other country where civilian courts had such broad jurisdiction to review
military actions.

Mr. Zamir had a reputation as a strong advocate of civil rights, but said he
sided with the military on a number of issues, such as house demolitions --
which Israel revived last year for use against those who carried out or
organized violence.

"Frankly, it is an extreme measure that's difficult to defend," he said. But he
noted that Israel did not have the death penalty, and when fighting violence,
"the thinking is there must be some form of deterrence."

Raji Sourani, the director of Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza, has
been battling the Israeli legal system for more than a quarter century. Because
of restriction imposed during the current violence, most Palestinian lawyers
cannot enter Israel to work in the courts. So when defending Palestinians, or
objecting to Israeli military practices, he gathers material in Gaza, and sends
it to his Israeli partners. "We build the legal file and send it by e-mail and
fax," said Mr. Sourani.

Despite his many frustrations with the Israeli courts, Mr. Sourani says he
remains "constantly amazed by the high standards of the legal system." "On many
issues," he said, "when the courts are dealing with purely Israeli questions,
like gay rights, I admire their rulings. But when it comes to the Palestinians,
these same people seem to be totally schizophrenic."

Israel's army says international law and conventions on terrorism permit the
kind of tough actions it is taking when confronted with violence. For example,
detention without trial is permitted as a security measure. But critics say
Israel uses the practice excessively, citing the 1,100 Palestinians in
"administrative detention," which is monitored by the courts, but does not
require the state to file charges.

The army has judged the past 31 months of fighting to be not a war, but "an
armed conflict with terrorists." In advising commanders, military lawyers say
they believe that the killings of Palestinians involved in violence are legally
acceptable when no other options, like arrest, are possible.

Palestinians contend, though, that the attacks inevitably result in the deaths
of a much broader cross-section -- from leaders of militant groups, to political
figures not involved in violence, to innocent bystanders.

The military also contends that existing conventions on terrorism need to be
updated, saying that most attacks are handled after the fact as police matters.

But with terror attacks, "the problem is prevention, not punishment," said one
Israeli military officer who studies the issue. "How do you stop a suicide
bomber before he reaches Tel Aviv. International law is silent on this."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marwan Barghouti, the Palestinian leader who is on trial in
Israel. (Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); AL FATAH (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JUDGES (78%);
PETITIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LAW OF WAR (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (69%); LIBERALISM (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: TORTURE;
Olympics' Ethics Panel Proposes Disbanding of Iraqi Committee

BYLINE:  By RICHARD SANDOMIR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 505 words


The International Olympic Committee's ethics commission called yesterday for the
dissolution of Iraq's Olympic Committee, which Iraqi athletes have accused of
employing torture.

The commission also recommended that exiled Iraqis and others not associated
with the torture and other crimes form a new Olympic committee. The
International Olympic Committee's executive board is expected to adopt the
recommendations next week in Madrid.

Dr. Jacques Rogge, the president of the international committee, said that the
findings formed a "strong condemnation of actions" by the Iraqi government "and
a moral judgment on actions that were absolutely unacceptable."

The commission acted on a complaint filed Dec. 6 on behalf of two Iraqi athletes
by Indict, a London-based human rights organization.

Indict accused Iraq's Olympic Committee and its president, Uday Hussein, the son
of Saddam Hussein, of beatings, torture and harassment of athletes, maintaining
its own prison, widespread discrimination and participation in the looting of
Kuwait in 1990 and 1991.

On Tuesday, The New York Times described in interviews with members of Iraq's
national soccer team how players were punished after games were lost or ended in
ties. Punishment included being spat on by Uday Hussein's guards, imprisonment,
and 12-hour sessions of push-ups and sprints.

The Iraqi Olympic Committee's building was equipped with torture devices that
included a sarcophagus with long nails pointing inward from every surface so
that victims could be punctured and suffocated.

Charles Forrest, the executive director of Indict, said that the International
Olympic Committee should have acted earlier. "Indict shouldn't have been in the
position of having to make this complaint," he said in a telephone interview
from London. "They should have investigated this on their own."

Mr. Forrest said that horror stories about Iraq's Olympic Committee began to
emerge several years ago. "The hints and rumors," he said, "were significant
enough to be investigated even if people weren't available to make a formal
complaint."

But Dr. Rogge said his committee had never received any complaints. He was aware
of a complaint made in 1997 to FIFA, soccer's international governing body, "but
FIFA found no evidence of wrongdoing."

The 1997 complaint said that soccer players were tortured after losing an
important game. A delegation from FIFA interviewed players in Baghdad, but the
complaint was not corroborated. Last December, Indict's chairwoman, Ann Clwyd,
said, "You can't expect athletes interviewed in Iraq to commit suicide by
telling the truth."

The special representative of the International Olympic Committee's ethics
commission, Paquerette Girard Zapelli, a former French magistrate, met with at
least one exiled Iraqi athlete in London and examined evidence of torture
provided by Indict. She also consulted with Human Rights Watch. "She came back
and said all the allegations were absolutely credible, and that there was no
doubt of that," Dr. Rogge said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (96%); OLYMPICS (93%); ETHICS (90%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SPORTS GOVERNING BODIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); SOCCER (89%); SPORTS &
RECREATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); SPORTS & RECREATION
EVENTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (74%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); ATHLETES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
EXECUTIVES (71%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS (71%); SUICIDE (68%); TERRORISM (64%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  OLYMPIC GAMES;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (94%) INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE; INDICT (ORGN)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) SANDOMIR, RICHARD; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); HUSSEIN,
UDAY

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); SPAIN (91%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Right Feet

BYLINE:  By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: BASRA, Iraq


Two right feet. That was the tipoff. The skeleton in the coffin had two right
feet.

The skeleton, actually just a skull and a pile of bones, was in one of the 33
wooden coffins laid out in the courtyard of the Jumhuriya Mosque in Basra, a
port city in southern Iraq. It was part of a collection of skeletal remains
found in one of several mass graves that dot the countryside here. You can still
see the blindfolds wrapped around the eye sockets of each human skull, and the
ropes that bound the feet before people were shot.

The unearthing of these remains is both very important and very sad. It
isimportant because they bear silent witness to what an engine of human mass
destruction Saddam Hussein's regime was. It is sad, though, because Iraqi
families, desperate to find their missing loved ones, have been haphazardly
digging up any suspected mass grave site. Because the sites have not been
secured by U.S. or British troops -- who told the locals they don't have enough
men to do that -- the graves are being opened before any international authority
or human rights organizations can properly document, photograph and catalog what
the sites contain.

This will make it very difficult to connect the bodies with lists that the Baath
regime itself kept of those it executed and then use this as evidence in a
criminal tribunal. Hence the open coffin in the mosque courtyard with two right
feet -- bodies get jumbled together.

So just as it is becoming increasingly clear that many weapons sites --
including nuclear research sites -- which might have proved that Saddam had
weapons of mass destruction, have been looted and the evidence scattered, the
same is happening with sites of his human mass destruction. The U.S. had no plan
or teams in place to secure the Iraqi sites, as it did in Bosnia.

Lord knows that with tens of thousands of people having disappeared under
Saddam's regime, there should be plenty of evidence of his barbarity around. But
hard evidence is important. A key element in the war crimes case against the
Serb tyrant Slobodan Milosevic has become just a handful of killings, which,
thanks to proper forensic analysis and documentation, investigators were able to
retrace right up the chain of command.

The bones in the Jumhuriya Mosque came from one of several mass grave sites near
Basra that were apparently filled with young men killed by the Baath regime
after Saddam's henchmen assassinated a popular Shiite cleric in 1999, sparking a
mini-uprising. Families started digging up these sites when the local Baath
office was looted and a list was found of people executed at that time.

"We went to one of these sites on April 23," said Sam Zia-Zarifi from Human
Rights Watch. "And we found the spot was covered with ammunition. First, we
feared that the families would just start digging and blow themselves up. Our
second fear was that they would start digging, period -- and thus make it
impossible to positively identify remains and use those sites for any
accountability in the future. We notified Jay Garner's office. They said they
would secure it, but it never happened.

"Our experience everywhere is that you literally cannot move ahead in a country
like Iraq unless you can somehow account for who did what to whom," he added.
"Sometimes people may want to forgive; sometimes they may want to punish. But
everywhere it is important that people know. People are going to want to know:
Who is this new police chief? Is he someone who killed my son? And it is
important to bring the bad guys to justice with some real evidence."

As someone who never believed Saddam had any weapons of mass destruction that
threatened us, but that this war could easily be justified by his mass
destruction of his own people, I find this chaotic loss of evidence particularly
sad.

America is the occupying power of Iraq. It has legal obligations, and one of
them is to secure mass graves and not to simply dismiss looting, as Secretary of
Defense Donald Rumsfeld did, with his shameful toss-off line: "Stuff happens."
People expect more from us. The U.S. military executed its war plan with great
efficiency and decency. For that, most Iraqis are grateful, and every American
can be proud. But when it comes to securing the peace, either there was no plan,
or those executing it simply did not have the manpower or know-how to pull it
off. Either way, we have gone from the clarity of war to what Mr. Zia-Zarifi
calls "the fog of peace." We dare not get lost in there.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (86%); FORENSICS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); CEMETERIES (76%);
SHOOTINGS (75%); WITNESSES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); TERRORISM
(69%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (69%); WAR & CONFLICT (68%); ARMED FORCES
(53%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (51%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%); THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (59%) FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L;
HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: HUMAN RIGHTS;
Iraqi Detainees Claim Abuse By British and U.S. Troops

BYLINE:  By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: BASRA, Iraq, May 15


Muhammad al-Tamimi wants the British soldier who he says kicked him in the ribs
and hit him over the head with the butt of his gun to endure what he endured --
a long detention.

Mr. Tamimi is one of about two dozen detainees who have come forward recently
with complaints of mistreatment by allied forces in southern Iraq. Amnesty
International, the London-based human rights group, which has been conducting
interviews with the complainants, said today that some of the acts described
could be considered torture.

Iraqis who were taken prisoner have accused American and British soldiers of
offenses ranging from beatings to -- in one severe case recounted by a Saudi man
-- electric shock. Some detainees have accused soldiers of hitting them just
once, but in one instance a former prisoner said he was beaten throughout the
night.

Researchers at Amnesty International said today that they had not corroborated
the allegations or presented them to allied forces. But they said they had
received enough similar accounts from Iraqi civilians and soldiers that they
were taking them seriously.

"The patterns that have emerged constitute ill treatment," said Kathleen A.
Cavanaugh, an Amnesty International researcher in Basra who conducted some of
the interviews. "That mistreatment may constitute, in some cases, torture."

The British Ministry of Defense released a statement denying the accusations.

"Those who were detained by British forces were treated in line with the Geneva
Conventions, and we had regular visits by the International Committee for the
Red Cross," the statement read. "If there are allegations, then we will have to
look at them and see if we can investigate."

A Pentagon spokesman, Bryan G. Whitman, also disputed the Amnesty International
report. "We treat all enemy prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva
Conventions, and with dignity and respect," Mr. Whitman said.

Mr. Tamimi, 26, said he was one of those who welcomed the toppling of Saddam
Hussein and greeted the advancing British soldiers not with guns but waves of
joy. But on April 17, after the British had contained a fierce counterattack by
Hussein loyalists in Basra, Mr. Tamimi said he was picked up on the street one
evening and hauled away.

He said he was treated roughly from the start and was denied water despite
repeated requests. One British soldier struck him in the forehead, Mr. Tamimi
said as he showed off a scar. He said he was also kicked hard in the ribs. In
addition, he said soldiers took the money he was carrying, about $200 in Iraqi
dinars, and never returned it.

"In every country, whatever nationality, British, American or Iraqi, there are
people who are nice and people who are not so nice," said Mr. Tamimi, who is a
street hawker. "The soldier who mistreated me needs to be taken to court."

In Mr. Tamimi's case, the mistreatment stopped when he came into the custody of
American soldiers, he said. He was taken to the detention compound for prisoners
of war in Umm Qasr, where he said he was treated with dignity, although he said
it took from April 17 until May 14 for a board of inquiry to determine that he
ought to be released.

Mr. Tamimi carries a battered piece of paper in his pocket that documents his
release.

"In the case of the above individual, the board reached the conclusion that
there was no evidence to doubt that the person was a civilian status, and there
was no evidence to support an assertion that he had committed a belligerent act
against coalition forces," said the document, signed by Col. Alan Ecke, the camp
commander.

As word of Amnesty International's investigation has spread in Basra and other
southern towns, former detainees have begun arriving unannounced at the
Al-Marbad Hotel, where staff members for the organization have been staying.

"A soldier hit me for no reason," said Muhammad al-Qatrany, 22, who was
interviewed today by an Amnesty researcher on the front porch of the hotel. "I
didn't have a weapon. I was a civilian. Why did he hit me?"

Researchers from the organization said the accounts they heard were consistent
in interview after interview. They said they were unconvinced by suggestions
that the mistreatment, if it occurred, came in the heat of battle.

"You treat people taken into custody in a war the way you want your prisoners to
be treated," said Ms. Cavanaugh, who is a lecturer at the Irish Center for Human
Rights. "The American and British publics would be justifiably outraged if their
prisoners of war were treated this way."

Amnesty also criticized the American military for not allowing the organization
access to the Umm Qasr detention center.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad al-Tamimi, left, and Muhammad al-Qatrany said allied
troops mistreated them during their detention at a prison compound. (Marc
Lacey/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (64%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (63%) TORTURE;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL
AND CHEMICAL WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) LACEY, MARC

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: IRAQ;  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Morocco's Choice: Openness Or Terror

BYLINE:  By Aboubakr Jamai;  Aboubakr Jamai is editor in chief of Le Journal
Hebdomadaire, a Moroccan newsweekly. This was translated by The Times from the
French.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: CASABLANCA, Morocco


When suicide bombers shattered the calm of the night here on May 16, they did
more than take 43 lives -- they also endangered Morocco's future as a democracy.
Morocco had long been considered a haven of tolerance and peace, and any
troubles we had we attributed to foreign agitators. We can't pretend that is the
case any more. This time, all the attackers were Moroccans. All grew up in
poverty; none had been outside the country. Instead, the ideology of radical
Islam came here and found ready recruits.

Faced with this reality, the Moroccan government seems to have made the decision
to restrict liberty in the name of security, perhaps in imitation of the United
States after the Sept. 11 attacks. This week, Parliament approved a broad
anti-terrorism bill that has been strongly criticized by human rights groups.
But these moves are a mistake. To fight terrorism, Morocco needs more democracy,
not less.

The evolution of democracy in Morocco has been hesitant, sometimes even
illusory. For example, the legislative elections last September were more
transparent than in the past, but recent investigations in the press here have
raised serious questions about their fairness.

We are also burdened by a constitution that does not meet the first criterion of
a democratic constitution: the separation of powers. The monarchy has all the
power, so much so that the Parliament plays a marginal role in political life.
The true power is in the hands of the people close to King Mohammed VI. The
relative powerlessness of elected institutions has resulted in the rejection of
the political system by a large part of the Moroccan people, a rejection Islamic
fundamentalists have exploited to recruit militants.

Paradoxically, this antidemocratic system is supported by a political
intelligentsia that calls itself democratic, even progressive. Indeed, the
concentration of powers in the monarchy is considered a defense against
fundamentalism. We have to delay democracy in order to save it from those who
would use it to kill it, the intelligentsia say. We rely on the enlightened
despot to preserve our future. The problem with this reasoning is that Arab
regimes have shown themselves to be more despotical than enlightened.

There is hope for a genuine democracy in Morocco, however, because we have a
thriving civil society. Associations for women's rights and for human rights are
doing extraordinary work. The most concrete result of their action has been the
opening of a real dialogue with moderate Islamist movements. For instance,
members of the Moroccan Human Rights Association and the most popular Islamist
movement in Morocco, the Justice and Charity Party, debate democracy and the
status of women, a discussion ignored by the official news media but covered and
often organized by the independent press. As in Turkey, the most important
Islamist groups have moderated their political and social stances as they take
part in public debate, including running for office. (Islamists are hoping to
win the mayoralty of Casablanca, for instance, as a way of showing that they can
manage a major city.)

Unfortunately, the government's increasing restrictions on the news media --
this month, a journalist was sentenced to four years in prison, accused of
insulting the king -- are stifling this movement toward democracy. I mourn the
slowing, one could even say the halting, of the progress toward openness that
the king seemed to want to establish at the beginning of his reign three years
ago. The press and human rights organizations are reporting cases of torture by
the police.

If the attacks of Sept. 11 forced the West to seek a new equilibrium between
security and liberty, one can imagine the difficulties faced by a country like
Morocco. There is, however, no other route to take than that of democratization
that brings social equity. The only antidote to extremism is the nurturing of
our democratic culture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); FUNDAMENTALISM (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); ELECTIONS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%);
WOMEN (73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (73%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (71%);
APPROVALS (69%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (64%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;
TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

ORGANIZATION: JOURNAL HEBDOMADAIRE (MOROCCAN NEWSPAPER)

PERSON: JAMAI, ABOUBAKR

COUNTRY: MOROCCO (96%); TURKEY (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: MOROCCO;  CASABLANCA (MOROCCO)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Asylum Seekers Suffer Psychological Setbacks, Study Finds

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 493 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


A study of inmates in the nation's immigration detention centers has found
rising levels of depression and post-traumatic stress among victims of torture
or persecution who are seeking political asylum in the United States.

The report, by a team of doctors who specialize in the treatment of people
fleeing persecution, found a steady deterioration in the psychological
well-being of asylum seekers over the months and years that they were detained
in the centers, many of which offered little access to counseling and other
mental health services.

In the 2002 fiscal year, more than 9,000 asylum seekers were detained while
awaiting adjudication of their claims, according to government statistics. The
authors of the report based their findings on only a small sampling of that
group, saying that officials at the Department of Homeland Security declined to
grant them access to a larger pool of inmates.

The study, written by Physicians for Human Rights and the Bellevue-New York
University Program for Survivors of Torture, based its findings on interviews
with 70 asylum seekers in 2001 and 2002.

Officials at the Homeland Security Department said today that they had just
received the 220-page report and could not comment on its findings until they
had reviewed it.

Dr. Allen S. Keller, an author of the report, said the findings were "very
disconcerting." The report, "From Persecution to Prison: The Health Consequences
of Detention for Asylum Seekers," will be released on Tuesday.

"The people we interviewed for this study were subjected to the most awful kind
of persecution in their countries," said Dr. Keller, the director of the
Bellevue-New York University program. "They came here seeking safety, seeking
refuge. Instead, what they found was a prison cell."

Seventy-four percent of those interviewed said they had been tortured in their
home countries, and more than half said they were suffering from psychological
problems when they arrived here.

People who seek asylum are detained when they arrive at ports of entry in the
United States. Government officials say detention ensures that people do not
flee before claims are processed.

But 70 percent of those interviewed said their psychological conditions worsened
while they were in detention. Only about 6 percent reported receiving counseling
services.

Many also said that they were treated poorly by immigration officials at
airports and in detention centers.

Abdulai Bah fled Sierra Leone during the civil war there and was held for nearly
four months at the Elizabeth Detention Center in New Jersey. Mr. Bah said he was
terrified because no one explained why he was being detained. He was granted
asylum in Feb. 2001, he said.

"I wasn't expecting to be sent to any prison," said Mr. Bah, 21, in a telephone
interview from his home in Staten Island. "Back in my country, people were
praising the U.S. in terms of democracy and human rights being respected. I
wasn't ready for this."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL ASYLUM (95%); IMMIGRATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); MENTAL HEALTH (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION
CENTERS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DEPRESSION (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); PRISONS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); MENTAL ILLNESS (78%);
MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (77%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); WRITERS (74%);
STATISTICS (69%); CIVIL WAR (68%) IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  MENTAL HEALTH AND
DISORDERS;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  STRESS (HUMAN)

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (83%) PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS; BELLEVUE-NEW YORK UNIVERSITY PROGRAM
FOR SURVIVORS OF TORTURE

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Young Still Forced To Join in Endless Rebellion

BYLINE:  By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1795 words

DATELINE: KINNAIYADI, Sri Lanka, Dec. 29


The floods ruined this season's paddy harvest in this village of sandy earth and
slanting palms.

The harvest of its youth went ahead.

Ten days ago, at least 18, and possibly 60 or more, young people, according to
different villagers' estimates, were taken off to join the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam, one of the world's most ruthless and effective secessionist
movements. Many of them were boys and girls, some as young as 12.

Some were taken by force, yanked from houses or scooped up along the roadside
like found treasure. Others went "voluntarily," to spare their parents after
Tiger cadres repeatedly threatened them if they did not supply the movement with
a child. They were loaded into tractor-trailers and taken away.

For 20 years, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam have fought for a separate
state for the minority Tamils of Sri Lanka, the island nation off India's
southern tip. The Tamils, many of whom are Hindu, are concentrated in the
northern and eastern parts of the country. They say their cause has been
motivated by discrimination against them by the Sinhalese, many of whom are
Buddhist, who make up three quarters of the country's population of 18 million.

Much of the rebels' battle has been fought on the backs, and bodies, of child
soldiers, according to human rights organizations, including the United Nations.

Today, however, the Tigers have paused in their armed struggle and put aside the
quest for their own state. They are in peace talks with the Sri Lankan
government. They are trying to obtain regional autonomy for the Tamil people and
to transform themselves into a legitimate political organization.

They insist that they no longer have, or accept, children in their ranks. In
recent months, they have undertaken the highly publicized releases of 165
children.

In an interview in Kilinochchi, the Tigers' administrative capital, the
movement's political leader, S. Thamilchelvam, said: "We want to discount the
disinformation campaign of previous governments. There was no conscription.
There were no child soldiers."

But in whispered interviews here, villagers -- afraid for their lives if their
identities were revealed -- told of a relentless recruiting campaign, in which
the only way to save children was to send them away. One woman who had two
nieces and one nephew taken told how parents, angry that they were losing their
own child, had steered cadres toward their neighbors' children as well.

A police intelligence official confirmed that children had been taken; he
estimated the number at 30 or 35. One villager interviewed put the number at 60
over three days.  A representative of a human rights organization, who
subsequently visited the village, was told that 100 young people, mostly under
18, were taken.

Complaints filed with international aid groups, as well as interviews with
Tamils and community leaders in the Tiger-controlled north and east, also
indicate that child enlistment and abduction, while down from past levels,
continue.

There was a time when young people, including some children, joined on their
own. The cause seemed just, and for a poor child, the movement offered meals and
security.

While some children still join voluntarily, swayed by recruiting meetings at
which Tigers show propaganda films of battle victories, villagers say the
appetite for war here is gone. The Tigers alone have lost 17,600 cadres in
battle, and the country a total of more than 64,000 lives. So to bolster their
ranks, the Tigers appear to be continuing to use coercion, both of those under
and over 18.

Whether classified as recruitment or abduction, taking children into the
movement is a violation of a cease-fire agreement signed last February, which
bars, in accordance with international law, hostile acts against civilians. It
is also a violation of the Tigers' own public pledges.

The Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission, a team of Scandinavians invited by both sides
to monitor the cease-fire, has certified 281 cases of child recruitment from
February through October, with more than 400 cases still being investigated; in
November, there were 24.

"We also clearly realize our complaints are the tip of the iceberg," said the
group's spokesman, Teitur Torkelsson. "They're not even half." In the north,
international aid groups have about 50 open cases of children who have been
taken since the cease-fire was signed. There have also been reports that homes
the Tigers maintain for children orphaned by war have been used as recruiting
grounds for the rebels.

But most of the complaints come from the Batticaloa district in Eastern
Province, where this village is.

In fact, the conscription in Kinnaiyadi appears to be only the latest wave of
forced recruitment, often of children, in the Batticaloa area. Here, Tamils
said, the Tigers' policy remains as it has long been: every family with three or
more children must give one.

"They have thousands, and they're still taking them," said the Rev. Harry
Miller, an American Jesuit priest who has lived in the town of Batticaloa for
more than a half century. In July, he said, the Tigers took eight children from
outside a Hindu temple feast on the edge of Batticaloa.

"We haven't gotten any back," he said.

Of the problems in the east, Mr. Thamilchelvam said they were "instances" that
had been brought to the notice of the high command, and the political hierarchy
had been ordered to make sure they were not repeated. But he said the
demographics of the area -- there are large Muslim and Sinhalese populations as
well -- meant that Tamil youths often sought protection by joining the
guerrillas.

This village is technically under government control, with an army camp just
feet from its edge. But it has largely been forgotten by the government. The
school ends at fifth grade and often is closed by flooding; the only nearby
hospital, serving a constellation of villages and towns, can see only 50
patients a day.

Instead, it is the Tigers who hold sway here, which is why villagers have been
afraid to even make an official complaint to the police. Terror chokes the shady
byways. Residents, as in much of Batticaloa, say they do not open their mouths
except to eat. To speak, even anonymously, they said, could mean putting their
lives on the line. No one knows who is with the Tigers, but anyone might be.

If the past is any guide, those taken will be taken to Tiger training camps,
given new names and told their past is a closed chapter. Some parents may never
see their children again.

One 64-year-old woman near Kinnaiyadi, who spoke on condition of anonymity out
of fear, told how last February, Tigers tried to extort money from her son under
threat of death. To save him, his own son, 19, agreed to join the movement. He
has not been seen since.

Others catch glimpses, often in brief and tearful reunions, of their children at
the Tigers' annual Heroes' Day celebrations. Some young recruits escape,
although the Tigers sometimes take a relative hostage until the escapee returns.

A few are released, as was the case in an incident involving five young men from
the town of Batticaloa between the ages of 18 and 22 who were taken on Dec. 17.

One of them, who spoke along with his mother -- both of them too fearful to be
identified -- said he and his friends had gone to a Tiger office with some
cadres because they thought they would be able to watch films. Instead, they
were put in a van, taken two hours away and told that now that they were 18, it
was their duty to join the movement and either fight for a separate state or
help run a peacetime administration.

Their families, meanwhile, had found their sons' bicycles outside a Tiger
office. The Tigers said the young men had willingly joined the movement, and
told the parents to take home their bikes and jewelry.

Skeptical, tenacious mothers demanded that their sons be asked in front of them
if they had joined voluntarily, and they protested to international
organizations. The young men were quietly released two days after they had been
taken.

Mr. Thamilchelvam, who is third in the Tigers' hierarchy, repeatedly insisted
there had been no forced conscription. Civilians, "especially young people," had
voluntarily supported the movement, he said.

Children who had lost parents and relatives during the war had sought refuge
with the movement and been placed in orphanages, he said. Tiger officials
insisted that children from the orphanages were not allowed to join the
movement.

But critics of the guerrillas have long insisted that the orphanages were
themselves fertile recruitment grounds for the organization. One 18-year-old in
Batticaloa in the east told how after her two brothers were forcibly conscripted
by the Tigers and then died fighting for them, the Tigers told her mother they
were taking her sister to an orphanage to educate her. She, too, ended up dead
on a battlefield.

Visits to two orphanages in the north, in the jungle area that is the Tigers'
base, did little to clarify their real purpose. At the Sencholai orphanage for
girls, the picture of Velupillai Prabhakaran, the Tigers' revered and feared
leader, is in the classroom, and the girls call him "Uncle." "He's more or less
the foster parent for these children," said Janani, the 43-year-old Tiger who
runs the orphanage.

At the boys' orphanage, there was a shrine to the Tigers' suicide bombers.

One girl who had come at 14 -- out of her "desire," she said nervously, as
several cadres listened -- was now, at age 17, a cadre, as were several other
girls. Janani said perhaps "two or three" had joined the movement. She would not
permit a visit to the older girls' quarters.

The 17-year-old cadre was also not an orphan -- her parents were alive and
living in the area. Tiger officials say that if they believe the movement can
better raise a child from a poor family, they will take him or her, with the
parents' permission.

Janani said that perhaps 10 percent of the girls were not truly orphans.
Sometimes parents came wanting to take their children back, she said, but if the
children did not want to go, "We can't force them."

It is not hard to find evidence of the Tigers' history with children,
particularly as they move former military cadres into the civil administration
they run in the north. There is the 18-year-old customs official who said he
joined at 16, the assistant in the political wing who joined at 15 or 16, and
another who joined at 12, and from the battles he cited, first fought at 14 or
15.

Then there is the cemetery outside Kilinochchi, the final resting place for
1,938 war heroes. The headstones have the cadres' real names, their "movement
names," their parents' names, their villages of origin and the dates of their
deaths.

On each, the only thing missing is the date of birth.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A boy stood next to a shrine to heroes of the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam, left, at an orphanage in northern Sri Lanka. At another
orphanage, a Tiger cadre helped a child climb a rope. Villagers in Kinnaiyadi,
above right, say young people were taken from there recently to join the Tigers.
(Photographs by Sriyantha Walpola for The New York Times)(pg. A6) Chart/Map: "AT
A GLANCE: The Youngest Soldiers"A recent United Nations report identified 14
areas of conflict where governments or militant groups may be recruiting or
using soldiers younger than 18. Map of the world highlighting the following
nations:SRI LANKANORTHERN
IRELANDCHECHNYAAFGHANISTANNEPALMYANMARPHILIPPINESSOMALIAUGANDABURUNDISUDANLIBERI
ACONGOCOLOMBIA (Source: United Nations)(pg. A6) Map of Sri Lanka highlighting
Kinnaiyadi (pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); RICE FARMING (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (76%); POLITICS (73%); DISCRIMINATION (73%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (67%); RELIGION (67%); ETHNICITY
(66%); PEACE PROCESS (66%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (66%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(65%); POLITICAL PARTIES (64%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (61%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TAMILS
(ETHNIC GROUP);  KIDNAPPING

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%)
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: WALDMAN, AMY

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); INDIA (79%)

REGION: SRI LANKA

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE COURTS;
DETENTION UPHELD IN COMBATANT CASE

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


A federal appeals court handed the Bush administration a major legal victory
today in ruling that a wartime president can indefinitely detain a United States
citizen captured as an enemy combatant on the battlefield and deny that person
access to a lawyer.

The case, which set up a stark clash between the nation's security interests and
its citizens' civil liberties, may have expanded the power of the presidency as
the three-judge panel ruled unanimously that President Bush was due great
deference in conducting the war on terrorism.

The judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in
Richmond, Va., said it was improper for the federal courts to probe too deeply
into the detention of Yasser Esam Hamdi, a 22-year-old American-born Saudi who
was captured on the battlefield in Afghanistan and is now imprisoned in a
military brig in Norfolk, Va.

Lawyers for Mr. Hamdi challenged his detention, asserting that because he is a
citizen he has the same constitutional rights as citizens in criminal cases,
including the right to consult a lawyer and to question the reasons for his
confinement.

The appeals panel said that to deprive any citizen of his constitutional
protections "is not a step that any court would casually take." Excerpts, Page
A15.

Even so, in the opinion written by the circuit's chief judge, J. Harvie
Wilkinson III, the panel said, "The safeguards that all Americans have come to
expect in criminal prosecutions do not translate neatly to the arena of armed
conflict. In fact if deference is not exercised with respect to military
judgments in the field, it is difficult to see where deference would ever
obtain."

Attorney General John Ashcroft called the decision "an important victory for the
president's ability to protect the American people in times of war."

But Elisa Massimino, a director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, said:
"The court seems to be saying that it has no role whatsoever in overseeing the
administration's conduct of the war on terrorism. That is particularly
disturbing in the context of a potentially open-ended, as-yet-undeclared war,
the beginning and end of which is left solely to the president's discretion."

The lawyers authorized by Mr. Hamdi's father to argue the case on his son's
behalf are certain to seek a review from the Supreme Court, but there is no
guarantee that the justices will take up the case.

The only other American citizen known to be held without charges is Jose
Padilla, the so-called dirty-bomb suspect. Unlike Hamdi, who was captured on a
battlefield in Afghanistan, Mr. Padilla was arrested at O'Hare International
Airport in Chicago on suspicion of being involved in a terrorist plot to
detonate a radioactive device. He is being held in a military brig in South
Carolina.

Today's ruling may be the most far-reaching yet in a host of court cases brought
on by the administration's efforts in the war on terrorism.

In one case, a federal district judge has upheld the administration's decision
to hold about 600 prisoners at the Guantanamo naval base in Cuba, ruling that
the laws of the United States do not apply there.

Other federal judges have ruled that the Bush administration could not hold
hearings on immigration violations in secret and could not withhold the names of
those arrested on such charges from the public. Those cases are making their way
through the appellate courts.

The Hamdi case began with the narrow issue of whether the courts should be
satisfied with a Defense Department official's two-page, nine-paragraph
statement that offered a spare accounting of facts to justify the government
charge that Mr. Hamdi has been properly labeled an enemy combatant.

Judge Robert G. Doumar of Federal District Court in Norfolk ruled in August that
the declaration -- made by Michael Mobbs, a special adviser to the under
secretary of defense for policy -- was not enough.

The appeals court reversed that finding today and went much further in defining
the authority of the executive branch in wartime.

"The constitutional allocation of war powers affords the president
extraordinarily broad authority as commander in chief and compels courts to
assume a deferential posture in reviewing exercises of this authority," the
panel found.

While courts are entitled to review detentions when asked, the panel ruled that,
"courts are ill-positioned to police the military's distinction between those in
the arena of combat who should be detained and those who should not."

The panel said it would be improper for the judicial branch to launch an
exhaustive inquiry into the conditions of Mr. Hamdi's capture, as his lawyers
had requested. To do so, the judges said, would require officers to travel back
to the United States from across the globe. They said the conduct of the war
should not be determined by litigation.

The appeals court did not go so far as to deny Mr. Hamdi the use of the writ of
habeas corpus, a legal mechanism allowing people to challenge their detention, a
position that might attract a Supreme Court review. Instead, the judges said the
judicial inquiry had to be extremely limited.

Frank W. Dunham Jr., a federal public defender in Virginia who argued the case
for Mr. Hamdi, had asserted that the defendant was entitled to challenge the
accusations that he was an enemy soldier.

But the court said that since it was "undisputed" that Mr. Hamdi "was present in
a zone of active combat operations, we are satisfied that the Constitution does
not entitle him to a searching review of the factual determinations underlying
his seizure there."

In addition, the judges rejected appeals by Mr. Hamdi's lawyers that they should
consider whether the war was at an end. Such questions, the court said, were
solely the province of the president and his military advisers.

The judges also rejected Mr. Hamdi's assertion that the Geneva Convention
required the government to convene a tribunal to determine if he was a lawful or
unlawful combatant. The panel said that only governments and diplomats could
invoke the Convention, not individuals.

Judge Wilkinson ended the opinion with a reference to the casualties of the
Sept. 11 attacks.

"It is not wrong even in the dry annals of judicial opinion to mourn those who
lost their lives that terrible day," he wrote. "Yet we speak in the end not from
sorrow or anger, but from the conviction that separation of powers takes on
special significance when the nation itself comes under attack."

Judge Wilkinson was joined on the panel by Judge William W. Wilkins and Judge
William B. Traxler. Judge Wilkinson and Wilkins were appointed by President
Ronald Reagan. Judge Traxler was first named to the bench by the first President
Bush and elevated to the appeals court by President Bill Clinton.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A federal appeals court has ruled that Yasser Esam Hamdi, left,
shown with a Northern Alliance soldier, could be denied access to counsel.
(Reuters)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); LAWYERS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
RIGHT TO COUNSEL (90%); APPEALS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); AIRPORTS (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (76%); DIRTY BOMBS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); PRISONS (71%); ARRESTS (67%) DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM;  LEGAL
PROFESSION

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (59%) ;LAWYERS COMMITTEE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) LEWIS, NEIL A; HAMDI, YASSER ESAM; BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (79%); RICHMOND, VA, USA (71%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             100 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 11, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is Now the Time to Confront Iraq?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 189 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Is Completing Plan to Promote a Democratic Iraq" (front page, Jan. 6):
In a September report, the Bush administration listed the decades of human
rights violations by the Iraqi government, including arbitrary arrest and
detention, torture, extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and forcible
expulsion.

Now you report that in planning for a possible United States role as occupying
power, a State Department working group is considering a process that would
"publicly shame, but not necessarily punish, human rights violators."

The Bush administration's commitment to building an Iraq that respects human
rights must start by insisting that every person who committed crimes under
international law, whether they are civilian or military and regardless of rank,
should face legal consequences. There should be no amnesties, pardons or similar
measures for people who have committed crimes against humanity, war crimes or
genocide. All judicial proceedings should fully respect international standards
for fair trials.

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Executive Director
Amnesty International U.S.A.
New York, Jan. 6, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); AMNESTY (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (88%); TORTURE (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); PARDONS (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (72%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (68%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (67%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (66%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(66%); TERRORISM (59%) ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;
AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: SCHULZ, WILLIAM F

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             101 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Sham Referendum in Chechnya

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 464 words


Two brutal wars have devastated Chechnya over the past decade without resolving
the essential issue of the status of the secession-minded republic within the
Russian Federation. Vladimir Putin's plan to hold a referendum on a proposed new
constitution in March, followed by new presidential and parliamentary elections,
is superficially appealing, but falls short of the steps needed to bring the
conflict to a democratic resolution.

The second Chechen war, now in its fourth year, is proving as destructive and
futile as the first was in the early 1990's. Both sides have routinely violated
human rights and let egregious crimes go unpunished. Russian brutality has
intensified since last year's hostage-taking by Chechen terrorists in a Moscow
theater and the deadly bombing of Russian offices in Chechnya last month.
Chechen militias have behaved as reprehensibly, committing atrocities against
Russian and Chechen civilians and accepting training and other help from foreign
terrorists, including Al Qaeda. Their behavior has forfeited the sympathy
Chechnya's historic grievances once enjoyed among Russian liberals.

It is in this context that the planned referendum must be judged. The idea that
a fair test of Chechen opinion can be carried out in the present climate of
intimidation is ludicrous. Doubts about the real nature of this exercise have
been reinforced by the news that the petition authorizing the referendum
obtained the required number of signatures only by including Russian soldiers
stationed in Chechnya.

No serious effort was made to negotiate the new constitution with representative
Chechens independent of Russian control. Its provisions seem to offer Chechnya
less autonomy than other Russian republics already enjoy. Any government
emerging from this flawed process is likely to be seen by Chechens as a band of
Russian collaborators, not their own independently chosen representatives.

Mr. Putin's aim seems not to offer a real political opening but a stage-managed
show aimed at convincing the outside world that the Chechen war is over and no
longer warrants international concern. That would explain Moscow's precipitate
attempts to dismantle refugee camps where Chechens have been seeking shelter
from this unforgiving war. Those camps are, unfortunately, as necessary as ever.
It also appears to be the rationale behind Mr. Putin's recent refusal to renew
the human rights monitoring mandate of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Not just continued human rights monitoring but some
effort to hold violators accountable is necessary for establishing an
environment where fair elections can be held.

Mr. Putin should be encouraged to seek a political end to this war. He ought to
begin by revising his unhelpful referendum plan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFERENDUMS (93%); ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); PETITIONS (77%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(74%); BOMBINGS (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (72%); REFUGEES (71%);
LIBERALISM (70%); AL-QAEDA (69%); HOSTAGE TAKING (69%) EDITORIALS;  REFERENDUMS;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CONSTITUTIONS;  ELECTIONS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (89%) PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRES)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 17, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Europe: Chechen Rights Complaints In Court

BYLINE:  By Michael Wines (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 109 words


The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, agreed to consider
complaints by six former residents of Russia's Chechen Republic that Russian
troops tortured them, killed family members or bombed civilians at the height of
the Chechen conflict in 1999 and 2000.

Another 114 similar complaints have been filed with the court, an arm of the
Council of Europe, whose parliament has frequently criticized human-rights
conditions in Chechnya. The chief human-rights official in Russia, which is a
member of the council, dismissed the court's action as a political move aimed at
showing "how bad everything is in Russia."   Michael Wines (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); COUNCIL OF EUROPE (57%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (92%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); FRANCE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Dismisses Claims of Slave Laborers

BYLINE:  By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1032 words


People forced to work as slave laborers for Japanese and German corporations in
World War II may not sue for wages and injuries, the federal appeals court in
San Francisco ruled yesterday.

The court struck down a law enacted by the California Legislature in 1999 that
allowed such suits. The court said the law was an impermissible intrusion on
"the federal government's exclusive power to make and resolve war."

The court also dismissed claims by the slave laborers on other theories, saying
the statute of limitations barred them. That ruling is quite likely to be
invoked in pending and anticipated suits that seek reparations against people
who profited from slavery in the United States.

Judge Stephen Reinhardt, writing for a unanimous three-judge panel of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, said he had reached those
conclusions reluctantly. Judge Reinhardt described the "terrible abuses that
German and Japanese corporate interests inflicted both on civilians and on
soldiers captured by German and Japanese military forces."

A plaintiff, James O. King, was a marine who was forced to work for 44 months in
a Japanese steel mill after having been captured on Wake Island. In an interview
yesterday, Mr. King described those conditions. His job, he said, was
"sledgehammer swinger." He worked 10 to 14 hours a day every day of the week.

"We performed labor without compensation," he said. "We didn't even have the
food necessary to perform the labor. People died."

Mr. King, 81, recalled that he and 1,500 other prisoners were given a teacup of
rice twice a day and a thin broth of weeds, bugs and the occasional baby mouse
in the evenings.

The California statute would have allowed many thousands of people who performed
slave labor, and their heirs, to sue those businesses and their successors or
affiliates for wages, interest and injuries. The law applied to all forced labor
from 1929 to 1945 in territory occupied by the Nazis, their allies and
sympathizers.

The law extended the statute of limitations to the end of 2010. The appeals
concerned 29 consolidated suits, one against German companies and the rest
against Japanese businesses.

The federal government supported the defendants.

"California is plainly of the view that Japanese companies' use of unpaid forced
labor, even if condoned by the Imperial Japanese government, violated principles
of international human rights law," the government wrote in its brief. "But
under our constitutional scheme, only the federal government has the authority
to prescribe penalties for foreign violations of international law."

"A state legislature," the brief continued, "is in a poor position to assess
what risks to our relations with Germany and Japan are entailed by a statute
that aims to redress the wrongs of World War II or to weigh those risks against
other foreign policy objectives that depend on the good will of those
governments."

In 2001, another panel of the same court upheld a similar California law that
required insurance companies to disclose information about policies that they
and affiliated companies sold in Europe that were in effect from 1920 to 1945.
The United States Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal from that decision this
month.

Yesterday, the Ninth Circuit panel distinguished the insurance case on the
ground that it concerned commerce rather than foreign affairs and because it was
not directed at any particular country.

The slave labor law, by contrast, Judge Reinhardt wrote, "seeks to redress
wrongs committed in the course of World War II."

"California was dissatisfied with how the federal government chose to address
the various wartime injuries suffered by victims of the Nazis and their allies
after the United States brought the Second World War to a close," he wrote.

But states are not free to make such judgments, he concluded.

Last week, in a decision not mentioned by the Ninth Circuit, a state appeals
court in Los Angeles upheld the statute. That court ruled that the Legislature
had done nothing more than extend the statute of limitations, which states are
free to do. That did not, the Los Angeles court held, interfere with the federal
government's powers over foreign affairs.

Nate G. Kraut, a lawyer for a plaintiff, said his client intended to ask the
entire Ninth Circuit to review the panel's decision based on the state court
decision.

Peter J. Spiro, a professor of law at Hofstra University, said the federal, and
not the state appeals court, followed Supreme Court precedent. That precedent,
Professor Spiro said, may be operating from obsolete premises.

"Germany and Japan may be upset about California's slave labor law," he said.
"But it's something we can handle, and doesn't really have a serious downside
risk. That's the new world, one in which states do and should be permitted more
discretion in the international sphere.

Harold Hongju Koh, a professor at the Yale Law School and a State Department
official in the Clinton administration, agreed that states should have a role in
assuring international human rights.

"Corporations should not be able to have continuing benefits with respect to
their in-state activities from their human rights abuses," Professor Koh said.

The plaintiffs also sued on theories unrelated to the California statute. The
court dismissed all those claims on the grounds of the statute of limitations.
The claims were, the court held, "stale for several decades" and filed "far too
late."

That ruling, Professor Spiro said, does not bode well for what he called
"trans-historical claims" that involve the slavery of African-Americans in the
United States.

"Can you go so far back to remedy conduct which is no longer considered not just
wrong, but heinous?" he asked. "The answer appears to be no."

Daniel C. Girard, who represents Mr. King, the former marine, said the case was
not only about the law.

"It's not unusual that you see a demand for payment that isn't legally
enforceable," Mr. Girard said. "But the demand stands. If the position of the
Japanese companies involved is that they refuse to consider the demand for
compensation and stand on legal defenses, the moral consequences are what they
are."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%);
APPEALS COURTS (90%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAGE VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); FORCED LABOR (89%); LITIGATION (89%); APPEALS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUDGES
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); VERDICTS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); ARMED FORCES (67%); INTERVIEWS
(66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (61%); FOREIGN POLICY (60%); IRON & STEEL MILLS
(52%) LABOR;  STATUTES OF LIMITATIONS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  SLAVE LABOR;  WAGES AND SALARIES;  WORLD
WAR II (1939-45);  NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES

PERSON: STEPHEN REINHARDT (79%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); GERMANY (94%); WAKE ISLAND (79%)

REGION: CALIFORNIA;  JAPAN;  GERMANY

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             106 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Russia: Kremlin Faults Police On Rights

BYLINE:  By Michael Wines (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 96 words


The Kremlin's chief human rights monitor said the Russian police had regularly
violated the rights of Moscow's growing ethnic minority population, particularly
since Chechen guerrillas took more than 750 people hostage in a Moscow theatre
in October.

The head of President Vladimir V. Putin's human rights commission, Ella
Pamfilova, said the police had increasingly made illegal arrests, filed false
criminal charges and at times had beaten members of minority groups. She urged
the police to severely punish any officers found to be breaking the law.
Michael Wines (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%);
MISCONDUCT (88%); ARRESTS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%); ETHNICITY (85%); TERRORISM (84%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (83%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND
MISCONDUCT;  TERRORISM;  POISON GASES;  HOSTAGES;  FENTANYL (DRUG);  FALSE
ARRESTS, CONVICTIONS AND IMPRISONMENTS

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (73%) WINES, MICHAEL; PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRES);
PAMFILOVA, ELLA

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); EUROPE (90%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  MOSCOW (RUSSIA);  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             107 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Advocates Denounce China's Sentence of Dissident

BYLINE:  By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 10


International human rights groups expressed outrage today at the life sentence
handed down to a dissident based in the United States as the Chinese government
released further details of what it said were his crimes.

Wang Bingzhang, a permanent resident in the United States who lives in New York,
was sentenced today to life in prison in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen,
after being found guilty of espionage and terrorist activities under China's
state secrets laws. Mr. Wang was the first political dissident to be charged
under China's new antiterrorism laws, leading in part to his harsh sentence.

According to the court verdict, Mr. Wang had been gathering military
intelligence for Taiwan from 1982 to 1990 under the cover of the company name
"Guanzhong," according to the government-controlled New China News Agency.

It added that since 1996 he had organized "terrorist activities" in connection
with an underground political party he wanted to form, including procuring guns,
and planning explosions and assassinations. He also plotted to bomb the Chinese
Embassy in Thailand, the verdict said, according to the news agency.

But the report provided little evidence to support the charges, and court
officials in Shenzhen, reached by phone, refused to provide further details. The
United States Embassy had asked to send an observer to Mr. Wang's trial, but the
request was denied because involving what the Chinese government considers state
secrets are held in private.

Mr. Wang, who holds a United States green card, is still a Chinese citizen and
so is not covered under bilateral consular agreements that would give him access
to embassy assistance while in jail.

Associates of Mr. Wang called the charges politically motivated and ridiculous.

"The charges are just fabricated to get at Dr. Wang, since he is a founding
father of the overseas Chinese democracy movement," said Yongjun Zhou, a leader
of the Free China movement, who was released from a Chinese labor camp just last
year. "There is no well-formed dissident group in China -- we can't even meet,"
he added. "How can we organize a terrorist group?"

He noted that, like many exiled dissidents and China scholars, Mr. Wang had
sought financing from the government of Taiwan. But he said that was public
knowledge and common practice, not a crime.

In Hong Kong, about a dozen rights activists attempted to deliver a petition
protesting the sentence to an office of the Chinese government.

The verdict, which can be appealed within the next 10 days, is the latest in a
bizarre saga involving charges and countercharges of espionage, kidnapping and
more.

Colleagues in the United States say that Mr. Wang had traveled to Vietnam last
June to meet with labor activists based in China. On July 3, the Chinese police
said they found Mr. Wang and two colleagues bound in a temple in South Guangxi
Province. The police first rescued them, then detained them after realizing who
they were.

Human rights advocates contend that the Chinese police kidnapped Mr. Wang -- a
longtime adversary of the Chinese government -- and took him into custody.

According to colleagues based in the United States, Mr. Wang sneaked into China
in 1998 on a false passport in hopes of meeting with members of the then
fledging China Democracy Party. The party was later declared illegal and its
members were arrested. Mr. Wang was caught by the police and later expelled.

But in the report by the New China News Agency, the Chinese government
essentially said the purpose of the visit was to start a "terrorist cell." He
met with three Chinese "to spread terrorism and ordered them to obtain guns for
kidnapping," the report said.

For the past year, human rights advocates have charged that the Chinese
government has been using the global campaign against terrorism as an excuse to
detain and imprison its political enemies, from Muslim activists who want an
independent state in China's northwest, to the members of the banned spiritual
movement Falun Gong.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ESPIONAGE
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%);
RESCUE OPERATIONS (88%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
LITIGATION (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); POLITICS (70%); PETITIONS (69%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ESPIONAGE;  TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  KIDNAPPING;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: ROSENTHAL, ELISABETH; WANG BINGZHANG

CITY: SHENZHEN, GUANGDONG, CHINA (88%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); GUANGDONG, CHINA (88%); NORTH
CENTRAL CHINA (79%); GUANGXI, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); TAIWAN (92%); HONG KONG (79%);
THAILAND (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  VIETNAM

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             109 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Sharon Faces Belgian Trial After Term Ends

BYLINE:    By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 564 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 12


Belgium's highest court said today in Brussels that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
of Israel could be tried for war crimes under the nation's laws, but not as long
as he enjoyed the immunity of his office.

The ruling, while blocking the case against Mr. Sharon, did allow a Belgian
court to hear the case against Mr. Sharon's co-defendant, Amos Yaron, the former
Israeli Army chief of staff.

In its summary, the high court said investigations and a trial could proceed
even if a suspect was not physically present in Belgium. Several cases involving
foreign leaders, past and present, had been on hold for almost a year, pending
the high court's decision.

The case against Mr. Sharon and Mr. Yaron dates back to 2001, when survivors of
the 1982 massacres at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut filed a
criminal complaint, holding the two Israelis responsible for the deaths of their
relatives. Christian militias, backed by Israel, did the killing, but an Israeli
commission of inquiry in 1983 concluded that Mr. Sharon, then the defense
minister, had a personal responsibility for the events.

By filing their case in Belgium, the survivors hoped to make use of the
country's 1993 law that allows the courts "universal jurisdiction" over crimes
against humanity or war crimes anywhere.

Many states have given their courts universal jurisdiction over some crimes. But
until now, Belgium's so-called antiatrocity law went further by barring immunity
claims and by allowing the courts to investigate crimes committed anywhere,
regardless of the nationality of the victims or the perpetrators.

Today's ruling recognized the immunity of high public office, like the posts of
prime minister, president and foreign minister. But the judges implied that the
case against Mr. Sharon could be pursued after he left office, lawyers said.
Citing that ruling, Luc Walleyn, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, hailed the
decision as a victory.

Daniel Shek, the Israeli Foreign Ministry's director of European Affairs,
described the decision as "very problematic," according to Reuters.

The Israeli case is one of many pending in Belgium involving charges of grave
human rights violations. Lawyers handling the cases said they were elated with
today's ruling, because it overturned a decision last year in a lower court that
held that an accused person had to be present in Belgium to be investigated.

"This was a big breakthrough, a big step forward," said Georges-Henri Beauthier,
a human rights lawyer. "Cases had been blocked in several courts, awaiting the
high court's ruling." Mr. Beauthier said he could now continue pursuing the case
against Hissene Habre, the former ruler of Chad, who lives in exile in Senegal.
Today's decision effectively means that prosecutors can issue international
arrest warrants and apply for a suspect's extradition, he said.

Belgium's antiatrocity law has made the country into a magnet for grave human
rights violations, and cases against two dozen current or past leaders are still
pending in Belgian courts.

Critics in Belgium have attacked the law, arguing that Belgium could not become
the "world's court." Several legislators have said they want Parliament to
"reinterpret" the law.

But changes appear unlikely soon. Now that the high court has ruled, the
Belgium's prime minister, Guy Verhofstadt, said today that there was no need for
Parliament to intervene.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 19, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on Thursday about a ruling by Belgium's highest court
that after his term as Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon could face trial
for 1982 war crimes misstated the role of an Israeli who was tried on the same
charges -- involving the massacre of Palestinians at two refugee camps in
Lebanon. That man, Amos Yaron, was a military commander but was never chief of
staff.

An article last Thursday about a ruling by Belgium's highest court that after
his term as Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon could face trial for 1982 war
crimes misstated the role of another Israeli, Amos Yaron, who faces the same
charges -- involving the massacre of Palestinians at two refugee camps in
Lebanon. And a correction in this space yesterday referred incorrectly to the
status of his case. Mr. Yaron was a military commander but was never chief of
staff; the ruling about Mr. Sharon also cleared the way for Mr. Yaron to be
tried. He has not already been tried.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Belgium's highest court opened the way yesterday for an
investigation of a massacre of refugees in 1982. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
JURISDICTION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); LAWYERS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); ARMIES (73%); REFUGEES (73%);
ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%) Terms not
available from NYTimes. from NYTimes. from NYTimes.

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (92%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); BELGIUM (95%); NETHERLANDS (79%); SENEGAL (79%); LEBANON
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

African Leaders Arrive in France for Talks

BYLINE:  By BARRY JAMES, International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 19


France welcomed African leaders today to a summit meeting overshadowed by the
conflict in Ivory Coast and by the attendance of Robert Mugabe, the leader of
Zimbabwe, who has been banned by the rest of the European Union for his
autocratic rule and human-rights abuses.

Notably absent was Laurent Gbagbo, the president of Ivory Coast, where France
has sent some 3,000 troops to enforce a fragile cease-fire under which the
government is to share power with rebels until elections in 2005.

It would have been very risky politically for Mr. Gbagbo to have come to France
now, diplomats said. The rebels, meanwhile, are threatening to reignite the
civil war unless he puts the power-sharing agreement into effect.

The British strongly opposed a decision by President Jacques Chirac of France to
invite Mr. Mugabe to the meeting of leaders and representatives from 50
countries starting on Thursday.

At issue is the dispossession of white farmers and the redistribution of their
land to Mr. Mugabe's supporters in what the Zimbabwean government calls a land
reform policy aimed at rectifying imbalances left as a legacy of Britain's
colonial rule.

Threatening to block the extension of sanctions against Zimbabwe, France
obtained a dispensation for Mr. Mugabe to visit Paris for the meeting when the
European Union reimposed the ban on visits by Zimbabwean leaders last week.

The French have argued that it is better to talk over differences face-to-face.
But diplomats said another factor was that had Mr. Mugabe not come, many other
African leaders would have stayed away in sympathy.

In fact, two of the most powerful countries in Africa south of the Sahara,
Nigeria and South Africa, are pushing to have Zimbabwe readmitted to the
Commonwealth after a punitive suspension.

Mr. Mugabe was met in Paris by protests and an attempt by a British human-rights
campaigner, Peter Tatchell, to have him arrested for torture and human rights
violations.

Tom Spicer,an activist with Zimbabwe's opposition Movement for Democratic
Change, called Mr. Mugabe's presence in Paris "a disgrace."

"Mugabe should be ostracized from the international community," he said. "He
disregards international pressure and I don't believe that dialogue at the
moment is an effective way to bring about the end to the regime in Zimbabwe."

Despite the difference over Mr. Mugabe, Mr. Chirac and Prime Minister Tony Blair
of Britain said at a meeting earlier this month that they were determined to
work together to achieve peace and economic development in sub-Saharan Africa.

Diplomats said Mr. Chirac wanted to put Africa at the heart of France's foreign
policy priorities and expand French influence to the English-speaking part of
the continent as well as in France's former colonies.

President Paul Kagame of Rwanda is also attending the meeting, making his first
visit to France since 1992, when he came on an unsuccessful mission to gain
support for the Rwandan Patriotic Front, a rebel movement that he led.

Mr. Kagame has accused France of arming and supporting the former Rwandan
government, which carried out mass killings in 1994. Relations between him and
France have been further soured by Rwanda's involvement in the civil war in
Congo, a neighboring country.

The visit here seemed to mark a more conciliatory stance by Mr. Kagame, who said
recently, "We want to move forward with any partner who wants to move forward
with us."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TORTURE (77%);
ELECTIONS (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (75%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); RURAL DEVELOPMENT (73%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (72%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (69%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (69%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (84%)

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (79%); TONY BLAIR (55%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (94%)

STATE: SAHARA DESERT (79%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (99%); ZIMBABWE (97%); AFRICA (96%); COTE D'IVOIRE (95%); UNITED
KINGDOM (94%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%);
NIGERIA (79%); SUB SAHARAN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             114 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Team Calls Iran Helpful in Inquiry Showing Rights Abuses

BYLINE:  By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, Feb. 26


A United Nations team examining human rights abuses in Iran said today that it
had found violations but noted that Iranian authorities had shown extensive
cooperation in the inquiry.

Since arriving on Feb. 16, the five-member United Nations team, led by Louis
Joinet from France, has met with judiciary authorities and members of
Parliament, has inspected prisons and detention centers in Tehran and other
cities, and has spoken to prisoners and their family members.

The investigation was the first time in seven years that United Nations rights
observers had been allowed into the country.

Mr. Joinet said today in a news conference that most cases of prisoners he
interviewed fell under the category of arbitrary detention. Dozens of advocates
andjournalists who have pushed for more political and social openness have been
jailed by the country's hard-line judiciary since 1997.

Avoiding giving details of individual cases, Mr. Joinet said the team had found
"detention in solitary confinement practiced on a wide scale and for long
periods of time" in parts of Evin prison in Tehran. He also referred to
"sentences that were quite disproportionate to the crimes" and an absence of
legal culture, in that many criminals were not aware of the importance of having
lawyers.

He also mentioned the arrest of lawyers of political prisoners, who were jailed
"simply because they reported torture against their clients."

Despite his criticisms, Mr. Joinet praised the "unprecedented cooperation" the
team had received from the authorities. He said the team had chosen the prisons
and detention centers it inspected and the more than 100 prisoners it
interviewed. The team picked the locations for interviews inside prisons without
the presence of minders and "frequently changed position to make sure they were
away from cameras," Mr. Joinet said.

The team was even allowed to visit the notorious Block 209 in the Evin prison,
which Mr. Joinet described as a prison within a prison that was controlled by
the Ministry of Information.

The observers were also permitted to enter a military prison in the city of
Shiraz after they made a last-minute decision to inspect the place.

Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi of Iran said he welcomed the presence of the
team and appreciated the United Nations' new approach toward Iran rather than
issuing "useless condemnation resolutions."

"For years, European countries tested the method of issuing resolutions but
learned it was useless." he said last week. "Now they are seeking dialogue with
Iran."

The police broke up two rallies today by families of political prisoners outside
the Laleh Hotel, where Mr. Joinet and his team were staying in Tehran. About 20
demonstrators were arrested on Saturday and Tuesday, the police said. Mr. Joinet
said judiciary authorities had assured the team that all were released.

He noted that he had received a big pile of letters and reports from protesters,
all of which were in Persian, and needed to be translated before he could make
any statement about them.

The Iran researcher for Human Rights Watch, Elaheh Sharifpour, who is based in
New York, voiced concern that the team did not meet with people who had been
arbitrarily arrested in the past and were out of prison now or inspect
underground detention centers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); ARRESTS (88%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); TORTURE (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); LAWYERS (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); ARMED FORCES (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: FATHI, NAZILA

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); SHIRAZ, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAN (92%); FRANCE (90%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             116 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture, Beyond Saddam

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: BATMAN, Turkey


A middle-aged Kurd took me on a lonely hillside near here to point out the
isolated police station in whose basement he had been beaten, subjected to
electric shocks and sexually humiliated. We stood half a mile away as he
recounted his tale, and then the police spotted us -- and a tank rushed toward
us.

I fled. But the Kurds in Turkey cannot flee, and many here worry that the war in
Iraq will set off more of the savagery that marked the 1980's and 1990's in
"Turkish Kurdistan" (a phrase that, if I were Turkish, might lead to my arrest).

The world has turned its back on the Kurds more times than I can count, and
there are signs that we're planning to betray them again. The U.S. was so
desperate to bribe Turkey into our coalition that it was willing to allow tens
of thousands of Turkish troops into Iraq's Kurdish areas. And we still seem
ready to acquiesce in this. The Turks, having broken the back of Kurdish
resistance within their borders, plan to expand their efforts and "disarm"
Iraq's Kurds to block their control of oil fields.

How can we allow this? Aside from the sheer immorality of presiding over what is
in effect a Turkish invasion of peaceful Iraqi Kurdistan, such an incursion
risks warfare between Kurds and Turks that could spill into Turkey as well.

"The Turkish government has been far worse to the Kurds than Saddam has," one
well-educated Kurd said bitterly. His comment stunned me, for Turkey never used
poison gas or conducted mass executions as Saddam did, but one Kurd after
another said the same thing. They described past Turkish military techniques
like raping wives in front of husbands, or assembling villagers to watch men
being tied and dragged to their death behind tanks, and they noted that Turkey
had been less tolerant of Kurdish language and culture than Saddam.

President Bush is motivated to invade Iraq partly, I believe, by a deeply felt
horror of Saddam's repression. But if our claims to be acting on behalf of the
people of Iraq are to have credibility and moral legitimacy, we must try to stop
Kurds from being slaughtered not only by our enemies in Baghdad, but also by our
friends in Ankara. And we should certainly not acquiesce in such steps as a
Turkish invasion of northern Iraq, which could trigger a new spiral of clashes
and repression in Turkey.

How could a warm and friendly country like Turkey, which has made genuine
progress on human rights and deserves a place in the European Union, be so harsh
to its Kurds? Turkey's horror of a flourishing Kurdistan derives from its
"Sevres syndrome," named for the French city where Western powers tried to
dismember Turkey after World War I. Ever since then, Turkey has seen
accommodation as a slippery slope toward national disintegration. There had been
progress toward reconciliation in recent years, but now the prospect of war in
Iraq has revived old suspicions and hatreds.

While President Bush has been eager to take note of Iraqi atrocities against the
Kurds, the West has never been so outraged by similar Turkish atrocities. More
than 30,000 people died during the years of fighting between the Turkish
government and the guerrillas of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K.; both
sides were brutal, murdering civilians and engaging in torture and terrorism.

Turkey also forced at least 500,000 Kurds to leave their villages at gunpoint.
Excellent reports on Turkey by Human Rights Watch say that some refugees who
have tried to return to their homes recently have been shot by government-armed
thugs.

Southeast Turkey still feels like a police state. I traveled to one remote town
to interview a Kurdish man who had been beaten by the police in front of
neighbors, doused with gasoline and then set on fire (he survived). The man's
family was so terrified to see a foreign reporter and risk another police
nightmare that they sent me packing.

Only one Kurdish man was not afraid to be named: Abdurrahim Guler, 37, who has
endured repeated bouts of torture and death threats. In one brutal session, he
says, the commander called out, "Bring in the stick," used to rape men.

"You can use your stick," Mr. Guler says he shouted back. "I still won't talk
even if you use a minaret!"

Now something even grimmer is bearing down on the brave Kurds: Turkish tanks,
like the one that sent me fleeing, but waves of them. I feel sick at the thought
that we're about to betray the Kurds, again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); WORLD WAR I (71%); IRAQ
WAR (71%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (70%); ARMED FORCES (67%); TERRORISM (59%);
EUROPEAN UNION (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  KURDS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (70%) KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D; BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); ANKARA, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  TURKEY

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             119 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 19, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Colombia: Rights Abuses Growing, U.N. Says

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 113 words


Government security forces have committed more human rights abuses since
President Alvaro Uribe decreed a state of emergency last August, the United
Nations said. The government has also not done enough to break links between the
security forces and far-right paramilitary units, according to Michael Fruhling,
representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Colombia. The United Nations said that his report "describes a significant
increase in complaints of violations directly attributed to members of the
security forces in comparison with 2001" and that "many of these actions were
carried out as part of the new government's security policy."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY (88%);
WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (86%); POLITICS
(86%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (58%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (88%) FRUHLING, MICHAEL; URIBE, ALVARO (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (94%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             123 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Is Expected to Be Prosecutor for War Crimes Court

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 23


Luis Moreno Ocampo, an Argentine lawyer who was involved in the trials of
Argentina's former military dictators, is expected to become the first chief
prosecutor of the new permanent war crimes court in The Hague, diplomats from
several nations say.

Mr. Moreno, now teaching at Harvard University's law school, was picked by
consensus at a closed-door, informal meeting of the court's steering committee
in New York on Friday, the diplomats said.

The final decision for the post will lie with the 89 countries that belong to
the International Criminal Court; they are expected to make the formal
appointment at their next assembly in April. But the choice of Mr. Moreno,
according to the diplomats, is very likely to be endorsed.

Mr. Moreno has had a varied career, both as a well-known prosecutor in Argentina
and as a prominent campaigner in Latin America where he has led a drive to end
corruption in business. Before joining Harvard, he has also taught at Stanford
University and is a regular speaker on justice and human rights.

His nomination ends a six-month, quiet but intense search for a suitable
candidate. The post of chief prosecutor will be the court's most sensitive one,
and the position that, more than any other, will shape the institution's public
face.

The decisions of the prosecutor's office will go to the heart of the court's
mandate, to deal with the gravest war crimes, like genocide or large-scale
atrocities against civilians. The new institution is intended only as a court of
last resort and is entitled only to take on cases when no national court is
willing or able to act.

Mr. Moreno's name has long been on the short list of six or seven candidates,
lawyers from Africa, Latin America and Europe, who have had the discreet backing
of their governments. But to avoid the risk of divisive bargaining, members of
the court had agreed to choose a prosecutor by consensus behind the scenes.

Washington has played no part in picking Mr. Moreno, diplomats said. The Bush
administration has removed itself from the process, not only by pulling out of
the court but also by actively campaigning against it. The administration has
said it fears that a "rogue" prosecutor could use the court as a forum for
harassing or initiating political stunts against American officials.

Supporters of the institution insist that the checks and balances in the 1998
treaty creating the court make arbitrary or irresponsible prosecutions nearly
impossible. Other large nations, though, have demurred. China and Japan have
spoken in favor of the court, but have not signed the treaty. Russia has signed,
but not ratified its decision.

With the choice of Mr. Moreno, most key positions at the court will have been
filled. Earlier this month, the first 18 judges were sworn in at a ceremony in
the Dutch Parliament in The Hague, not far from its temporary headquarters. The
judges, 7 women and 11 men, come from different legal traditions and are largely
from Western-style democracies. A Canadian judge, Philippe Kirsch, was elected
as the court's president.

Referring to Mr. Moreno's selection, Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights
Watch in New York, which has lobbied for the court's creation, asked, "What
further indication of the quality of personnel is needed now for the Bush
administration to stop demonizing and vilifying this court?"

Mr. Moreno first rose to prominence in 1985 when, as a young criminal lawyer, he
became deputy prosecutor in the trials against the Argentine military junta and
the subsequent trial against the repressive police chief of Buenos Aires.

Later, as the federal district attorney of Buenos Aires, he was in charge of
trials against the Argentine military responsible for the Falklands war and the
officers who led the military rebellion in 1988.

After dealing with the military, Mr. Moreno played a key role in numerous large
public corruption cases. The law firm he founded has been involved in a wide
range of cases, including the extradition of a Nazi officer and cases involving
political bribery. He is president of Transparency International for Latin
America, which promotes ethical business practices.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Luis Moreno Ocampo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); LAWYERS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); ETHICS (77%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CORRUPTION (77%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); MILITARY RULE (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); CORPORATE WRONGDOING (72%);
POLITICS (72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); TRENDS (69%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (63%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  ETHICS

ORGANIZATION: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%);
STANFORD UNIVERSITY (55%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: MORENO OCAMPO, LUIS; SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); ARGENTINA (93%); LATIN AMERICA
(90%); CHINA (79%); JAPAN (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: ARGENTINA

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

State Dept. Faults China on Rights

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 31


The State Department accused the Chinese government today of numerous and
serious human rights abuses and also took Israel and the Palestinian Authority
to task for what it described as poor rights records.

In its annual report, the department said abuses in China included "instances of
extrajudicial killings, torture and mistreatment of prisoners, forced
confessions, arbitrary arrest and detention, lengthy incommunicado detention and
denial of due process."

At the same time, the report credited the government with some positive steps,
including the release of a number of prominent dissidents.

On Israel, the report said the country's overall human rights record in the
occupied territories remained poor, and had worsened in several areas as it
continued to commit "numerous, serious human rights abuses."

The report also criticized the Palestinian Authority's rights record.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); DUE
PROCESS (73%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PALESTINIANS;  TORTURE;  POLITICAL PRISONERS

ORGANIZATION: PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%);
UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: CHINA;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: SOUTH AFRICA;
Iraq War Sets Bad Precedent, Mbeki Warns

BYLINE:  By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section B; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, April 7


President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa today issued his most stinging evaluation
of the war against Iraq, saying that the United States and Britain had unevenly
applied standards of democracy, and warning Africans that they could be the next
victims of what he depicted as international bullying.

Mr. Mbeki opened a conference on elections and democracy in Africa by
challenging participants to do more than simply recommit to Western principles
such as free elections, a multiparty system and independent human rights
monitors.

He compared the invasion of Iraq to force-feeding a person on a hunger strike,
and said that real democracy was the product of evolution, not something to be
imposed.

"The prospect facing the people of Iraq should serve as sufficient warning that
in future we, too, might have others descend on us, guns in hand to force-feed
us," Mr. Mbeki said. "If the United Nations does not matter," he continued, why
should "the little countries of Africa" think that "we matter and will not be
punished if we get out of line?"

Mr. Mbeki, South Africa's second black president since the end of white minority
rule in 1994, has faced pressure from Britain over his country's policies in
Zimbabwe.

Western diplomats have accused the Zimbabwean president, Robert Mugabe, of
launching a new wave of repression against political foes. Mr. Mugabe has ruled
Zimbabwe since the end of white-minority rule and his critics charge that he has
undermined democracy and installed an authoritarian regime.

Mr. Mbeki, architect of what government officials call a "quiet diplomacy" in
Zimbabwe, has avoided public condemnation of Mr. Mugabe. And in his speech
today, he lashed out instead at Britain.

"Great Britain does not limit the period during which a person may hold the
position of prime minister, to say nothing about the hereditary position of head
of state," he said. "It does not have an independent electoral commission that
conducts elections. It does not have an independent human rights commission."

He offered what seemed to be a sarcastic comment about Britain, the former
colonial power in both South Africa and Zimbabwe, and its pronouncements on the
validity of elections in Zimbabwe.

"I have never heard of international observers verifying whether any British
election was free and fair," Mr. Mbeki said. "Instead, I have heard of observers
visiting the United Kingdom during election time to learn about how democratic
elections should be conducted."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); POLITICS (79%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ELECTION
AUTHORITIES (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); PUBLIC POLICY (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (68%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ELECTIONS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: THABO MBEKI (93%) THOMPSON, GINGER; MBEKI, THABO (PRES)

CITY: JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (95%); AFRICA (95%); SOUTH AFRICA (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%);
IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: IRAQ;  SOUTH AFRICA;  AFRICA;  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             130 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Wants to Acquit General in Human Rights Case

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia June 7


Indonesian prosecutors told a human rights court this week that one of the
nation's most senior military officers was not guilty of crimes against humanity
during the violence that engulfed East Timor four years ago, and they asked that
he be acquitted of all charges.

The unusual request means that a government tribunal established last year under
international pressure to try Indonesian soldiers for their brutality against
East Timorese independence groups is unlikely to pass any serious sentences.

The prosecution's move was interpreted as one of several signs of the
reassertiveness of the military here, and of the continuing lack of serious
civilian control of an army that ruled until the collapse of President Suharto's
government in 1998.

The Bush administration, eager to increase American influence in the world's
most populous Muslim country and to keep Indonesia on its side during the
campaign against terror, has made initial steps to renew relations with the
military after ties were cut because of human rights abuses in East Timor.

The prosecution told the special tribunal on Thursday that Maj. Gen. Adam
Damiri, who was the commander in East Timor at the time of a military-backed
rampage by militia groups in September 1999, should be acquitted of all charges.

General Damiri is now chief of operations for the Indonesian military. He failed
to appear at four of his scheduled court dates for sentencing proceedings on the
East Timor charges because of his duties organizing the army's new offensive
against separatist rebels in the northern province of Aceh.

As one reason for a not-guilty verdict, the prosecutor, Sarani Hozie, said that
General Damiri had been awarded a medal for his service in East Timor.
"Moreover, the defendant is polite in court and never obstructs the
proceedings," Mr. Hozie said.

In one hearing at the tribunal, where the public space is usually packed with
uniformed members of the army, a judge submitted a copy of a letter written by
General Damiri to his superior on the success of the military-backed militia
that was attacking pro-independence groups. The letter was not included in the
prosecutors' case.

Another hearing for General Damiri will be held next month. It would be highly
unlikely that the judges would rule against the prosecution's request, lawyers
here said.

General Damiri was the most senior and last of 18 soldiers and militiamen, as
well as a few civilians, who were brought before the court.

Of these defendants, 12 have been acquitted. The five who were convicted
included two soldiers, the most senior of whom, Brig. Gen. M. Noer Muis,
received a sentence of five years in prison. That term was less than half the
minimum sentence called for under the statutes. The five who were convicted
remain free pending appeals.

The special tribunal did not indict the former Indonesian military chief,
Wiranto, who was the top commander at the time of the East Timor killings.
United Nations officials estimated that more than 1,000 pro-independence East
Timorese were killed in the rampages organized by military-backed militia after
a United Nations referendum.

The United States ambassador to Indonesia, Ralph L. Boyce, criticized the
request for a not-guilty verdict in the Damiri case.

"While reserving judgment until the final verdict is reached, we find it
particularly disappointing that it was the prosecution that sought a not-guilty
verdict in this case," Mr. Boyce said.

The Pentagon allocated $4 million for counterterrorism training to the
Indonesian Army last year. In addition,Congress approved $400,000 for Indonesian
officers to go to the United States under the prestigious International Military
Education and Training program.

But last month, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said the $400,000 should
be put on hold until the Indonesian military and government gave better
cooperation to the F.B.I., which is investigating the murders of two American
teachers in the province of Irian Jaya last year. An inquiry by the Indonesian
police into the killings concluded that it was highly probable that the army was
involved in their deaths.

President Megawati Sukarnoputri, who is running for a second term next year,
sees the military as the institution that enforces national unity.

Since President Megawati came to power in 2001, the military has declined to
dismantle its system of territorial commands that places military officials in
parallel positions with civilians through most layers of provincial and village
government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); ACQUITTAL (91%);
ARMIES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); SENTENCING (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (53%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY

PERSON: DAMIRI, ADAM (MAJ GEN); PERLEZ, JANE

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (59%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             136 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE COURTS;
Bush Declares Student an Enemy Combatant

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


President Bush made a surprise decision today to remove a Qatari student from
the criminal justice system and declare him an enemy combatant after prosecutors
said new evidence linked him to another round of terrorist plots by Al Qaeda
after Sept. 11.

The student, Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri, 37, had been held in civilian custody
since late 2001, first as a material witness in connection with the Sept. 11
attacks and later on charges of lying to the F.B.I. and credit card fraud.

Because he was declared an enemy combatant, Mr. Marri was moved from a prison in
Illinois to a military brig in South Carolina, according to Lawrence S.
Lustberg, who represented him in the criminal case. As an enemy combatant, Mr.
Marri can be held indefinitely, and he has no access to a lawyer unless the
military decides to bring charges, officials said.

The case represents the first time that the administration is shifting custody
of someone charged by criminal prosecutors to the military as an enemy
combatant, administration officials said.

Neither of the other two men publicly identified as enemy combatants, Yaser Esam
Hamdi, who was captured in fighting in Afghanistan, and Jose Padilla, suspected
in a scheme to set off a "dirty bomb," had faced criminal charges beforehand.
Both are Americans.

The administration said national security interests drove the decision to turn
over Mr. Marri to military custody. They would not elaborate.

Critics of the detention policies said the move added to the confusion over
using the array of military, criminal and civil measures against people
considered terrorism suspects.

"To just pluck someone from the criminal justice system and remove them from any
of the protections of the legal system to me suggests a very troubling disregard
for the rule of law," said Jamie Fellner, the United States director for Human
Rights Watch.

Mr. Lustberg, a private lawyer in Newark, said he planned to seek a reversal of
the decision by filing a writ of habeas corpus in the federal court system in a
few days.

Mr. Marri had been scheduled to go to trial next month in federal court in
Illinois on the criminal charges pending against him, and Mr. Lustberg said, "We
thought he had a powerful defense."

Mr. Marri had apparently planned to argue that the charge he had lied to F.B.I.
agents in interviews in late 2001 about his travels in the United States was
based on a misunderstanding, and Mr. Lustberg said that notes from the bureau
agents could bear that out.

Legal observers surmised that classifying Mr. Marri as an enemy combatant might
have been driven by concerns about being forced to expose intelligence sources
in open court. That issue has complicated the case against Zacarias Moussaoui,
who is accused of participating in the Sept. 11 conspiracy.

Justice Department officials said the decision to remove Mr. Marri from the
criminal system was not based on any concern about the strength of the case
against him.

"We had no obstacles in pursuing that case," Alice Fisher, a deputy assistant
attorney general in the criminal division of the Justice Department, said at a
briefing.

Mr. Marri arrived here on Sept. 10, 2001, on a student visa to pursue graduate
studies at Bradley University in Peoria, Ill. The Federal Bureau of
Investigation questioned him in October 2001 about possible links to terrorism.

Justice Department officials said new evidence uncovered in the last several
months, after criminal charges had been brought against Mr. Marri, provided
further links to overseas operatives of Al Qaeda.

The officials said people in American custody indicated that Mr. Marri had
visited a Qaeda training camp in Afghanistan, met with Osama bin Laden and
pledged support for Al Qaeda's cause. He was assigned to help "settle"
operatives for follow-up attacks after Sept. 11, officials said.

They added that Mr. Marri's effort to call a financier for Al Qaeda by using a
calling card account also used by Mohammed Atta, ringleader of the Sept. 11
attacks, further corroborated his role. The Justice Department refused to
identify the detainees who gave them information, but law enforcement officials
said Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a senior leader of Al Qaeda captured in March in
Pakistan, was a source.

At the F.B.I., the assistant director for counterterrorism, Larry A. Mefford,
said there was no evidence that Mr. Marri was involved in the Sept. 11 attacks
or knew about them beforehand. But, Mr. Mefford added, "Clearly, we think he's
very important."

Mr. Lustberg, a prominent civil liberties lawyer, said he had never heard some
of the allegations that Justice Department officials were making today against
his client.

"It's either brand new," he said, "or it was withheld from us. The whole thing
is really puzzling to me."

Frank W. Dunham Jr., a standby lawyer for Mr. Moussaoui -- who is representing
himself and who has also been considered for enemy combatant status -- said he
was concerned that administration officials were abusing the judicial process by
failing to maintain a separation between the military and civilian systems.

"You shouldn't be allowed to switch tracks like they're doing," Mr. Dunham said
in an interview. "That's how you get into the abuse of threatening criminal
defendants, suggesting that 'if you don't pleaded guilty to this charge or that
charge, we're going to declare you an enemy combatant and lock you up forever.'
"

Elisa C. Massimino, director of the Washington office of the Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights, said the Bush administration had made it difficult for the
public to tell why someone like Mr. Marri was declared an enemy combatant while
the administration used the criminal system to convict someone like Iyman Faris,
a truck driver from Ohio who admitted last week that he was involved in a
conspiracy by Al Qaeda to destroy the Brooklyn Bridge.

"It really looks like a situation where they make the rules up as they go
along," Ms. Massimino said.

Justice Department and military officials said that each situation was evaluated
on the merits and that they could not set forth a broad policy on who is
considered an enemy combatant.

"There's no bright line," Ms. Fisher said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri arrived on a student visa on Sept. 10,
2001. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL LAW (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (89%); INTERVIEWS (79%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); HABEAS
CORPUS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); HIJACKING (78%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME
(78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); PRISONS (75%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (75%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (73%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); DIRTY BOMBS (72%);
CREDIT CARDS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); AIRLINES (61%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%) AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) MARRI, ALI SALEH KAHLAH AL-; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES);
LICHTBLAU, ERIC

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY;  QATAR

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             139 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebels Kill 16 Peasants in Colombian Villages

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 356 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Jan. 17


Leftist rebels have killed 16 peasants in remote villages in northwestern
Colombia, the authorities said today as the country's human rights offices sued
the government for failing to prevent a mass killing last year.

Rebels from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia carried out the latest
killings on Thursday and today in the countryside around the town of San Carlos
in the province of Antioquia, about 120 miles northwest of the capital here said
military and local officials.

"Our information, given to us by country people from around there, is that an
armed group burst into several villages and murdered 16 people after forcing
them from their homes," a San Carlos Town Hall official said by phone.

Army spokesmen said troops had rushed to the area.

The lawless, rough countryside in that area is the scene of a battle between the
Revolutionary Armed Forces and paramilitary militia men.

The news came as Colombia's official human rights office said it was suing the
government for about $5 million on behalf of relatives of victims of another
massacre in May 2002, when rebels accidentally killed 119 civilians, including
45 children, in the remote jungle town of Bojaya.

The Office for Defense of the People said authorities were negligent in
protecting the people of Bojaya, who were caught in the cross-fire of a pitched
battle between the rebels and far-right paramilitary outlaws.

The terrified townsfolk of Bojaya, in northern Colombia, took refuge in a
church, gathering around the altar, when a mortar fired by the rebels crashed
through the roof and exploded.

The rebels later said they were aiming at the paramilitaries.

Thousands of people, mainly civilians, are killed every year in Colombia's
guerrilla war, which has dragged on for almost four decades.

The rebels say they are fighting for socialist revolution, and the illegal
paramilitaries were formed to fight the rebels.

Both sides have a history of killing civilians they suspect of collaborating
with their foes. On Wednesday, guerrillas reportedly machine-gunned a bus
driving through country near San Carlos, killing four people, including a young
boy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (94%); CHILDREN (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
LIBERALISM (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (78%); ACCIDENTAL
FATALITIES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMIES (77%); MURDER (58%)
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (84%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BOJAYA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             141 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTERNATIONAL FORUM;
Ashcroft Soaks Up a World of Complaints

BYLINE:  By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: DAVOS, Switzerland, Jan. 24


Attorney General John Ashcroft came here today to explain to the world's rich,
powerful and just plain pushy the Bush administration's tactics in its campaign
against terror. In the process, he faced a barrage of questions, not all of them
from the usual suspects.

Paul Sagan, an American technology executive from Cambridge, Mass., for
instance, told Mr. Ashcroft after lunch in an luxury hotel: "I'm concerned about
the way Americans are perceived. Why do you think we are perceived as being not
on the right side by a lot of the world? Often we are seen on the wrong side."

Earlier, at a meeting of the World Economic Forum -- an annual gathering of some
2,000 business, political, religious and other leaders -- Kumi Naidoo, head of
an umbrella organization of civil rights groups, took Mr. Ashcroft to task over
the way America has conducted its antiterror campaign since Sept. 11.

"We are seeing large levels of alienation across this planet from the war on
terrorism," he said in one of several sharp exchanges with Mr. Ashcroft. "What
we are saying is that certain fundamental tenets of democracy are being
violated."

Kenneth Roth, who is the head of Human Rights Watch U.S.A, said America's
"unwillingness to be bound by international standards has bred distrust and is
harming the U.S.'s standing in the world and the war against terrorism."

At a separate session yesterday, Anne-Marie Slaughter, a professor at Princeton,
said the central issue being debated in the world now was American power and the
opposition to it.

Recalling that the World Economic Forum met last year in New York City in part
out of sympathy following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center,
Professor Slaughter added, "The agenda has shifted."

The response by American participants to the criticism today seemed to be that
the Bush administration can live with dueling perceptions of the United States
as both protector and persecutor.

"There may be many people who don't like the pre-eminence of America," said
David Dreier, a Republican congressman from California, another participant.
"But they do like Americans to be there" in times of crisis.

"The U.S. is essentially a provider of most of the building blocks of
international peace and security," said Richard Haass, a State Department
official.

Or, as Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, added: "Nobody likes
the big guy on the block. We are every country's problem and every country's
solution."

As the United States prepares for possible war with Iraq, the challenge facing
Mr. Ashcroft and other American officials is to counter the argument from
critics in Europe and the Arab and Muslim world that the twin wars on terror and
Iraq will create so much resentment that it will breed a new generation of
anti-American terrorists.

While Mr. Ashcroft said that the American aim was to prevent acts of terror
before they took place rather than prosecute the perpetrators afterward,
Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister of Malaysia, turned to the attorney general
across a stage and, in front of hundreds of participants, said, "To say you must
do preventive actions irrespective of the causes is wrong."

The terrorists who attacked the World Trade Center "did it because they were
incensed with something and we have to find out why they were incensed," Dr.
Mahathir said. "We should try not to amplify the situation, anger them more and
lead more people to join this group of people."

Mr. Ashcroft replied, "I am not prepared to say we have to give up values to
appease the terrorist."

Critics from the United States, Europe and the Muslim world specifically
challenged many of the Bush administration's antiterrorism measures, including
its detention of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, its refusal to identify by
name people detained in the United States and its decision to register
foreigners from selected, mostly Muslim, nations.

It is, however, the looming possibility of war with Iraq that underpins a sense
among some critics that Washington's overwhelming dominance as the world's only
superpower has somehow lessened its standing in the world. "We expect more wise
guy than big guy," said Amr Moussa, the secretary general of the Arab League.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Ashcroft heard an earful of complaints in Davos,
Switzerland. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); IRAQ WAR
(72%); RELIGION (69%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (68%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%); TRENDS
(62%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%) TERRORISM;  WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM;  ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: JOE BIDEN (58%); DAVID DREIER (58%) COWELL, ALAN; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY
GEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); NAIDOO, KUMI

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (91%); NEW YORK, USA
(79%); DELAWARE, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SWITZERLAND (94%); IRAQ (92%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: DAVOS (SWITZERLAND)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             142 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
The Killing of Iraq's Ancient Marsh Culture

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 490 words


OF all Iraq's ethnic groups, the marsh Arabs of the southern reaches of the
Tigris and Euphrates rivers may have the strongest claim to be Saddam Hussein's
most bludgeoned victims. They alone can claim to have had a 6,000-year-old
culture dating back to the ancient Sumerians, as well as the wetlands that
nurtured that culture, obliterated by Mr. Hussein. Theirs, Western human rights
groups say, is a story of genocide.

The Kurds have been victims of purges and ethnic cleansing, forced in tens of
thousands to flee their traditional homelands in the oil fields of the north.
But they have found refuge in the self-governing enclave of northern Iraq, since
1991 a protectorate of American and British air power. And the Shiite Arabs,
accounting for about 60 percent of Iraq's population of 22 million, have had
scores of their most influential clerics murdered and their religious ceremonies
suppressed.

But the marsh Arabs have virtually ceased to exist. The northern approach to the
southern city of Basra, through the area where the wetlands used to be, is
guarded by a huge portrait of Mr. Hussein in traditional marsh Arab dress.
Behind him are the lagoons and islands, high-prowed canoes called mashhufs and
hump-backed houses of latticework reeds called mudhifs, water-slick buffaloes
and thriving waterfowl -- all characteristic of life in the marshes.

Mr. Hussein, like all totalitarian rulers, has worked to eliminate the very
possibility of resistance, and this made the marsh dwellers his ineluctable
enemy. Inhabiting an area of several thousand square miles accessible only by
boat until the advent of the helicopter, the marshes were a traditional center
of rebellion and banditry. The Turks, the Persians and the British came to know
the men of the marshes through their raids on passing caravans and regiments and
trains. In the Iran-Iraq war of the 1980's, the marshes were an infiltration
route for Iraqi opposition militias based in Iran.

Suppressing a Shiite rebellion that followed the Persian Gulf war in 1991, Mr.
Hussein bombed the marshland villages, some with napalm and chemical agents.
Then, working from an old British plan to drain waters that were excessively
salted or polluted, Mr. Hussein's battalions all but eliminated the wetlands
over a six-month period in 1992, turning them into a dusty, uninhabitable
desert. The United Nations has described the process as one of the world's
greatest environmental disasters.

In the process, at least 100,000 of the 250,000 marsh Arabs were displaced
within Iraq; an additional 40,000 fled to Iran. Reed beds were burned and
remaining lagoons poisoned. Thousands of fugitives were rounded up, sent to army
camps in the north and executed. Now, according to a report published by Human
Rights Watch on Friday, the marsh Arabs face a new disaster if their strategic
homeland again becomes a battleground in a war between Iraq and American troops.
JOHN F. BURNS

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hearth and Home Marsh -- Arab villagers built latticed houses
from reeds, and traveled in graceful, high-browed canoes called mashhufs.; Swamp
Dwellers -- A labyrinth of waterways and banks of reeds up to 25 feet high
helped to isolate the humid marshlands of southern Iraq.; Missing Pieces --
Pelicans and other waterfowl are among the wildlife that has disappeared with
the draining of the marshlands.; Wasteland -- Smoke from fires set by Iraqi
troops to force the marsh Arabs from their homes, seen from the space shuttle
Endeavour in 1996.; Islands in the Stream -- Villages like this one, shown in
1974, have been obliterated by Saddam Hussein's campaign to destroy Iraq's
southern wetlands. (Photographs by Nik Wheeler/Corbis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); ETHNICITY (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); WETLANDS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); RIVERS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DESERT STORM (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); WATER POLLUTION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); BIRDS (71%); RELIGION (69%); ARMED
FORCES (69%); ARMIES (66%); ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (65%);
POPULATION SIZE (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (56%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); GULF
STATES (79%); TURKEY (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             145 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2003 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

STATE OF THE UNION: THE IRAQ ISSUE;
Bush Enlarges Case For War by Linking Iraq With Terrorists

BYLINE:   By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


President Bush, enlarging the case for going to war with Iraq soon, said tonight
that there was intelligence showing that Iraq was helping and protecting
terrorists. He warned that Saddam Hussein could distribute weapons of mass
destruction to terrorists who could use them against the United States.

Iraq's alleged terrorist connection is just one reason Mr. Bush cited for
preparing for war. He also said Iraq could threaten the Persian Gulf region if
it developed weapons of mass destruction, and he assailed its record on human
rights.

To that end, he pointed to the example of North Korea, which is already
suspected of having nuclear weapons and is, Mr. Bush said, "an oppressive
regime" that rules by fear and starvation.

The allegation that Iraq is conspiring with terrorists seemed tailored to
address the question of why it is important to act now.

In essence, Mr. Bush argued that military action is needed to avoid the risk of
a Sept. 11-style attack using weapons of mass destruction. In last year's State
of the Union address, Mr. Bush identified Iraq as a potential target. Tonight,
he sought to make the case for why the United States needs to strike Iraq soon
if it does not disarm.

With American forces massing in the Persian Gulf region and estimates that the
United States and its allies could be ready to strike by late February or early
March, Mr. Bush's speech was yet another sign that the administration has no
intention of yielding to reluctant allies and domestic critics who argue that
the United States should allow more time for United Nations inspections in Iraq.

The countdown for a military attack seems to be under way. Signaling that the
hour of battle is approaching, Mr. Bush went so far in his speech as to address
American forces, saying, "some crucial hours may lie ahead."

"Before Sept. 11, 2001, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could be
contained," Mr. Bush said. "But chemical agents and lethal viruses and shadowy
terrorist networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19 hijackers with
other weapons, and other plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take
just one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day
of horror like none we have ever known. We will do everything in our power to
make sure that day never comes."

It is clear that his argument has enormous appeal for the administration in
terms of its public diplomacy. For many Americans, protecting the nation against
terrorists is a far more persuasive rationale for going to war than preventing
Iraq from developing new weapons that could change the balance of power in the
oil-rich Persian Gulf.

Administration hard-liners have long been suspicious that there are hidden links
between Saddam Hussein and terrorist groups, relations Iraq could exploit to
attack the United States while masking its responsibility. "Evidence from
intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by people now in
custody, reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including
members of Al Qaeda," the president said in his speech. "Secretly, and without
fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists, or help
them develop their own."

Mr. Bush said Secretary of State Colin L. Powell would go to the Security
Council next week and provide intelligence on Iraq's weapons programs, terrorist
links and attempts to deceive the United Nations. But he did not spell out what
that new information is.

Just a few months ago, the C.I.A. told Congress that Iraq was striving to
develop weapons of mass destruction but was unlikely to orchestrate terrorist
attacks in the United States unless Washington struck Iraq first. The C.I.A. has
never amended that public assessment.

"Baghdad for now appears to be drawing a line short of conducting terrorist
attacks with conventional or C.B.W. against the United States," the C.I.A. said,
referring to chemical and biological weapons, in an Oct. 7 letter to Congress.
"Should Saddam conclude that a U.S.-led attack could no longer be deterred, he
probably would become much less constrained in adopting terrorist actions," the
C.I.A. added. "Saddam might decide that the extreme step of assisting Islamist
terrorists in conducting a W.M.D. attack against the United States would be his
last chance to exact vengeance by taking a large number of victims with him."

In laying out his case, Mr. Bush said Iraq's pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction was a danger to the Middle East, and he denounced its human rights
abuses.

"It is important that the president argued that Saddam's pursuit of weapons of
mass destruction creates a threat to the entire region and that Saddam has
created a human rights catastrophe," said Kenneth M. Pollack, a former C.I.A.
expert on Iraq now at the Brookings Institution.

"There is still skepticism around the world that Saddam would give weapons of
mass of destruction to terrorists," Mr. Pollack said. "So it is important that
this is not the only argument."

The speech tonight was a logical extension of Mr. Bush's address last year, in
which he indicated the United States would not limit the fight against terrorism
to governments that actively supported and harbored terrorists like the Taliban,
but would also carry it to hostile states developing weapons of mass
destruction.

In that speech Mr. Bush first declared that the United States was threatened by
an "axis of evil" that included Iraq, Iran and North Korea.

Critics argued that the concept grouped together nations who were not allies and
actually had little in common and that United States policies toward those
nations would necessarily have to differ. By grouping them together, they said,
Mr. Bush had inadvertently invited criticism that his foreign policy was
inconsistent.

If the United States believes that rogue states are such a danger, why was it
moving against Iraq and not Iran, which has stronger ties with terrorist groups
and is also trying to develop nuclear weapons, critics asked. And why is
Washington so patient with North Korea, which has a track record of selling
missiles?

With Mr. Bush seeking to avoid a confrontation with North Korea and Iran even as
he is trying to marshal a force for striking Iraq, he did not mention the "axis
of evil" again. Instead, he suggested that Iran was going through a period of
internal ferment and possibly change. Regarding North Korea, he stressed that
the United States wanted to work with its allies to achieve a peaceful solution.

But Mr. Bush made it clear that the United States was determined to confront
Iraq if it did not voluntarily disarm and would do so soon. In keeping with his
doctrine of pre-emption, he indicated that Washington was prepared to act even
in the face of allied objections and without explicit Security Council approval.

"We are asking them to join us, and many are doing so," Mr. Bush said of the
allies. "Yet the course of this nation does not depend on the decisions of
others."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 31, 2003



CORRECTION: A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about President
Bush's State of the Union speech misstated the name of the commandant of the
Marine Corps, who attended with other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He
is Gen. Michael W. Hagee. (Gen. James L. Jones is a former commandant.)


GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Richard B. Myers, top, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and Gen. Eric K. Shinseki, the Army chief, with Senators Joseph L.
Lieberman and Hillary Rodham Clinton. Senator John Kerry, left, spoke with Adm.
Vern Clark, the Navy chief, center, and Gen. James L. Jones, the Marine
commandant. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (92%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); WEAPONS
DECOMMISSIONING (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); HIJACKING (73%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (59%); US NAVY (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%); JOHN KERRY (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%);
ERIC K SHINSEKI (59%); JAMES L JONES (59%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); GULF STATES (91%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Technology Briefing Internet: French Cou rt Rejects Suit Against Yahoo

BYLINE:  By Kerry Shaw (NYT)

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 117 words


After a three-year legal fight, a Paris court yesterday rejected a lawsuit by
French human rights advocates and Holocaust survivors who sued Yahoo for one
symbolic euro.

They accused Yahoo of having condoned war crimes when it sold Nazi
paraphernalia, including flags with swastikas, on its auction pages. French law
forbids the display or sale of racist material, but the items were available to
French users who clicked on the American pages. The court said that Yahoo did
not seek to "justify war crimes and crimes against humanity" when it sold the
items on its Web site. It was the second lawsuit against Yahoo by French human
rights advocates; the first was started in 2000.   Kerry Shaw (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (93%); WAR CRIMES (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); JEWS & JUDAISM (85%); WEB
SITES (84%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;  SALES;  AUCTIONS;  SUITS
AND LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

COMPANY: YAHOO! INC (94%)

ORGANIZATION: YAHOO INC

TICKER: YHOO (NASDAQ) (94%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(94%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (94%); SIC7375 INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL SERVICES (94%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (94%)
SIC7372 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS;

PERSON: SHAW, KERRY

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (73%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             148 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 14, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Rejects Belgian Court Ruling on Sharon

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 13


Israeli officials reacted with outrage today to a decision by Belgium's highest
court that Belgium could try Prime Minister Ariel Sharon for war crimes once he
leaves office.

Benjamin Netanyahu, the foreign minister, lashed out at the ruling as "an
affront to truth, justice and the right of the state of Israel to defend itself
against terrorism."

"We in Israel and the Jewish people as a whole have had enough of blood libels
on the soil of Europe, and we are going to fight this one with everything we
have," he said.

Israel recalled its ambassador from Brussels, while Mr. Netanyahu summoned
Belgium's ambassador to Israel to receive a protest. Israeli officials said that
the Beligan ambassador replied that he was not authorized to speak about the
matter.

Human rights groups were delighted by the Beligan court's decision. They hailed
it as permitting victims of genocide and war crimes to pursue justice regardless
of where the crimes took place. The Israeli case is one of many pending in
Beligum that involve alleged violations of human rights.

Mr. Sharon and a senior official in the Defense Ministry, Amos Yaron, are being
sued by survivors of a 1982 massacre of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon by
Lebanese Christian militias, who were backed by Israeli forces. Mr. Sharon was
Israel's defense minister at the time of the massacre in the Sabra and Shatila
refugee camps.

An Israeli commission later held Mr. Sharon indirectly responsible. He resigned
his post but was not prosecuted.

In an interview, Mr. Netanyahu said that the court's ruling was a blow to the
idea of international law, warning that American officials risked a similar fate
over wars in Afghanistan or even Vietnam.

At issue is a 1993 Belgian law allowing the courts "universal jurisdiction" over
crimes against humanity or war crimes. The court's ruling on Wednesday accorded
serving high officials immunity, but implied that they could be pursued once
they left office. The ruling overturned a lower court's decision last year that
accused people had to be present in Belgium to be investigated.

Mr. Netanyahu connected the Belgian court decision to resistance by several
European nations, including Belgium, to a possible American-led war against
Iraq. He said that the stress of the campaign against terrorism was revealing
weaknesses in European alliances first exposed by the end of the cold war.

"There is something deeply immoral and deeply distorted about what's happening
in Belgium," he said.

Other Israeli officials were equally harsh. The justice minister, Meir Sheetrit,
referred to Belgium as "this small and insignificant nation," wondering how it
could present itself as "the judge for the whole world."

Israel's president, Moshe Katsav, dispatched a severe letter to King Albert II
of Belgium. Mr. Sharon himself remained silent today about the matter.

Several Israeli officials said that Israel might work to block new Belgian
efforts to increase American investment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); RELIGION (91%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (91%);
LITIGATION (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); REFUGEES
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); COLD WAR (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); IMMIGRATION (77%); WAR ON
TERROR (76%); TERRORISM (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); LIBEL & SLANDER (71%)
BELGIUM-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-ISRAEL;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  FOREIGN SERVICE;  CHRISTIANS AND
CHRISTIANITY;  PALESTINIANS

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (90%) BENNET, JAMES; SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN);
YARON, AMOS; NETANYAHU, BENJAMIN (MIN)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); BELGIUM (97%); LEBANON (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  BELGIUM;  LEBANON

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             151 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Terror Suspect In American Hands

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 166 words


To the Editor:

No one should be reassured by the recent statement made by Ari Fleischer, the
White House spokesman, that United States personnel interrogate terrorist
suspects humanely (news article, March 4).

The number of serious, specific allegations of torture grows steadily. Former
prisoners of the United States in Afghanistan claim that they were forced to
stand naked, hooded, with arms chained to the ceiling and without being
permitted to sleep for days on end ("U.S. Military Investigating Death of Afghan
in Custody," news article, March 4).

If true, such treatment hardly comports with the United States' legal and moral
obligation to refrain from torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment.

It's high time the Bush administration acknowledge the seriousness of the
torture allegations, investigate them and make sure no American officials engage
in or condone torture with impunity.

JAMIE FELLNER
United States Program Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, March 5, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TORTURE (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); AL-QAEDA
(72%) TERRORISM;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: FELLNER, JAMIE; MOHAMMAD, KHALED SHAIKH

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court With a Growing Docket, But No Chief Prosecutor Yet

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 13


The glass-and-steel headquarters of the new global war crimes court has a post
office box -- No.  19519 -- that is already receiving complaints against
dictators and human rights abusers from distant places. About 200 claims have
arrived, according to the staff.

While the International Criminal Court swore in its first bench of 18 judges
this week, no complaint will be studied until a chief prosecutor is elected.
Only he or she can bring charges of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity in cases where national courts fail to act.

The search for someone to fill the prosecutor's post is proving difficult.
Members countries have scheduled the election for next month, but no strong
candidate with broad support has emerged so far. Nominations were due in
December, but court officials said they extended the date because they preferred
to find a figure by consensus, rather than risk divisive bargaining. In the case
of the judges, chosen according to a complex code to balance sex, legal
traditions and geography, it took 33 rounds of voting.

A short list for the prosecutor's post, including candidates from Argentina,
Australia, Gambia and Niger, has been circulating. Canada was taken off the list
after a Canadian judge, Philippe Kirsch, was elected this week as the court
president.

"No one thought this would be easy," said one court official, recalling that it
took the war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia more than a year to find
its first prosecutor in Richard Goldstone, a judge from South Africa.

Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, said the appointment was
crucial.

Speaking at the investiture of the judges, he said the experience of the war
crimes tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia had shown that "the decisions and
public statements of the prosecutor will do more than anything else to establish
the reputation of the court, especially in the first phases of its work."

In private, a court official elaborated: "He or she must be solid on substance,
skillful at handling the press, and be politically savvy. It has to be someone
who can instill confidence, especially among countries that are not yet members,
not least the United States." It is not easy to find all of those qualities in
one person, who is also willing to give up a private life, he said.

The prosecutor, unlike the judges, does not have to come from one of the 89
countries that have ratified the treaty establishing the court. That
theoretically leaves the door open to large countries that have not joined, like
China, India, Russia and the United States. Russia has said it will join, but
has not ratified its decision.

Some diplomats and legal experts here have speculated that an ideal prosecutor,
in fact, would be an American, but they agree this seems unlikely because of the
Bush administration's hostility to the court.

"Americans are terrific prosecutors -- they have a very fine tradition," said
Geoffrey Robertson, who has just been named president of the international war
crimes court for Sierra Leone. "Having a top-flight American would clearly help
reconcile Washington to the court."

Supporters argue that the fact the 18 judges are largely from Western-style
democracies that are American allies may also calm critics. "With these judges
it will be harder now to paint this court as an anti-American cabal and this
will put the lie to the willful distortions Washington has put out about this
court," said Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch in New York.

Even with a prosecutor in place, it may take a year to prepare the first
indictment. "It will be hard to manage expectations," said one official. "You
don't want a prosecutor who is too politically scared and won't indict anybody
or a prosecutor who is too anxious to get started and may indict too soon. The
first case obviously will be crucial."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); GENOCIDE
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  JUDGES;  APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); CHINA (79%); GAMBIA
(79%); INDIA (79%); RWANDA (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); SERBIA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             154 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two on Amnesty Board Resign Over Reversal on Attack Claim

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 15


Two board members of Amnesty International USA have resigned to protest what
they said was pressure to accept unproved allegations that an Amnesty volunteer
researcher was the target of Guatemalan death squads.

Last Monday, Amnesty International USA, the American section of Amnesty
International, took out advertisements in newspapers, including The New York
Times, supporting assertions by the researcher, Barbara Bocek, a Guatemala
specialist, that she had been threatened and assaulted in Washington State
because of her human rights work.

The advertisements reversed the board's decision in January not to pursue her
case after local and federal authorities dismissed her claims, and a private
investigator the board hired reportedly failed to substantiate her story.

A group of Ms. Bocek's supporters lobbied the 18-member board to reconsider its
decision and presented demands that have been partly met. However, several board
members said the demands were based on a misreading of the private
investigator's report, which has yet to be released.

Since then, Linda Hartke has stepped down as the board chairwoman, though she
remains on the board. Ruth Barrett Rendler, a board member who works at a
torture survivor treatment center in Minneapolis, resigned after someone
claiming to support Ms. Bocek threatened to tell Ms. Rendler's clients that she
could not be trusted to support them.

Rosa Ehrenreich Brooks, a law professor in Virginia, also resigned from the
board. "I consider it irresponsible, and verging on unethical, for the Aiusa
board now to undertake actions that rest on discounting, denying or suppressing
the results of the independent external investigation," Ms. Brooks said in her
letter of resignation. "Yet that is precisely what a majority of the board has
chosen to do by agreeing to the demands of the 'Friends of Barbara Bocek' that
we purchase newspaper ads in which Aiusa backs Ms. Bocek's account, while
failing to mention the significant evidence that undermines her story."

Beth Andrus, Ms. Bocek's attorney, did not respond to several messages left at
her office. In an e-mail message to her supporters, Ms. Bocek said she was
pleased to have obtained "justice" from Amnesty.

Morton Winston, the group's acting chairman, who will officially assume the post
on March 31, said the board changed its position on whether to accept Ms.
Bocek's version of events after considering new information, including a
presentation by Dianna Ortiz, a Catholic nun who was tortured in Guatemala.
Sister Ortiz, who runs a center for torture survivors, said people subjected to
torture were often revictimized when their accounts were doubted.

Ms. Bocek had said that two men assaulted her on a rural road near Forks, Wash.,
last year and warned her she would die if she returned to Guatemala to continue
her work.

Local and federal authorities in Washington State, however, said they had yet to
find any evidence and suggested that she made up or staged the incidents. The
Federal Bureau of Investigation closed her case earlier this year, saying it
lacked "prosecutive merit."

Both critics and supporters of Ms. Bocek have urged the board to release the
private investigator's report. The board has resisted, citing concerns for her
privacy. However, human rights monitors in Guatemala said the failure to publish
the report left the credibility of their work in doubt.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIVE SERVICES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); ASSAULT &
BATTERY (89%); TORTURE (89%); EXTORTION (78%); BOARD CHANGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); PRINT ADVERTISING (77%); NEWSPAPER ADVERTISING (77%); MARKETING &
ADVERTISING SERVICES (77%); ETHICS (76%); LAWYERS (71%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(50%) SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  ADVERTISING AND MARKETING

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; RENDLER, RUTH BARRETT; BROOKS, ROSAN EHRENREICH; BOCEK,
BARBARA; HARTKE, LINDA

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (93%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); GUATEMALA (94%)

REGION: GUATEMALA;  WASHINGTON (STATE)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             157 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgium Rethinks Its Prosecutorial Zeal

BYLINE:  By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, March 28


"The News from Absurdistan" was the headline on a commentary here the other day,
written by Luc Van der Kelen, the chief editor of the Flemish newspaper Het
Laatste Nieuws.

"A former president and the vice president are indicted for what happened during
a war of liberation against a monstrous dictator who had invaded a small
country," Mr. Van der Kelen wrote. "This is the totally absurd and inevitable
consequence of grotesque legislation."

The former president to whom Mr. Van der Kelen was referring was George Bush,
the father of President Bush, and the vice president was the current vice
president of the United States, Dick Cheney. Both have been charged in Belgium
with war crimes in connection with the bombing of a civilian shelter in Baghdad
that killed 403 people in the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

The accusations were filed under a Belgian law that gives this small country
"universal jurisdiction," to try the perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, even if there is no Belgian connection with the alleged
crimes, the victims or perpetrators.

In fact, the effort to use the law against former President Bush, which provoked
angry complaints from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell (who is also cited in
the suit), has now led to an abrupt change here. On Thursday, a parliamentary
commission rewrote the law to insert "filters" that will essentially enable the
government to dismiss the case against Mr. Bush.

"There will be enough changes to prevent all these ridiculous cases," Mr. Van
der Kelen said in an interview. "Hopefully, we will be out of these problems."

Yet, pending a vote of the full Parliament on the changes in the law, the
Belgian effort to make itself a place where the victimized of the world can get
a hearing seems a case study in good intentions gone awry. It is also the story
of a small country seeking a special moral role but, in the view now beginning
to prevail, has overstepped the margins of good sense.

The Belgian law of universal jurisdiction was adopted in 1993, when the
Parliament, horrified by mounting civil strife in Rwanda -- a former Belgian
colony -- wanted to act against what the law called "grave violations of
international human rights" wherever they occurred.

Other countries also have laws that enable them to reach beyond their borders
when it comes to war crimes or crimes against humanity. Israeli law grants its
authorities power to arrest and try those responsible for the Holocaust, as
happened with Adolf Eichmann in 1961. In 1998, a Spanish magistrate relied on
Spanish law and the international law of universal jurisdiction to seek the
extradition of the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet from Britain, where
he was living in exile. After holding Mr. Pinochet in prison for a year, a
British court denied the demand for extradition and instead returned him to
Chile.

But the Belgian law is unusual in that it requires no connection with Belgium at
all for a case to be brought. In its first years, many people who had suffered
grave abuses of human rights did come here to file their cases. Saddam Hussein
was accused by Iraqi Kurds in the chemical attacks of Kurdish areas. Exiled
Cubans accused Fidel Castro of human rights violations. Israeli victims of
suicide bombings filed suit against Yasir Arafat.

None of those suits meant very much in practical terms. The accused leaders
ignored them, and Belgium clearly has no capacity to pursue anybody indicted of
war crimes. But supporters of the law of universal jurisdiction felt there was
an important element of symbolism.

"We shouldn't forget that people who have undergone extraordinary suffering have
been able to find a country in the world capable of hearing their pain and
following up on their demands, even if it is in a purely theoretical way," Eric
David, a professor of law and a strong advocate of the Belgian law told a
French-language newspaper.

In 2001, a group of Lebanese Palestinians filed a suit against Ariel Sharon,
charging him with war crimes because of Israel's failure to prevent the mass
killings in Sabra and Shatila in Israeli-occupied Lebanon in 1982. Israel
protested vigorously, and Belgians questioned what business they had subjecting
any Israeli to prosecution.

Israel became the first country to defend a case here, arguing successfully in
lower courts that Belgium had no jurisdiction to try an Israeli leader. But a
few weeks ago the Belgian Supreme Court issued a ruling that left open the
possibility that Mr. Sharon could be prosecuted. The court ruled that Mr. Sharon
is immune from prosecution because he is now a serving prime minister, but
upheld the principle of universal jurisdiction, meaning that once Mr. Sharon
becomes a private citizen, a new suit could be filed against him.

Meanwhile, other Israelis cited in the suit are still subject to Belgian
prosecution. It is more than technically possible that if one of them came to
Belgium for, say, an international conference, or even went to a country with an
extradition treaty with Belgium, he could be arrested.

Then, on March 18, seven Iraqi families filed suit against Mr. Bush, Mr. Cheney,
Mr. Powell and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander in the gulf
war.

"The objective of the Iraqi families, who together lost four or five children in
that bombing, was to bring up the question of responsibility for their losses,"
said Raymond Coumont, president of an antiwar group called Meetings for Peace
that filed suit with the Iraqis.

"They also knew from their own experience that it is simply not true that
precision weapons prevent civilian deaths," Mr. Coumont said. "And when they
learned that President Bush had decided to go to war against Iraq, they felt
that it was the moment to present their case."

Mr. Powell retorted with a stern warning that Belgium was risking its status as
an international meeting place and the headquarters of NATO, a warning that the
government seems to have taken seriously. More generally, as Mr. Van der Kelen
wrote, there seemed something absurd in filing charges against a former
president of the United States, even if the feelings of the Iraqi families were
easily understood.

"This case proved that there is something wrong with the genocide law," Didier
Seeuws, the spokesman for the Belgian Foreign Ministry, said in an interview.
"The government wants to change the law."

The government of Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt has engaged in intense
discussions to persuade Parliament to accept the "filters" in the law that will
essentially enable the government to reject cases where the accused person comes
from a democratic country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); DESERT STORM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
JURISDICTION (88%); INTERVIEWS (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%);
LITIGATION (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); MAGISTRATES
(74%); GENOCIDE (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
BOMBINGS (72%); JAIL SENTENCING (69%); HOLOCAUST (69%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (66%); CASE STUDIES (64%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  PERSIAN GULF WAR;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); GEORGE H W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (72%) BERNSTEIN,
RICHARD; VERHOFSTADT, GUY (PRIME MIN); BUSH, GEORGE (FORMER PRES); POWELL, COLIN
L (SEC)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (78%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%)

COUNTRY: BELGIUM (94%); IRAQ (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); CHILE (79%); GULF STATES (71%)

REGION: BELGIUM;  IRAQ;  BAGHDAD (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: China: Hitting Back

BYLINE:  By Joseph Kahn (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 94 words


China officially retaliated against a State Department critique of its human
rights record, saying American human rights standards had deteriorated sharply
even as the United States was "pretending to be the world's judge."

The report by China's State Council said discrimination, especially against
Arabs and Muslims, was on the rise in the United States since the Sept. 11,
2001, terror attacks. It said the United States was inflicting vast suffering on
the people of Afghanistan and Iraq, while practicing "democracy of the rich" at
home.   Joseph Kahn (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%);
MUSLIM AMERICANS (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%);
TERRORISM (86%); ARAB AMERICANS (86%); HIJACKING (86%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%);
RELIGION (84%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (83%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (53%)
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
MUSLIM-AMERICANS;  DISCRIMINATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARAB-AMERICANS;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT (US)

PERSON: KAHN, JOSEPH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (95%); IRAQ (92%); ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(90%)

REGION: CHINA;  IRAQ;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             164 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Indonesia: Jail For Soldiers In Killing

BYLINE:  By Raymond Bonner (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 118 words


A military court convicted seven members of Indonesia's elite special forces for
the torture and murder of Theys Eluay, the leader of a nonviolent campaign for
independence for Irian Jaya, Indonesia's mineral-rich, easternmost province. Mr.

Eluay was tortured, then strangled, in November 2001, after attending a party
with the soldiers. It was only after intense pressure from the United States and
Australia that Indonesia undertook a serious investigation, and ultimately a
trial. The convictions are a rare instance of soldiers being prosecuted for
human rights abuses. The maximum sentence today was 3.5 years, which brought
immediate criticism from human rights advocates here.   Raymond Bonner (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); MURDER (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (88%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); VERDICTS
(88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (88%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
MILITARY LAW;  TORTURE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: ELUAY, THEYS; BONNER, RAYMOND

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); ASIA (92%); AUSTRALIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  IRIAN JAYA (INDONESIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             166 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dissidents in Cuba

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 101 words


To the Editor:

You are right to call for condemnation of Cuba's recent imprisonment of nearly
100 dissidents after a series of sham trials ("Cuban Litmus Test," editorial,
April 18).

But it's a tough assignment when, at the other end of the island, at Guantanamo
Bay, the United States has several hundred people locked up without trial,
without charges and without lawyers.

Once, we could point to our own legal system and to our signature on the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights as justification for condemning human
rights abuses. Not anymore.

HUMPHREY TONKIN
West Hartford, Conn., April 18, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM (59%) POLITICAL
PRISONERS;  TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: TONKIN, HUMPHREY

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (74%)

REGION: CUBA;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             167 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: IMMIGRANTS;
Illegal Aliens Can Be Held Indefinitely, Ashcroft Says

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Attorney General John Ashcroft has ruled that illegal immigrants who have no
known links to terrorist groups can be detained indefinitely to address national
security concerns.

Mr. Ashcroft was ruling in the case of a Haitian immigrant who had won the right
to be released on bail while awaiting a decision on his asylum claim. Mr.
Ashcroft did not argue that the man was a security threat, but said that his
release and that of others like him "would tend to encourage further surges of
mass migration from Haiti by sea, with attendant strains on national security
and homeland security resources."

Because immigration judges are part of the Justice Department, rulings made by
Mr. Ashcroft must serve as the basis for any decisions.

The decision will have an immediate effect on Haitian immigrants in Florida. But
Mr. Ashcroft said the nation's immigration judges should rule similarly in bail
hearings involving other illegal immigrants when the government provides
evidence that extended detention is needed to protect the country.

It was unclear how widely the policy would be enforced. But outraged advocates
for immigrants said it would impose unnecessary hardships on immigrants and
asylum seekers who pose no security risk.

This policy shift is the latest effort by the Bush administration to use the
detention of immigrants as a tool to address security concerns and prevent
terrorist attacks. In March, officials said they would detain people from Iraq
and 32 other countries who arrive at airports and border crossings seeking
political asylum.

The government has also detained dozens of immigrants without charge as material
witnesses in terrorism cases.

This is the first time, however, that officials have decided to detain
immigrants who have no links to terrorism in an effort to address broader
security concerns. Until now, judges in bail hearings focused on each individual
immigrant and whether he or she would return to court or pose any danger to
local communities.

Human rights groups, including Amnesty International and the Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights, sharply criticized the policy shift.

"It's shortsighted, it's wrong and it does not make us safer," said Elisa
Massimino, who runs the Washington office of the lawyers group. "What it means
is that these people will languish in detention without the opportunity to prove
to a judge or anyone else that they don't pose a threat to national security."

David Joseph, the detained Haitian immigrant in question in Mr. Ashcroft's
ruling, scrambled to shore last Oct. 29 along with more than 200 other Haitians
after their boat ran aground off Miami. Mr. Joseph and many others applied for
political asylum.

Immigration advocates and lawmakers from both parties immediately called on the
president and Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida to order the Haitians' release. Some
passengers have been released on bail, but Mr. Ashcroft's decision will ensure
that the rest remain in detention until claims for asylum are decided.

Mr. Ashcroft said his ruling was necessary to discourage mass migration from
Haiti, which he described as a staging point for Pakistanis and Palestinians
hoping to enter the United States illegally, a charge that was disputed by
advocates for immigrants.

He said the Coast Guard was wasting precious resources focusing on Haitians
trying to enter the United States by boat. With the war against terrorists
draining resources, officials lack the capacity to screen Haitian immigrants
individually to determine whether they present national security risks, he said.

"Under these circumstances," Mr. Ashcroft wrote in his decision on April 17, "it
is reasonable to make a determination that aliens arriving under the
circumstances presented by the Oct. 29 influx should be detained rather than
released on bond."

Bill Schulz, the executive director of Amnesty International, said he recognized
the government's right to protect the public from terrorism. But he said
officials also had an obligation to asylum seekers.

"International standards state that the detention of asylum seekers should
normally be avoided and is justified only in limited cases prescribed by law,"
Mr. Schulz said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (93%); NATIONAL SECURITY (91%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BAIL (89%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); WITNESSES (79%); JUDGES (79%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%);
IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%) IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;  ASYLUM
(POLITICAL);  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%)

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (56%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: HAITI (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: HAITI

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             168 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Office To Monitor Police

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 90 words


Afghanistan opened a Human Rights Department aimed at curbing human rights
violations by police officers across the country.

"We see cases in which police are not living up to their obligation to respect
the rights of individuals," the interior minister, Ali Ahmad Jalali, said.
"Persecution and beating are prevalent in some places." There are about 50,000
police officers in Afghanistan, but most are paramilitaries loyal to regional
warlords who have have little or no formal training and do not function as a
united, civilian force.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); MISCONDUCT (85%) POLICE BRUTALITY AND
MISCONDUCT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  POLICE

PERSON: JALALI, ALI AHMAD (MIN)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             169 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: Briefly Noted;
REFUGEES FLEEING TO JORDAN

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 166 words


Refugees and other foreigners in Iraq -- mostly Palestinians -- have been
fleeing to Jordan because of intimidation and attacks, the United States-based
Human Rights Watch group said in a report released Sunday. Amid rampant looting,
vandalism and other crimes, landlords -- forced by President Saddam Hussein to
take in Palestinian tenants at discounted rates -- have been taking advantage of
the chaos by evicting tenants or demanding unrealistic rental increases, the
22-page report said.

In other cases, armed groups have threatened foreigners to leave their homes or
face violence. Mr. Hussein was seen as a supporter of the Palestinians.

Peter Bouckaert, a researcher for the rights group, criticized American-led
forces for doing too little "to ensure the security of anyone in Iraq, let alone
these vulnerable populations." The United Nations refugee agency says about
1,000 Iranian Kurds and 450 Palestinians who fled Baghdad are stranded in a no
man's land between Jordan and Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RENTAL PROPERTY
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); EVICTION (88%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (86%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (74%); TERRORISM (72%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (72%); VANDALISM (56%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL
WARFARE;  PALESTINIANS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  HOUSING;  RENTING AND
LEASING;  LANDLORDS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (84%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); IRAQ (94%); JORDAN (94%); UNITED
STATES (94%)

REGION: IRAQ;  JORDAN

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             170 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Burmese Rape Horrors

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 122 words


To the Editor:

I read with great interest your article about the Burmese military's systematic
use of rape against women in Myanmar, formerly Burma (news article, May 12).

The rapes have been investigated and corroborated by local human rights groups,
the United States State Department and now Refugees International.

Hundreds of women have been raped. Many of them have retold their painful
stories time and again, putting themselves at risk to tell the truth. They
deserve justice, and the international community should provide it.

The Burmese military junta should be held accountable for its crimes. These
brave women of Burma stood up to a dictatorship. We should not let them down.

KATHLEEN DIDOMENICO
New York, May 12, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SEX OFFENSES
(88%); MILITARY RULE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); REFUGEES (84%);
GENOCIDE (84%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  SEX CRIMES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  WOMEN

ORGANIZATION: REFUGEES INTERNATIONAL (58%)

PERSON: DIDOMENICO, KATHLEEN

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (98%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             174 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: East Timor: Call For U.N. Tribunal

BYLINE:  By Laurie Goodstein (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 96 words


More than 90 American religious leaders and organizations have issued a
statement urging creation of an international tribunal under United Nations
auspices to try Indonesian military and police officials accused of human rights
violations in East Timor.

Indonesia has set up its own human rights court, but the religious leaders
called that court, which so far has acquitted 12 of 17 defendants, a "sham."
East Timor won its independence from Indonesia in 1999 after 24 years that
included periods of ethnic and religious violence and rights abuses.   Laurie
Goodstein (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); RELIGION
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); POLICE FORCES (87%);
MISCONDUCT (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (87%); VERDICTS
(86%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (85%); ACQUITTAL (84%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  POLICE
BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GOODSTEIN, LAURIE

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             175 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: MASS EXECUTIONS;
A Grim Graveyard Window on Hussein's Iraq

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2837 words

DATELINE: HILLA, Iraq, May 30


He was a good soldier, so when he heard the first crack of the executioners'
guns, Fadel al-Shaati said he instinctively dropped to the ground and pressed
himself against a wall of the freshly dug trench.

He could not get it straight in his mind. The men firing at him were comrades in
arms, men of his own Iraqi Army. But they had inexplicably dragged him from his
bed in his nightclothes, as they had so many others, and forced him, blindfolded
and bound, into this pit in the darkness of night.

Now, 12 years later, Mr. Shaati cannot remember if the women and children beside
him screamed as the bullets hit, or whether the men in the hole moaned as they
died. He only recalls a moment of hollow silence when the soldiers stopped
shooting.

Then came the throaty rumble of a backhoe and the thud of wet earth dropping on
bodies. He survived but saw hundreds of other innocents buried in another of
Saddam Hussein's anonymous mass graves.

The killing ground of Hilla lies between pockmarked fields, stands of date palms
and tufted pastures where sheep and cattle graze. Even today, after the
bullet-shattered remains of more than 3,000 people have been pulled from its
soil, there is nothing much to distinguish it on the pastoral landscape.

What is remarkable about the site is that it is just one of dozens, possibly
hundreds, of secret graveyards scattered across Iraq.

"The truly frightening part is that the number of suspected mass graves is so
unfathomable," said Sandra L. Hodgkinson, a State Department official who has
been documenting some of the sites for the American occupation forces in Iraq.
"They are everywhere. Literally every neighborhood and town is reporting
possible grave sites, and from all different periods of time. I think we're
going to find them everywhere."

No one really knows how many people were slaughtered by the Iraqi government
over the past 35 years. It apparently killed its citizens on a huge scale, both
systematically and indiscriminately. Human rights groups, which have tried to
document the carnage for years, estimate that nearly 300,000 Iraqis are missing
and were probably executed. Tens of thousands more, according to Iraqi
opposition groups, may have been imprisoned and tortured, their lives warped
forever by what they saw and experienced.

The executions took place through the late 1970's and 1980's, when Iraq's Arab
neighbors and most Western governments considered Saddam Hussein an ally against
the threat of Islamic militancy in Iran. They occurred, survivors and witnesses
said, while American troops were still occupying much of southern Iraq,
sometimes just on the outskirts of the killing fields, in the weeks after the
Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The government killed in purges aimed at specific political opposition groups,
like the Communists, and it killed to suppress the political ambitions of the
Shiite Muslim majority. It killed the relatives of dissidents, Muslim clerics
and Christians whose loyalty was suspect. It killed Kurds, with bullets and
poison gas, in a wholesale campaign meant to subdue an entire ethnic group.

The killing continued through that decade and beyond, when much of the world
shunned but tolerated the Iraqi leader.

Iraq, post-Hussein, is a reflection of the misery its people suffered. But it is
also rediscovering its pain, now that the prisons have been emptied and the
reality of the mass graves exposed. No longer can the relatives of the missing
console themselves with the hope that their loved ones might turn up. With that
realization, many people are bitterly striking out at a world that seemed
indifferent to their fate for so long.

Every day, young men from the nearby village of Husseini come to the Hilla
burial ground and carefully wrap the unclaimed bones in strips of white muslin,
tying up the brittle little bundles at each end. Sometimes, in a simulation of
the Muslim tradition of washing the dead, they tenderly stroke the exposed
skulls.

The men from Husseini come because they want to find the 60 men taken from their
village in March 1991, when Republican Guard troops brutally put down a Shiite
uprising. The men have only identified 10 of their missing neighbors in the
field by the palm trees, but they have not lost hope. They believe there are
four or five other mass graves in the immediate area that have yet to be
excavated.

If they were thankful for the American invasion that toppled the Iraqi
government, their gratitude has soured a bit with every pile of bones they
exhume. American troops were in Iraq at the time of these killings, they said,
but they stood by.

"All those years, the families of these people were waiting for them to come
home," said Raid al-Husseini, a doctor from the village, as he surveyed the
scarred landscape. "All those years since 1991, Saddam Hussein was alive. But
the Iraqi people were left for dead, whether they were walking on this earth or
lying in a mass grave."

A Roundup of Young Men

Iraq is a land of tormented survivors and ghosts. "And miracles," said Mr.
Shaati, who needed one to survive execution in a dark field near Hilla 12 years
ago.

He is 39 now, a gaunt man who makes his living as a mechanic. Until last week,
he had told no one but his father what he saw in that trench. "He told me not to
tell this to anyone because they would realize I was a witness and I would be
killed," Mr. Shaati said. "So I didn't. I couldn't sentence myself to death
again."

In 1991, he was just a tired soldier who wanted to get home.

The Iraqi Army, driven from Kuwait by American-led forces, was disintegrating.
As it collapsed, so did the government's control of Shiite cities in the south
and much of the Kurdish north. Emboldened by the suggestion from the first
President Bush that they rebel against Mr. Hussein, Iraqis attacked government
offices and killed Baath Party officials.

In the pandemonium, Mr. Shaati bolted for home, arriving in Hilla just as the
largely Shiite city began its own feeble revolt in early March. Within a week,
special Republican Guard units arrived and began rounding up any young men they
could find.

Mr. Shaati was taken one day at 4 a.m. and transferred to Mahawil military base,
a sprawling compound of corrugated steel warehouses and low concrete buildings
that became a staging area for that spring's killings.

As the detainees milled about waiting for instructions, Iraqi soldiers opened
fire on the crowd, Mr. Shaati said. "I remember one officer shouting: 'If you
shoot them here, you're just going to mess this place up with all the blood and
filth. Take them somewhere else and kill them.' So they stopped shooting and
pushed us into the big warehouses."

He spent six days there, in a crowded room with no food or water. A man he knew
who suffered from ulcers died at his feet. "After two days, the body smelled
horrible and we begged them to take it away. But nobody did anything."

The soldiers took them out in groups of 100 to 150 people. When his time came,
Mr. Shaati was ordered to remove his T-shirt and rip it into strips that were
tied over his eyes and around his hands. The prisoners were herded onto a bus,
everyone holding on with their teeth to the shirt of the person in front of
them. When they arrived at a field -- Mr. Shaati is still not sure where --
their grave had already been prepared.

"They led us down an incline into a wide long hole," he said. "It was quiet. No
one fell or even cried. I was positioned very close to the corner, maybe second
or third from the wall. Then they started shooting. Somehow I wasn't hit. By
then, I guess, they didn't go to the trouble of shooting all of us."

After the grave was covered, Mr. Shaati, alive but choking on dirt, wormed his
way out of the ditch. He punched through the earthen blanket with his head, and
worked himself free of the cloth straps. Gulping the cold night air, he knew
that all his soldierly ideas about honor and country counted for nothing.

"That's the worst thing," he said. "To fight for them and then be slaughtered."

That is why, in his view, American forces could conquer Iraq so quickly 12 years
later. "We didn't fight," he said. "It's not that we were afraid of them. But we
sold our country in order to get rid of Saddam Hussein."

Guilt by Association

Her most disturbing memory is of the time she felt nothing but her own pain.

After the beatings and electric shocks, Suriya Abdel Khader would find herself
once again in the fetid cell, a room so crowded that most prisoners could only
stand. The women died upright, then slumped to the floor, but Ms. Abdel Khader
remembers registering only a dull flash of annoyance whenever that happened.

"Get this body out of the way," she would think to herself. "It's taking up
room."

She was imprisoned, she believes, because her four brothers had been arrested in
Mr. Hussein's blanket crackdown on Shiites suspected of supporting Iran or the
Islamic Dawa Party.

The systematic arrest of Shiites, and the torture and the executions that began
in 1979, were the first of the Iraqi leader's huge purges. Men were rounded up
first. It was not long before entire families were swallowed by the prisons and
the execution grounds.

"They took the first of my brothers in 1980," said Ms. Abdel Khader, a plump,
blue-eyed woman who had been searching the mass graves for traces of her
vanished siblings. "He was 16. He was part of a group feared by the regime: he
prayed at the mosque."

Two more brothers, ages 17 and 18, were arrested in 1985 when Iraqi soldiers
raided a remote farm where many young Shiite men had gone to avoid the
government's house-to-house searches. She learned that a friend of her brothers
was wounded, so she left bandages for him near the farm. That day, she was also
arrested, along with her father, sister and a 3-year-old brother.

She spent one year being moved from prison to torture center to prison and back.
Her tormenters would hang her from a hook in the ceiling by her arms, which were
bound behind her back. Sometimes they added electric shocks. Sometimes they beat
her on the soles of her feet until they were engorged with blood and her
toenails fell off.

She was 25.

"I was lucky that I became like a dead body," she said. "I didn't know what was
going on around me. There was no water, no bathroom. The only food was two big
pots they brought in, one with dirty rice and one of soup. You had to fight for
it. If you were strong and healthy, you'd get food. If you were weak, you'd
wait."

After the torture came the sham trial, then a sentence to spend her life at
Rashad women's prison, a maze of unheated cells where the sewage would float
from the one toilet down the corridors and seep onto the women's rough
mattresses.

"They'd make us wait for water," she said, "and we'd have to gather it drop by
drop from the pipes in the early morning."

Women with death sentences were kept in the same compound where she stayed. The
executions followed a schedule, like trains. "We knew that on Sundays and
Wednesdays, they came and took the Shiite prisoners. There were other days for
the Kurds and the Christians and everybody else."

She was released in 1991, in one of Mr. Hussein's sporadic amnesties, and
married a man who had lost five brothers to the same campaign against Shiites.
Last week, she took him to see the prison, where squatters have now set up house
in the cell where she once suffered.

Memories surged to the surface, so powerful that Ms. Abdel Khader, a sturdy
woman, swayed like a storm-tossed willow tree.

"All this because I brought bandages to an injured boy," she said in a flat
voice, turning to leave. "That was my big crime against Saddam Hussein."

Random Executions

Clawing through the dirt, Abdelhassan al-Mohani collected his brother bone by
bone.

He knelt in a hole at the edge of a cemetery near the village of Muhammad
Sakran, just outside Baghdad. The faded writing on a plastic armband in the
grave told him this was his brother, Abdelhussein. Mr. Mohani held the skull and
gently brushed the dirt from the eye socket. Then he wept.

Abdelhussein had disappeared on his way to work in Baghdad on Jan. 23, 1981. His
family never heard a word from the government, but eventually they drew the
obvious conclusion: as a Shiite, he must have been arrested in the Islamic Dawa
Party roundup.

Ten years later, Saddam Hussein's agents found the family again.

On April 11, 1991, a few weeks into the Shiite rebellion, Iraqi helicopters
dropped leaflets over Karbala ordering everyone to leave or be attacked with
chemical weapons. Mr. Mohani piled his relatives into a pickup truck and a car
and fled.

About four miles south of the city, the escape route was blocked. There, he
said, he saw Mr. Hussein's son-in-law, Hussein Kamal, executing people randomly
at a checkpoint. "He was telling people to get out of their cars and then he
would shoot them, shoot them until his arm was too tired to do it anymore."

The helicopter gunships returned. They hovered like lazy birds and fired.

"I had a friend from the army," Mr. Mohani said. "He was walking. Lots of people
were walking and the helicopters were shooting at them. My friend's wife was
shot in the leg. They had four kids and he and the children just sat with her,
sat with her until she died."

Scarred for Life

"Pray." That was the last thing Nasir al-Husseini's mother said to him before
the shooting started.

It was April 1991 and they had ventured out on a walk from their village of
Sadha with two 12-year-old relatives. It seemed safe. The fighting between
rebels and the forces of the government was over.

At a checkpoint, they were stopped by jittery Iraqi soldiers and arrested. Two
days later, bound and blindfolded, they were dumped in an open field with
hundreds of other people.

Mr. Husseini was only 10 at the time.

"We arrived at a place where a shovel had already made a hole," he said. "We saw
a brick factory and behind us a small canal. They started taking us out in ones
and twos."

His mother tried to keep him close, but her hands were tied and she could not
hold the children. They all stumbled into the ready-made grave.

"They were shooting at us, but I didn't get hit," Mr. Husseini said. "I was
lying on top of my mother. Then someone came down in the hole and dragged me up
by my collar and yelled, 'Shoot this kid!' I was pretending to be dead. And they
started shooting at me again, but still I didn't get hit. Then the shovel came."

He felt himself being lifted with the dirt and dropped once again into the hole.

"I rolled myself to the edge and then to a place where there were reeds and
water and the reeds were all sticking in my face," he recalled. "My body wasn't
covered with the dirt, just my head. I could breath but I didn't move. A man
came to check and was standing over the hole where everyone was buried and he
called to the shovel driver, 'Come and cover this kid.' But the driver, maybe he
didn't hear, because he didn't come.

"I could still hear the sounds of the motors of the buses but after awhile I
heard them driving away," he continued. "I listened and then there was silence.
So I lifted my head and I stood up. I saw nothing. Just a small hill where the
hole had been."

He walked toward the lights of a highway. His clothes were wet with blood. Out
of the darkness, he suddenly saw four men, apparently army deserters. "They
forced me to tell them what happened and I told them, and they said, 'Stop,
stop. Don't talk about this anymore.' We walked until we reached a small canal
and they washed my hands and clothes and face until they were sure I didn't have
any more blood or dirt on me."

The men dropped him at his aunt's house. She, too, refused to hear the story.
"She said, 'Stop saying these things. Don't talk about this anymore.' Everyone
said, 'He's lying, he's crazy.' But when my dad came back on leave from the
army, he knew I was telling the truth and he knew his family had been killed."

When people started exhuming the bodies in the Hilla field three weeks ago, Mr.
Husseini returned to his nightmare as he joined the search.

"I walked and I was pushing the dirt aside with my feet, and I saw a shirt with
bullet holes," he said as he described how he lookedfor his mother's body. "I
had something in my heart that said this was the place. But we didn't find her.
Then the neighbors said that four years ago, some Iraqi soldiers came and dug up
some of the bones to give to Iran in a prisoner exchange. I told my dad, and he
said, 'Don't go there anymore. You don't have to prove anything to me."

Mr. Husseini is 22 now, a solitary young man with a curl of dark hair falling
over his forehead.

"I never allowed myself to live all these years," he said. "Every day I thought,
now they're going to come and take me. I was always waiting."

He has no use for talk of justice or retribution. "Whatever you're going to do
to them, it won't be enough. For a long time I thought I was the only one who
lost someone. Then I saw all those people lining up and looking for their lost
people at that mass grave. And I thought, what can possibly be done to help
them?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Near a mass grave in Hilla, posters memorialized execution
victims. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)(pg. 1); Nasir al-Husseini, who was 10
when his mother died in a mass execution he escaped, remembered it as if it had
happened yesterday.; Fadel al-Shaati escaped a mass execution in 1991 after
being taken from his home at 4 a.m. by agents of Iraq's former government.;
Suriya Abdel Khader, a Shiite Muslim, visited the cell where she was detained,
she believes, because her brothers had been arrested. (Photographs by Ruth
Fremson/The New York Times)(pg. 22) Map of Iraq highlighting Hilla: The remains
of more than 3,000 Iraqis have been found in mass graves at Hilla. (pg. 22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CEMETERIES (90%); EYEWITNESSES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
GENOCIDE (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); DESERT STORM (78%); ARMIES (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (66%); RELIGION (65%); TORTURE
(61%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) SACHS, SUSAN; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); GULF STATES (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  HILLA (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 1, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Subversion Charges for China Labor Leaders

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Wednesday, Jan. 1


Two prominent labor leaders who organized demonstrations on behalf of workers at
a bankrupt state-run company in northeastern China have been charged with
"subverting state power," an offense that could result in a life sentence or the
death penalty under Chinese law, a human rights monitoring group said today.

The labor leaders, Yao Fuxin and Xiao Yunliang, helped link together disaffected
workers from numerous failed state-run businesses in the northeastern city of
Liaoyang last spring.

Street protests by as many as 30,000 laid-off workers calling for the state to
make good on unpaid pensions and to crack down on corruption rattled local
authorities because of their size and the possibility that workers from
different industries had begun cooperating in seeking better living standards.

Mr. Yao and Mr. Xiao were initially held on charges of organizing illegal
demonstrations, but the New York-based China Labor Watch said today the men
would be tried on the more serious charge of subversion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (88%); CORRUPTION (88%); STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (88%); RIOTS (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); SENTENCING (71%); LIVING STANDARDS (52%) LABOR;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

ORGANIZATION: CHINA LABOR WATCH

PERSON: YAO FUXIN; XIAO YUNLIANG

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             184 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Vietnam, Poor but Orderly, Is Now Tourists' Safe Haven

BYLINE:  By KEITH BRADSHER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 4


A generation after a war that made its jungles and rice paddies famous as places
of violence and death, Vietnam is now relying on its relative stability to draw
security-conscious foreign tourists.

The Sept. 11 attacks, followed by bombings in Bali on Oct. 12, have contributed
to a tourism boom in Vietnam that has packed upscale hotels and filled most
international flights here.

Many tourists say, and tourism industry officials agree, that they were
interested in coming anyway as Vietnam increasingly opens to the outside world.

But the tourists say that Vietnam's near absence of Muslims, who make up less
than 1 percent of the population, as well as the country's controlled Communist
society are reassuring at a time of travel warnings and attacks elsewhere.

As John and Melissa Ryan, clothing store owners from Berkeley, Calif., rode a
puttering motorboat up a palm-lined river toward Hoi An in central Vietnam a few
days ago, both said they had no worries about terrorism in Vietnam.

"It's Buddhist and Communist; I don't think the Communists would tolerate Muslim
radicals at all," Mr. Ryan said, as the boat passed traditional fishermen in
wood boats casting small, round fishing nets by hand into the muddy, slow-moving
water.

In 2001, 8.9 percent more tourists entered Vietnam than in the previous year,
even as the Sept. 11 attacks produced a sharp drop in travel to many other
countries. The number of foreign tourists rose another 12 percent in the first
11 months of 2002, compared with the same period a year earlier.

Tourism here increased despite the fact that flights to Vietnam are sparse and
expensive. Government-owned Vietnam Airlines has severely limited the number of
international flights here by foreign carriers. The limited competition has kept
ticket prices among the highest in Asia.

The tourism growth has been brisk enough to prompt the opening of new hotels,
after years of problems for the country's tourism industry. Like many countries
in Southeast Asia, Vietnam had built too many hotels in the boom of the
mid-1990's, only to have some of them close during the region's financial crisis
of 1997 and 1998.

Construction of the Sheraton Saigon Hotel and Towers and Executive Residences
complex, in what is now called Ho Chi Minh City, was completed in early 1999,
but the building was sealed up and left unfurnished. But at the end of 2001, the
owners and the management company, Six Continents, which owns the Sheraton
brand, decided to open the complex.

All but 3 of the 92 apartments have been rented, and a luxury store selling
Versace, Bulgari and Armani fashions to tourists is being opened, said Sean
Hunt, the general manager of the project. He said the 380-room hotel would open
in May.

"Vietnam is continuing to grow in popularity because it's perceived to be a safe
haven and a safe place to do business," Mr. Hunt said.

Vietnam has also preserved many old buildings, especially in cities like Hoi An
and Hanoi, as anemic economic growth, at least until recently, has discouraged
the demolition of historic neighborhoods to build skyscrapers. Parts of Hanoi
still look very French, even though Vietnam's colonial rulers left nearly half a
century ago.

Vietnam's continued poverty, especially compared with more affluent, capitalist
countries in East Asia, has made it a bargain, aside from the air fare. Taxi
rides can cost $1, while tailor-made suits sell for as little as $40, although
the quality of the stitching is sometimes suspect.

While tourism in Vietnam is booming, the number of visitors to Bali has not
fallen as much as the tourism industry there had feared.

Visits to Phuket Island, a Cancun-like resort area in a heavily Muslim area of
southern Thailand, appear to have recovered as well.

Accor S.A., the largest hotel operator in East Asia with 200 hotels, suffered a
drop of 15 to 20 percent from a year earlier in visits to its Bali hotels in
December, said David Baffsky, the chairman of the company's Asian and Pacific
operations.

But, he added, "The hotels in Bali were busier than a lot of people expected
over Christmas and particularly over New Year's."

Some human rights groups have urged tourists not to visit Myanmar, the former
Burma, to avoid providing financial support for the ruling military regime.
There has been no comparable effort by human rights groups to discourage
tourists from shifting their plans away from countries like Indonesia, which has
its own history of human rights violations.

But some travelers are skipping Thailand and Indonesia on their own initiative
after reports of security threats. In fact, some visitors to Vietnam are coming
from places with their own security concerns.

John and Sheila Bernson are Americans who live and work in Beirut, Lebanon,
which has become much quieter in recent years after a civil war and kidnappings
in the 1980's.

The couple headed straight for Vietnam for their New Year's vacation this week.

"I wouldn't even consider Phuket," Sheila Bernson said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); RELIGION (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (90%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (90%); TOURISM (90%); HOTELS & MOTELS (89%);
LODGING (89%); AIRLINES (89%); TRAVEL INDUSTRY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (89%); TRAVEL
HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (77%); AIR FARES (76%); LODGING CONSTRUCTION (76%);
BOMBINGS (73%); MARINE VESSELS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); CLOTHING &
ACCESSORIES STORES (68%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (68%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%)
TRAVEL AND VACATIONS;  ISLAM;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: VIETNAM AIRLINES (53%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (53%)

PERSON: BRADSHER, KEITH

CITY: HO CHI MINH CITY, VIETNAM (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%);
HANOI, VIETNAM (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: VIET NAM (99%); ASIA (92%); VIETNAM (92%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: VIETNAM

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             185 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Flawed Justice in Peru

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 137 words


To the Editor:

Re "Peru Court Throws Out Stringent Antiterror Laws" (news article, Jan. 4):

As a lawyer representing Lori Berenson throughout her ordeal of a military
trial, civilian "retrial" and her current appeal to the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, I wish to state that nobody should believe that the Constitutional
Court's ruling invalidating the military trials of people accused of terrorism
goes nearly far enough in reforming a flawed legal system.

The procedures used in civilian trials violate due process as well. The court
has already condemned these procedures, and yet Ms. Berenson was tried using
them after her military conviction was invalidated.

This new ruling does not put Peru's antiterrorism laws in compliance with
international standards of due process.

THOMAS H. NOOTER
New York, Jan. 7, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DUE PROCESS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAWYERS (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (88%); LITIGATION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(87%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); TERRORISM (69%)
TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

PERSON: NOOTER, THOMAS H; BERENSON, LORI

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             189 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Makeover

BYLINE:  By Scott Anderson;  Scott Anderson is a frequent contributor to the
magazine. His last cover article was about an Israeli commando unit on the West
Bank.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 4; Magazine Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 7978 words


Wearing a gold robe and matching cap, Muammar el-Qaddafi -- "the Leader," as he
is universally referred to in Libya -- paces a well-worn strip of land beside
his tent. He stares down at the bare earth as he walks, stopping occasionally to
gaze up into the surrounding trees. His is the preoccupied walk of a philosopher
thinking deep thoughts, or of an actor memorizing his lines.

An aide separates from the small pack of functionaries and bodyguards who have
approached and hurries to Qaddafi's side. He clasps Qaddafi's elbow in an oddly
collegial way and whispers in his ear. The Leader abruptly turns then, as if
taking notice of his visitors for the first time.

He is an imposing man, about six feet tall with a still-athletic build, and
though his mouth is fixed in a tentative half-smile, there is something wary in
his manner. His eyes are hidden behind brown-tinted sunglasses.

"Welcome, thank you for coming," he says in English as we shake hands, making it
sound as if this was all his idea. His smile broadens, and he places his right
hand over his heart, a traditional Arab gesture of friendship and greeting.
"Welcome."

A white plastic table and three plastic patio chairs have been arranged in the
shade of a nearby tree, and we sit there together with his interpreter while the
rest of the entourage retreats to a discreet distance. As Qaddafi settles in, a
retainer quietly comes forward to hand him a homemade fly whisk, several sprigs
of rosemary held together by a crumpled sheet of aluminum foil. Beneath his gold
robe, the Leader wears dark socks and ostrich-skin slippers.

It has been 33 years since Muammar el-Qaddafi came to power in Libya -- and for
nearly as long the West has been trying to write his epitaph. In the mid-80's,
he was Public Enemy No. 1 in the eyes of the American government, "the mad dog
of the Middle East" in Ronald Reagan's famous phrase. The financier of an
eclectic array of guerrilla groups around the globe, he was also responsible,
according to Western intelligence, for many of that era's deadliest terrorist
attacks, including, most notoriously, the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over
Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270.

Yet, today, Qaddafi seems intent on putting his checkered past behind him. Now,
rather than calling for "armed struggle" against Western imperialism, he has
re-established diplomatic and economic ties throughout Europe. Rather than
trying to destabilize his Arab neighbors, he wants to create a pan-African
confederation modeled along the lines of the European Union. He has even done an
about-face with regard to Israel. The man who once called for pushing the
"Zionists" into the sea now advocates the forming of one nation where Jews and
Palestinians would live together in peace.

"It is no longer acceptable or reasonable to say that the Jews should be thrown
into the sea," he explains. "Even if you could do it, it's not acceptable. The
solution is to join the two -- Israelis and Palestinians -- into one state,
because once a state like this is established, then the interests of both sides
are fulfilled." He pauses, gives a slight shrug. "They can call it Israetine."

There is also the hint that this new spirit of moderation has carried over into
Qaddafi's personal life. Supposedly freed from the daily demands of governance
-- he continues only as the nation's spiritual leader, he says, with no official
powers -- he is able to indulge in life's simpler pleasures.

"I have time now for horseback riding," he says. "I've always liked horses.
Also, I enjoy hunting sometimes, and I do quite a lot of reading. Also, going on
the Internet. I have a Web site."

But certainly the most significant changes have been the overtures Qaddafi has
made toward the United States. He was among the first Arab leaders to denounce
the Sept. 11 attacks, and he lent tacit approval to the American-led invasion of
Afghanistan. To the astonishment of other Arab leaders, he reportedly shared his
intelligence files on Al Qaeda with the United States to aid in the hunt for its
international operatives.

"It is strange," he muses, with an enigmatic smile, "as far as Libya is
concerned, that we find ourselves today in one trench fighting one common enemy
with America."

Just what is going on here? Has the Leader of the Revolution truly turned a new
leaf? Or is he merely playing for new advantage in his longstanding campaign
against the West? Is Qaddafi one of the Middle East's most astute and visionary
thinkers -- as many throughout the developing world believe -- or is he simply
an actor declaiming lines he believes his audience wants to hear?

Qaddafi's official residence in Tripoli lies in the innermost ring of the Bab
el-Azziziya Barracks in the southern suburbs. Other residences exist for the
famously peripatetic Leader in other parts of Libya, but it is here that he
normally conducts his business when in Tripoli.

The barracks is virtually a city unto itself, a sprawling warren of walls and
fortified bunkers and multistory buildings, and in its alleyways young children
-- presumably the offspring of billeted officers -- play soccer and ride bikes.
At the heart of the compound, past three rings of checkpoints manned by
black-bereted commandos and plainclothes security men, is Qaddafi's inner
sanctum, a roughly circular plot of land of some 10 acres girdled by watchtowers
and an eight-foot concrete wall.

It is a surprisingly modest complex, bordering on the ratty, dominated by a
round, dome-shaped building that resembles nothing as much as one of those
awkward visitors' centers built in American national parks during the 60's. Off
to one corner is Qaddafi's Bedouin tent, a sprawling, low-slung affair, with an
RV parked alongside. Upon this humble tableau, the Leader has added a few
embellishments. Eight camels wander about the unkempt grounds, while just
outside the tent three oversize birdhouses accommodate a flock of homing
pigeons.

A few hundred yards away is another curious sight: a three-story building with
much of its facade shorn off, dangling ceiling tiles and electrical wires
visible through its gaping holes. At one time, this was Qaddafi's official
residence in Bab el-Azziziya. On the morning of April 15, 1986, however,
American warplanes destroyed the building in retaliation for a bombing in Berlin
that had been linked to Libyan agents; the attack took the life of Qaddafi's
adopted 15-month-old daughter and very nearly killed the Leader himself. Ever
since, the ruins have been preserved as a kind of monument to American perfidy
-- with the implicit suggestion that Qaddafi, too, has been the victim of
terrorism -- and are a favored backdrop for his infrequent media appearances.

Sitting with Qaddafi is an odd experience. He still possesses enough of the
androgynous good looks and theatrical flair from his heyday in the 70's and 80's
to make him instantly recognizable. From certain angles, he bears an eerie
resemblance to that other aging former bad-boy celebrity, Mick Jagger.

Yet there is a kind of studied languor about Qaddafi that, initially, seems
quite at odds with his firebrand reputation. As he sat at the table outside his
tent, he spoke in a soft whisper, barely above a mumble, and his gestures were
noticeably slow and deliberate. Was this an indication of the manic-depressive
diagnosis his enemies have long sought to place on him or proof of his mystic,
otherworldly aura -- or, for that matter, a bit of role-playing designed to
produce that aura? In repose, he tilts his chin up at such an unnatural angle
that it invites comparisons to his nation's greatest archvillain, Benito
Mussolini. Another sign of his ethereal, off-in-the-clouds ways or, as some
suggest, an attempt by a vain man to mask the wrinkles on his 60-year-old neck?
And just what's with the hat and fancy dress? Supporting evidence to those
rumors that he's gay? But how to reconcile those rumors with others that have
him down as a world-class womanizer, the Jack Kennedy of the Sahara, or with the
official line that lists him as a doting husband and father to his seven
children?

But the longer one spends in Qaddafi's company, the more certain clues peek
through. Behind the partial camouflage of his sunglasses and despite the aloof
tilt of his head, he keeps intent watch over whoever is before him. As he grows
more comfortable in a conversation, his voice takes on timbre and his gestures
become more animated, and he will even occasionally indulge in a bit of
self-deprecating wit. What emerges is the portrait of an extremely guarded and
deliberate man, one who reveals of himself only what he wants to.

In fact, this has always been a hallmark of his personality. In the wake of the
1969 junior-officers coup that brought him to power, Qaddafi, then a mere
27-year-old lieutenant in the signal corps, waited for more than a week before
publicly announcing himself as its leader. And it was subsequently disclosed
that this had been no spur-of-the-moment power grab but rather a conspiracy more
than a decade in the making, dating all the way back to the day a teenage
Qaddafi picked up a copy of the Egyptian President Gamal Nasser's revolutionary
treatise "Philosophy of the Revolution" and began planning his own Nasserite
revolt with like-minded schoolmates. However much this tale, with its curious
blend of zeal and caution, has been officially embroidered, it is obviously the
way Qaddafi wishes to be viewed: implacable, a careful schemer, a man who likes
to keep others in the dark for as long as possible.

"My very first impression of him was that he was extraordinarily intelligent,"
recalls David Mack, a junior American diplomat in Libya at the time of the 1969
coup and now the vice president of the Middle East Institute in Washington. "He
clearly had this very strong charismatic hold over the other junior officers,
and he spoke in this high, literary Arabic form that was very unusual among
Libyans. But there was also something quite strange about him. He possessed a
near-total recall from one meeting to the next, but at the same time he seemed
to have a hard time keeping his attention focused. In the middle of meetings,
you'd feel him just kind of drift off, and it was very difficult to tell what it
meant."

One trait that Qaddafi shares with Saddam Hussein of Iraq is reclusiveness -- in
a nation of about five million people, it seems few Libyans have ever actually
seen the Leader in person -- so I carefully watched the interactions between him
and his immediate retinue, the small handful of men who deal with him on a daily
basis. In photographs taken of Saddam Hussein's inner circle, his aides appear
pale and frozen-smiled, a collection of dead-men-walking awaiting the next
purge. Among those around Qaddafi, by contrast, there was an excited air that
veered toward the giddy, as if they were in the presence of some A-list
celebrity and still couldn't quite believe their good luck.

It would be hard to imagine any nation that has undergone a more radical
transformation than Libya has under Qaddafi. As late as the 1950's, it ranked as
one of the poorest nations on earth -- and one of the most thoroughly dominated
by foreigners. Whatever wealth did exist lay largely in the hands of some
110,000 Italian "settlers," while a pliant, Western-installed king had made the
nation home to a profusion of foreign military bases, including Wheelus Field,
the biggest American air base outside the United States. Even the exploitation
of vast oil deposits in the eastern desert only accelerated Libya's vassal
status, with huge tracts of the country going under lease to Western oil
companies. For a young Arab nationalist like Qaddafi, the son of a Bedouin
shepherd and the first member of his family to attend secondary school, the way
forward was clear: revolution.

"We couldn't even consider Libya an independent country at that time," he
recalled, referring to his fellow conspirators in the 1969 coup. "We felt it was
our duty to liberate the country from the foreigners."

With broad popular support, Colonel Qaddafi and his Revolutionary Command
Council shut down the foreign bases and ordered the Italian settlers from the
country; in grisly payback for Mussolini's savage colonial war of the 1920's, in
which an estimated quarter of the Libyan population died, they ordered the
graves of Italian soldiers dug up and their bodies hauled away. When the foreign
oil companies balked at Libyan demands for a greater share of profits, the
military junta simply began nationalizing the oil fields.

At the same time, Qaddafi set out to propel his country into the 20th century.
Bankrolled by a flood of oil money, schools and clinics and public housing
complexes were built in the most remote reaches of the nation, sparking a
sweeping social transformation that vastly enhanced the average Libyan's
standard of living. In deference to the conservative Muslim clerics who still
held great sway, alcohol and Western music were banned, but at the same time,
Qaddafi brought about the emancipation of women; today, many urban women in
Libya have dispensed with even the minimal Muslim head scarf and, according to
Libyan authorities, women compose slightly more than half of all university
students.

In a land riven by fierce clan loyalties and regional factionalism, such massive
social upheaval naturally sparked resistance, and Qaddafi made it clear he
wasn't interested in any free-ranging debate. Real and imagined "enemies of the
people" were imprisoned and occasionally executed, while a vast network of
secret policemen and informers kept watch for "reactionaries," a category broad
enough to include Muslim fundamentalists, covetous fellow army officers and
members of the Westernized business class. As intrigues and coup attempts
multiplied, Qaddafi developed a pattern of constantly transferring military and
government officials from post to post and endlessly redrawing administrative
boundaries -- inflicting a certain chaos on the country but also ensuring that
no one had the means to build a power base that might challenge his.

To all this, the American government was initially sanguine. Under the Nixon
administration, the United States was primarily interested in Qaddafi's strong
anti-Communist stance -- and, of course, Libya's light, low-sulfur crude -- so
what the colonel chose to do in his spare time was considered his business.
According to published reports, the American ambassador in Tripoli went so far
as to betray a group of coup-plotting officers in the Libyan Army in 1971, first
professing support for their plan and then handing their names over to Qaddafi.

But then Qaddafi's ambitions began to spill over Libya's borders. Taking up the
mantle of pan-Arab leader, Qaddafi zealously pursued the dream of forming a
United Arab Republic with a host of other Middle Eastern and African countries,
and if his oil largess didn't sufficiently turn other leaders to his way of
thinking, the colonel appeared ready to try for regime change. Throughout the
region in the 70's came persistent accusations of internal meddling by Libyan
agents, including the financing of guerrilla groups and assassination squads. By
the end of that decade, Libya had fought wars with Egypt and Chad and had been
accused of fomenting revolt in Tunisia.

What truly drew American ire, however, was Qaddafi's leadership role in the
devastating 1973 Arab oil embargo and his calls for the annihilation of the
state of Israel. In the wake of the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, Libya became a safe
haven for a variety of violent Palestinian guerrilla groups, notably Abu Nidal's
Fatah Revolutionary Council, which used the country as a base for brazen attacks
against targets in Western Europe. At the same time, Qaddafi was tilting Libya
into the Warsaw Pact camp, buying billions of dollars of sophisticated Soviet
weaponry and inviting in Soviet advisers, while giving support to a host of
armed "liberation movements" around the world, including leftist guerrillas in
Angola and Mozambique, the I.R.A. in Northern Ireland, the Basque group ETA in
Spain and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in the Philippines. By the end of
the 70's, training camps situated in the Libyan desert were home to a virtual
model United Nations of malcontents -- reportedly including Japanese Red Army
"soldiers" next to Yemeni socialists next to members of West Germany's
Baader-Meinhof Gang -- while Libyan agents waged an assassination campaign
against Libyan dissidents in the United States and Europe. And through it all
was the smiling countenance of Muammar el-Qaddafi in his sunglasses and
outlandish costumes, hobnobbing with Idi Amin, playing gracious host in Tripoli
to visitors seemingly handpicked off Interpol's most-wanted list.

"I think he was enjoying himself immensely," says Mansour El-Kikhia, a Libyan
emigre who teaches international relations at the University of Texas in San
Antonio and who has long been one of Qaddafi's staunchest critics. "Think of it.
You have $10 billion a year at your disposal to do with what you want. Every
word you utter is God-given. Twenty-four hours a day, you see your face
plastered everywhere. It's the ultimate power trip, and after a while the only
way to satisfy it is to keep getting more."

By the 80's, however, Qaddafi had drawn the enmity of a powerful new adversary
in President Ronald Reagan. While diplomatic relations with Libya had been
scaled back under President Carter, Reagan severed them completely and then set
out to lure Qaddafi into a confrontation by testing Libyan territorial claims
off the country's Mediterranean coast. When Qaddafi took the bait, American
planes shot down two Libyan fighters. Before the end of his first year in
office, Reagan ordered all Americans remaining in Libya -- some 1,500, mostly
oil workers -- to leave or face legal action, and in 1982 he placed a blanket
embargo on Libyan oil.

At first, this seemed only to goad Qaddafi to further adventurism against the
West. During an anti-Qaddafi demonstration in London in 1984, shots fired from
inside the Libyan Embassy killed a British policewoman. The next year,
Palestinian terrorists hijacked the Achille Lauro, an Italian cruise ship,
killing one elderly American. The mastermind was later given a hero's welcome in
Tripoli, and the United States charged Libya with involvement in the operation.
On April 5, 1986, came the bombing of La Belle disco in West Berlin in which a
Turkish woman and two American serviceman were killed, an attack that the C.I.A.
quickly concluded was the handiwork of Libyan agents and that precipitated the
American bombing that destroyed Qaddafi's home in the Bab el-Azziziya Barracks.

Thereafter, Libya became noticeably quieter, although not -- as American and
British investigators would conclude -- reformed. On the night of Dec. 21, 1988,
Pan Am Flight 103 was blown apart over the Scottish village of Lockerbie,
killing all 259 on board and another 11 on the ground. After a massive
three-year criminal investigation, two Libyan intelligence agents were charged
as the principal conspirators. When Libya refused to hand the men over for trial
in Scotland, the United States and Great Britain led a successful campaign in
the United Nations for international sanctions. Although the U.N. sanctions were
not nearly as sweeping as those already in place by the United States -- the
U.N. imposed a travel ban and an embargo against oil-industry spare parts and
technology -- they had the effect of virtually isolating Libya from the rest of
the world. And just like that, with a speed and thoroughness that few had
imagined, Qaddafi and his rogue state seemed to fairly fall off the map.

But just what caused Libya to suddenly go quiet? The answer, it seems, might
provide lessons on how to handle other regimes that the United States finds
troublesome, like those of Iraq and North Korea, and might suggest solutions far
less messy than military invasion. Unfortunately, among Libyan experts, no
single answer emerges.

"I think it was probably a combination of factors," says Mary-Jane Deeb, an Arab
specialist at the Library of Congress. "Certainly, the U.N. sanctions were a big
factor, in that Libya was now a true pariah state. Qaddafi could no longer play
the David versus Goliath game, because the whole world was against him. At the
same time, world oil prices had dropped significantly, so he simply didn't have
the kind of money to throw around like before, and the sanctions compounded this
by making everything much more expensive in Libya. Also, Qaddafi has just gotten
older. He is no longer the young firebrand he once was, and if not wiser, he has
certainly grown more sedate. I think for a long time he has yearned to be seen
as a kind of elder statesmen in the region, and that can't happen when you've
been essentially quarantined."

A darker view is taken by El-Kikhia, the Libyan exile at the University of
Texas. "Qaddafi is a master of illusion," he argues, "and he learned very early
on who to antagonize and who not to. After Lockerbie, it was not fashionable to
overtly support terrorism. His novelty had worn off in Europe; all his neighbors
were fed up with him and happy to see him put in a box -- they certainly weren't
going to help him break the sanctions -- so now he has to reinvent himself once
again. So he becomes a changed man, a man of peace, a defender of human rights."
El-Kikhia gives a bitter little laugh. "I always believed that lying was a
learned trait, but with Qaddafi I believe it is genetic."

Perhaps the only person who could provide a truly authoritative explanation for
Libya's shift is Qaddafi himself, but on this point, he preferred to deal in
abstractions. "The history of mankind is not fixed," he offered, "and it does
not go at one pace. Sometimes it moves at a steady pace, and sometimes it is
very fast. It is very flexible all the time. The past stage was the era of
nationalism -- of the identity of one nation -- and now, suddenly, that has
changed. It is the era of globalization, and there are many new factors which
are mapping out the world."

In the heart of Tripoli lies Green Square, a massive expanse of asphalt
illuminated late into the night by powerful floodlights. In the evenings, flower
sellers line the curb to offer their wares, and half a dozen photographers --
each with his own brightly-painted ornamental carriage and sad-looking baby
gazelle -- patiently await customers. Despite these small touches of life, the
overall sensation is of standing in an emptying stadium parking lot.

On one side of Green Square is the old Ottoman citadel, now a very fine
archaeological museum, and immediately behind it lies the old medina, a vast
labyrinth of alleys and small shops that still retain some of the exoticness of
old North Africa. On the wall leading into the medina are two enormous banners,
one depicting a map of Africa with Libya outlined in a golden light and the
other showing a stern-faced Qaddafi looming sphinxlike over a desert scene.

While such personality-cult icons are a common feature of many Arab and African
nations, those in Libya are fundamentally different. Rather than merely
extolling the virtues or eternal wisdom of the leader, nearly all the Qaddafi
icons carry a broader exhortation to the Libyan people, with the Leader's
unsmiling visage serving as a kind of visual punctuation to the message. Today,
most of these exhortations have to do either with the fabulous benefits that
have derived from the Great Man-Made River Project, a colossal water-collection
scheme under way in the Libyan desert, or those to come from Qaddafi's newest
passion, the creation of the African Union.

"Libya goes forward in union with Africa," Qaddafi reminds Libyans from a
billboard on the road in from the Tripoli airport. The front of the new 20-dinar
note carries a group portrait of Qaddafi and some 40 other African leaders,
while the back carries a detailed map of the Great Man-Made River Project
pipelines. The overall effect is to render Qaddafi not as glorious idol but
rather as indefatigable teacher.

It is, in fact, this very aspect of Qaddafi's rule that can induce a rather
profound sense of disjuncture in the visitor, for there is very little about the
Libyan people to indicate a natural fit with either his steely determination or
his grand ambitions. Most Libyans tend to be a decidedly relaxed and easygoing
bunch, well attuned to the Mediterranean ethos that mandates spending great
stretches of time sitting in cafes. They seem to have difficulty recalling that
the West in general and the United States in particular are their historical
foes; Libyans of all ages readily approach foreigners on the street and are
delighted when they happen to stumble upon an American.

Despite their easy friendliness, there is an opaqueness -- or perhaps it is just
exhaustion -- surrounding most Libyans. Over the past 33 years, they have seen
their standard of living soar and then plummet and just now, with the suspension
of the U.N. sanctions in 1999, start to creep back up again. They have had to
grapple with countless generations of exhorting billboards, only to see those
exhortations suddenly change: denunciations of Communism followed by expressions
of friendship and solidarity with the Soviet Union; the government of
neighboring Egypt as friend, enemy, friend, enemy and now friend again. Not
surprisingly, it makes it hard to gauge what Libyans truly feel about their
leader. During the many casual chats I had on the streets of Tripoli, I probed
for at least a vague range of opinion on Qaddafi, but the universal response I
received was one of admiration, a hint of national pride.

"Herodotus wrote that all new ideas come out of the desert," a young computer
technician named Ali cheerily declared outside an Internet cafe in Tripoli.
"With the Leader, we can see that this is really true."

This could, of course, be attributed to conditioning; given the pervasive
informant apparatus in Libya, people may have learned to keep their thoughts on
Qaddafi to themselves. At the same time, Libya is not North Korea, either in
terms of its security apparatus or its isolation. A great many Libyans have
traveled and lived abroad. Customers crowd the Internet cafes, and an even
greater number have access to satellite television and CNN.

"I think you would find that all Libyans like the Leader very much," Ali said
when I pressed him on the topic. "Both because we live better than our neighbors
and because he has raised our standing in the world. Because of him, all the
world knows about Libya."

Ali raised some valid points. Despite the deprivations imposed in the 90's by
the sanctions, Libya still has one of the highest per-capita incomes in Africa
and a far more equitable distribution of that income than most nations,
including the United States. As for media exposure, how much ink has Morocco, a
country with six times the population, garnered over the past 30 years?

This point was touched on by an Italian businessman, speaking on condition of
anonymity, who has worked and traveled extensively in Libya over the past 20
years. "Qaddafi has made this place famous," he explained. "I've never met a
Libyan who thought he was perfect -- they're quite aware of some of the stupid
things he's gotten them involved in -- but I think most have a deep affection
for him for the way he has stood up to the West. You can't forget that Libya
before was a totally forgotten, beaten-down nation, and he changed that."

This fact was demonstrated anew when the Italian prime minister, Silvio
Berlusconi, came to Tripoli. The relationship between Libya and Italy has always
been a paradoxical one, with Libyan fondness for its closest European neighbor
complicated by a seething resentment for the horrific violence inflicted on them
by Italian soldiers during the colonial conquest. Qaddafi has repeatedly
demanded reparations for Italy's colonial misdeeds. Although the Italians have
not yet agreed to make any payments, they are increasingly anxious over veiled
Libyan threats to limit oil shipments. While Berlusconi's one-day visit was
billed as a courtesy call, certainly one pressing item on his agenda was to
mollify Qaddafi on the reparations question, and it was largely in hopes of a
breakthrough that some 40 Italian journalists flew into Tripoli with the prime
minister. They were in for a very frustrating day.

As Berlusconi was whisked off to Qaddafi's headquarters in Bab el-Azziziya, the
attendant journalists followed aboard a government-supplied bus. Once past the
barracks' three checkpoint perimeters, they were permitted into the inner
compound, there to catch only a brief and very distant glimpse of the two
leaders -- Qaddafi, resplendent in a purple robe, towering over the diminutive
Berlusconi -- strolling along a path. After about an hour of this, the
journalists were herded up and bused over to the Al Kabir Hotel, where they
spent the long afternoon milling about the lobby, collecting whatever stray bits
of news or rumor were afforded them. It was only when the bus suddenly
reappeared around 8 p.m. to return them to Bab el-Azziziya that their spirits
lifted.

During the ride, some journalists speculated that they were on their way to a
photo-op session with the two leaders, while the more optimistic suspected a
joint statement announcing that the reparations dispute had been resolved. As it
turned out, everyone was wrong. Once admitted to the inner compound, the
journalists were led across the grounds to the three-story ruins of Qaddafi's
old home. Across its shattered facade, floodlights illuminated an enormous
banner touting something called the Miss Net World beauty contest, with its
hopeful slogan: "Beauty Will Save the World." Within the building's front hall
stood the 22 beauty contestants -- along with the two Lebanese-Ukrainian
brothers who were the pageant's promoters -- posing for photographs amid the
detritus of shrapnel and shattered furniture. Rather than being off somewhere
hammering out a deal with Berlusconi, Qaddafi had apparently spent much of the
evening chatting with the beauty contestants in his Bedouin tent.

"It was really great," exclaimed Tecca Zendik, a statuesque 19-year-old from
Southern California who represented the United States in the pageant. "He was
very nice and really humble. They had put out this special chair for him, but
instead he sat in this ordinary plastic chair like everyone else."

"And the tent was really amazing," added Miss United Kingdom, Lucy Layton. "It
had these beautiful carpets and these silk tapestries on the walls. It was like
something out of 'Arabian Nights."'

It appeared there had also been a bit of drama in the tent. When Qaddafi began a
critique of American policy toward his country, including the 1986 air attack
that killed his infant daughter, Tecca grew emotional and began to cry. Taking
notice, Qaddafi moved her to the seat beside him and comfortingly patted her
hand as he continued his talk.

"He wants me to come back again tomorrow night," Tecca said, looking as if she
might start crying again. "I mean, this is all kind of overwhelming. I've never
been out of the States before, and here I am meeting Qaddafi."

At some point, a rumor circulated among the bewildered journalists that
Berlusconi, having failed to settle the reparations issue, had already left for
Rome.

Over the next several days, the Tecca-Leader friendship blossommed: she was
invited back to Bab el-Azziziya; he autographed a copy of his famous "Green
Book" for her. While it was pretty obvious to everyone that Qaddafi was doing
this for political reasons -- since the United States doesn't have official
diplomatic relations with Libya, having Tecca in town was something of a coup --
it began fueling resentment within the small and, until now, close Miss Net
World community, with some contestants fearing the fix was in for a Tecca
victory. (That conspiracy theory was later dispelled: the crown went to Miss
United Kingdom.)

As all of this went on, I tried to imagine what ordinary Libyans might make of
it. Weird? Maybe. Embarrassing? Perhaps. But recalling my conversation with Ali,
the young computer technician, I suspected there must also have been something
kind of thrilling about it. Along with the dark, sad places Qaddafi has taken
them, it must be kind of cool to have a leader who would send a visiting head of
state away empty-handed while a 19-year-old girl from Southern California got
two meetings and an autographed book.

During our conversation outside the Bab el-Azziziya tent, one of the Leader's
aides approached with a tray of drinks: Arabic coffees, lemonades and sodas.
Qaddafi waited for his guest to be served and then took a glass of plain water,
which he didn't touch. Periodically during the interview, he brushed lazily at
the air with his homemade fly whisk. A light breeze carried the odor of sheep
dung from a nearby scattering -- which was puzzling, for in three visits to Bab
el-Azziziya I never saw a sheep.

Any suggestion that Qaddafi is, in fact, insane would seem to be discounted
simply by his longevity in office. Further doubt was raised by the very careful
way he recounted his past, freely acknowledging those murky episodes that are
now common knowledge and "forgiven," while gliding away from those that might
still cause him trouble. For example, when I asked about his longstanding
support of the I.R.A. -- British intelligence says that tens of millions of
dollars worth of Libyan-supplied weapons flowed to the guerrilla group in the
70's and 80's -- he deftly converted the question into an illustration of how he
is actually a man of peace.

"The ultimate objective of supporting an armed struggle," he said, "is to bring
a problem to a conclusion, a peaceful solution. So when I saw that the British
and Irish were talking to each other, that there was a chance to solve this
problem by peaceful means, then there was no longer justification to keep giving
support for armed action."

On more sensitive matters, Qaddafi made use of a handy protective shield: he
holds no official position in the Libyan government; Libya is ruled by "the
masses"; he can't be expected to know everything that goes on.

He also pointed out the elasticity of labels like "terrorism," arguing that he
himself was its target in the 1986 American airstrike on Tripoli. It was on this
particular topic that Qaddafi came as close to a tirade as at any time that I
spent with him.

"For a superpower like America to elect somebody like Reagan, somebody who would
do something like that?" He waved a hand in the direction of his ruined former
home. "To kill a girl that was only 1 1/2 as she was asleep in her bed? I mean,
for America to choose a president like this, a man who is not stable in his
mind, it seems a lack of discipline in choosing who will be president. I don't
know of any other society that, because somebody is, let's say, a good boxer,
beloved by young people, he would be chosen president. O.K., he's a good boxer,
say hello to him, applaud him, but don't make him president of the country. And
it's not just me saying this. So many people are frightened by this, they put
their hand on their heart because of what might happen in the future."

To this glitch in the American political system, the Leader offered a novel
solution.

"It would be better for America to eliminate the elections and the president and
all that," he said. "They should have people's congresses, people's committees,
a jamahiriya" -- or "state of the masses," the organ that officially governs
Libya -- "in America. This way, the American people would have the power, and if
that happened, I'm sure they wouldn't be crazy, that they'd be good people."

Given Qaddafi's deadpan manner, it was hard to tell whether he was being serious
-- but then, that has always been difficult with the Leader. After the 1997
Paris car crash that killed Princess Diana and Dodi al-Fayed, for example,
Qaddafi charged that they had actually been murdered by British intelligence
agents, and he demanded those agents be extradited to Libya to stand trial.
Although this item ran in British and American newspapers as new proof of
Qaddafi's lunacy, it is far more likely that he was engaging in a rather
complicated joke, drawing a parallel to the two Libyan intelligence agents that
Great Britain wanted extradited to stand trial for the Lockerbie bombing.
Likewise, his suggestion to me that once the Israelis and Palestinians got it
together and formed the state of Israetine, they could join the Arab League.

"They can take our place," he said with a shrug and a soft chuckle, "because
we're leaving."

Where Libya is leaving to -- and on this point, too, Qaddafi could become quite
expansive -- is the African Union.

The Leader described his new focus on Africa as a logical step of political and
economic evolution: the moving out from the epoch of nationalism into that of
regional integration. But Qaddafi clearly has more personal motives. He well
remembers that it was his African neighbors to the south, rather than his Arab
brethren, who came to Libya's aid during the hard days of the U.N. embargo. And
after three decades of offering himself up as a pan-Arab leader only to be
constantly rebuffed, perhaps he'll have better luck as a pan-African one; in the
months before the inaugural African Union meeting in Durban, South Africa, he
made a rather naked attempt to wrest the leadership away from President Thabo
Mbeki of South Africa.

The problem is, his people don't really seem to get it. Separated from black
Africa by the vastness of the Sahara, most Libyans regard themselves as Libyan
first, then as Arab, then as Mediterranean; being African rarely makes the list.
It's something even Qaddafi's most steadfast loyalists have difficulty with.
Shortly after delivering a party-line argument for why Libyans wholly embrace
their African heritage and future, an Information Ministry official made an
offhand slip when describing the mosquitoes that dwell in the central desert.
"They're huge," he said, "but they don't carry disease, like in Africa."

Among the Tripoli cognoscenti -- or the cynical -- there is a quiet conviction
that Qaddafi's pan-African passion, too, will eventually slide away, especially
as the effects of the lifting of the U.N. sanctions fully filter through the
economy and Libyans re-establish their traditional links across the
Mediterranean. What would truly bury it, many suggest, is the day that the
United States and Libya finally end their long standoff and normalize relations.

The very first roadblock toward that day, however, can be summed up in one word:
Lockerbie.

At its mention, Qaddafi released a dispirited sigh.

"You see," he muttered, "this Lockerbie issue, it's an old issue, from the past.
We should have found a solution to it once and for all a long time ago. It
doesn't benefit any of us to keep chewing the cud over Lockerbie, talking about
it all the time."

In Qaddafi's view, the matter should have been settled once Libya handed over
the two Libyans indicted in the case, something it finally did in 1999 (one was
ultimately convicted by a court in the Netherlands; the other, acquitted). But
while this brought a suspension of the U.N. sanctions, it didn't affect the
parallel American measures.

That is because handing over the suspects was only one of four new conditions
the American government tacked onto its pre-existing Libya sanctions after
Lockerbie. Another was for Libya to make financial restitution to the victims'
families (a process it is now apparently near finalizing; the proposed
settlement is for $10 million per victim, for a total $2.7 billion), and another
was that it officially acknowledge responsibility for the bombing. This last
condition has now emerged as the major sticking point, for the Libyans maintain
that the charge simply isn't true. For its part, the American government is
adamant that such an acknowledgment is nonnegotiable.

"We have made it absolutely clear to the Libyans that all four of these
conditions have to be fulfilled before we can begin to address any other
bilateral issues," a State Department official involved in Libya policy says,
speaking on condition of anonymity. "There's no bargaining, no Northwest Passage
around this, as far as we're concerned."

In Washington, there is a small but growing movement to gradually restore
relations with Libya -- certainly the oil companies would love to get back to
business -- and an increasing impatience with what some view as intransigence on
the administration's part. The mea culpa provision in the Lockerbie conditions
is a case in point.

"I don't think there's any question that Libya and Qaddafi have fundamentally
changed over the past decade," says Milton Viorst, a journalist and Arab
scholar, "and it's largely come about due to some very smart and successful
policies the American government carried out. The problem is that we now seem
incapable of capitalizing on that success." If the Libyans settle the Lockerbie
reparations issue, Viorst continued, "that in itself should be seen as an
acknowledgment of responsibility. It's unreasonable to expect them to get naked
in public on this."

That sentiment is echoed by David Mack of the Middle East Institute: "I think we
now have a great opportunity to make Libya an example in that part of the world
of the very doctrine Bush has talked about. Let's turn it from a country that
once sponsored terrorism and show the real benefits to be derived from
renouncing that and standing with us."

This rehabilitation process is already nearly completed in Europe. In 1999,
Libya settled claims brought by France over the 1989 bombing of a UTA commercial
plane over Niger that killed 170, an attack that was linked to Libyan agents but
that, by the terms of the $33 million settlement, required no overt admission of
guilt. Libya has negotiated a settlement with Britain over the case of Yvonne
Fletcher, the policewoman killed during the Libyan Embassy demonstration in
1984, a move that led to resumption of full diplomatic relations between the two
nations. Italy and Libya have developed an entire network of economic and
cultural ties.

No doubt economics is one impetus behind these moves by the Europeans. Oil isn't
getting any more plentiful in the world, Libya is sitting on a lot of what's
left and so oil-poor Europe has a strong incentive to make nice.

There is a deeper issue at work as well. Perhaps because of their geographical
proximity to Libya and the rest of the Arab world, Europeans have come to view
Muammar el-Qaddafi as a man who has long waged battle against the danger now
facing everyone else: Muslim extremism. As far back as the 70's, he regarded the
Muslim Brotherhood, then a nascent fundamentalist movement, as a menace and
rooted its members from the country. In 1986, he reportedly closed down 48
Muslim institutions around Libya, charging that they were fronts for extremists;
in 2000, he made similar accusations when he unleashed his secret police against
opposition figures at the university in Benghazi, killing several and
imprisoning dozens more. The fundamentalists have never been particularly fond
of Qaddafi, either; by most estimates, they have been responsible for a sizable
portion of the many assassination attempts made on him over the years. As a
result, it is not just Qaddafi who talks of Libya being in "one trench" with the
West in the campaign against fundamentalist terrorism, but many Europeans, too.

"The world has become a very dangerous place," a European diplomat in Tripoli
says, "and when you look at Qaddafi today, I think you have to remember that old
adage, that the enemy of your enemy is your friend. Unfortunately, the Americans
are very slow to think this way."

Maybe so. Then again, maybe all those who would urge a new spirit of American
rapprochement toward Libya are rather missing the true focus of the debate. As
the Bush administration has made increasingly clear, it has a number of other
issues to take up with the Libyans even after any settlement on Lockerbie.

"Certainly, one enormous concern of ours," the State Department official says,
"is their involvement in developing weapons of mass destruction. Beyond that, we
also have major concerns about their human rights record."

In May, in a landmark speech titled "Beyond the Axis of Evil," Under Secretary
of State John R. Bolton expanded the list of American enemies to include Libya,
calling it a "rogue state" that is seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, an
accusation the Libyans heatedly deny. Over the past six months, C.I.A. analysts
have repeatedly suggested that Libya is pursuing the development of biological
and chemical weapons. And despite administration acknowledgment that Libya has
largely severed its ties to terrorist groups, its "residual contacts" with some
of those groups led to its inclusion on the State Department's 2002 list of
nations that sponsor terrorism. If all of this is reminiscent of the campaign
against Saddam Hussein, it may not be coincidental.

"I think Qaddafi has very good reasons to be nervous," says a political analyst
who often takes part in policy discussions on Libya at the State Department.
"The administration's attention right now is almost totally focused on Iraq, but
after that, Libya is either No. 2 or No. 3 on the list of nations the
hard-liners want to go after." The analyst recalls a meeting on Libya he
recently attended at the State Department. "The topic turned to the issue of
Lockerbie, and the seniormost official in the room said, 'Well, let's hope
Qaddafi deals with it while there's still time.' There was no ambiguity in what
he meant, but just in case someone didn't get it, he said it twice."

To the analyst, who has spent much of his career studying Libya, what he is now
most struck by is Qaddafi's suddenly straitened circumstances. "I'm just not
sure that he has that much to offer the United States," the analyst says. "O.K.,
he's anti-fundamentalist, but so are a lot of other Arab countries, and the
primary target of any Libyan fundamentalists who are still around is not the
United States but Qaddafi himself. Oil? The U.S. has gotten along quite nicely
without Libyan oil for 20 years. Against that, you have this enormous litany of
things he has done in the past that the U.S. may just never be in the mood to
forgive."

Traces of this appraisal are echoed by the State Department official. While
refusing to speculate on any future American action against Libya, he allows
that Qaddafi faces a daunting task in ever fully mending fences with the United
States. "He has a lot of strikes against him. He's made a number of positive
steps in recent years, but there's still a tremendous amount that he needs to
do."

Then again, Qaddafi has seen himself as a marked man since virtually the day he
took power, and yet somehow he has managed to survive 33 years of internal
intrigue, assassination attempts and radically shifting geopolitical alliances.
He has also already outlasted six American presidents, and if he is at all
nervous about outlasting this one, it appears tempered by a certain wily
confidence.

Sitting outside his tent in Bab el-Azziziya, Qaddafi even felt comfortable
enough to cast his own small element of doubt over his long, slow journey toward
rehabilitation in the eyes of the world. When I asked how he would like to be
remembered, he started with a platitudinous answer: "I would hope that people
would feel that I haven't been selfish, that I have even forsaken myself in
order to please and to help others. I do hope people would say that." But then
Qaddafi stopped and gave a low chuckle. "And I do hope that I have actually been
like this in reality."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Qaddafi in his residential compound in Tripoli.; The Libyans
put on a show for the visiting Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi.
Qaddafi has turned the results of a 1986 American bombing attack into a monument
to Western treachery. (Paolo Pellegrin/Magnum for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (84%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (65%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (65%); HIJACKING (65%);
BOMBINGS (64%); AIRLINES (64%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (61%); AL-QAEDA (60%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (60%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (60%); EUROPEAN UNION
(60%) BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  EUROPE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-LIBYA;
LIBYA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  EMBARGOES AND
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
EUROPEAN UNION; PAN AMERICAN WORLD AIRWAYS INC; UNITED NATIONS; AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP); STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SILVIO BERLUSCONI (59%) ANDERSON, SCOTT; QADDAFI, MUAMMAR EL- (COL);
BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (89%); TRIPOLI, LIBYA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (89%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); AFRICA (92%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); ISRAEL (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); ITALY (79%)

REGION: LIBYA;  EUROPE;  AFRICA;  NEW YORK CITY;  LOCKERBIE (SCOTLAND)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             190 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's Relentless Repression

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 377 words


China's new generation of Communist leaders seems determined to pick up where
its aging mentors left off, by putting peaceful protest leaders on trial for
their lives. Court proceedings began last week against Yao Fuxin and Xiao
Yunliang, two labor activists from the city of Liaoyang, in northeast China's
rust belt, who last year led huge worker protests demanding unpaid wages and
benefits. Such demonstrations are perfectly legal under the Chinese
Constitution. But the widely covered Liaoyang events embarrassed Beijing, and
Mr. Yao and Mr. Xiao were charged with subversion, which carries a potential
death penalty.

Beijing's refusal to tolerate legal, nonviolent protests mocks its claims to
uphold the rule of law and could encourage more-unruly expressions of
discontent. China's market reforms, though necessary, have brought severe
hardships to workers in unprofitable state factories like Liaoyang's textile and
metallurgy plants. The failure of authorities to respond more sympathetically
shows how little Communist leaders care about the workers and peasants in whose
name Mao's revolution was made.

Mr. Yao and Mr. Xiao, factory workers in their 50's, helped organize protests
last March that brought tens of thousands of people into the streets of Liaoyang
demanding wages and pension benefits they had earned but not received. As a
result, most of the money was paid and a factory director the workers accused of
looting one of the failed companies was detained on corruption charges.

But the two protest leaders were charged with the far weightier crime of
subversion. Prosecutors accused them of having links to the banned China
Democracy Party and cited phone calls they acknowledged making to foreign
reporters and human rights organizations. After a four-hour trial on Wednesday
the court adjourned. A verdict and sentence could come any day.

Last month Beijing released Xu Wenli, its most prominent political prisoner, for
medical treatment in America. While more humane than continued imprisonment,
such gestures deprive the democracy movement of some of its most courageous
leaders. Mr. Yao and Mr. Xiao, who committed no crime beyond seeking justice for
their fellow workers, should be acquitted and allowed to return home to
Liaoyang.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (92%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%);
FACTORY WORKERS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); SENTENCING (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
JAIL SENTENCING (77%); RULE OF LAW (76%); BACK PAY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
RIOTS (74%); ACQUITTAL (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); FARM LABOR
(72%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%) EDITORIALS;
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  LABOR;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

PERSON: YAO FUXIN; XIAO YUNLIANG

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); NORTHEAST CHINA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  LIAOYANG (CHINA)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             194 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Protesters Greet City's New Human Rights Panel With Chants of 'Hamas!'

BYLINE:  By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 479 words


The first meeting of the city's newly reappointed Human Rights Commission got
off to a rocky start last night, as protesters stood up and loudly accused one
of its members of having links to a terrorist group, prompting police officers
to force them from the room.

The meeting was the first since the election of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who
has expanded the commission's mandate and increased its budget. The meeting had
scarcely begun when the protesters stood up and began accusing Omar T.
Mohammedi, who was appointed to the commission by Mr. Bloomberg last fall, of
representing the terrorist group Hamas.

"Mohammedi is Hamas!" one protester said.

"This is like having the general counsel of the K.K.K.!" shouted another.

Once the brief outburst was over and police officers had shoved the protesters
from the room, the meeting resumed without comment by the commissioners, and
ended without incident an hour later.

Edward Skyler, a spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, said afterward, "It is
unfathomable to me that people could lump someone who provides free legal
counsel to immigrants into a terrorist organization, but that's why they are
called extremists."

Mr. Skyler added that the group that Mr. Mohammedi serves as legal counsel, the
Council on American Islamic Relations, wrote to Mr. Bloomberg last year to
assure him that they "did not support any terrorist organizations either
philosophically or financially."

Mr. Mohammedi is the general counsel of the New York chapter of the council. He
has represented Muslim immigrants who were detained after Sept. 11, 2001. He
also served as a lawyer for Amadou Diallo, the African immigrant who was shot by
New York City police officers in 1999.

Some experts on the Middle East have said that the Council on American Islamic
Relations has links to terrorist groups. Those accusations have been repeated in
recent weeks by members of the Coalition for Jewish Concerns, a Bronx group
whose members protested at the meeting last night and handed out leaflets
beforehand outside the building where it was held, 40 Rector Street, in the
financial district.

After the meeting, Mr. Mohammedi said, "I'm looking forward to working with the
commission." He said he was not disturbed by the outburst, and declined further
comment.

Another commission member, Rabbi Haskell Lookstein, was quoted in The New York
Post this month saying that he believed Mr. Mohammedi's organization was linked
to terrorist groups, and that he might leave the commission for that reason.

But after the meeting last night, Rabbi Lookstein said that he had been
misquoted, and that he had no intention of leaving.

"I don't want to create problems for what's basically a very good commission,"
he said. He added that he had spoken to Mr. Mohammedi at a reception after the
meeting.

"We both agreed that it's important to be part of this commission," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CORPORATE COUNSEL (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); APPOINTMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS
(90%); HAMAS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); LAWYERS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); MAYORS (71%); BUDGETS (71%);
RELIGION (70%); JEWS & JUDAISM (69%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A War Crime Or an Act of War?

BYLINE:  By Stephen C. Pelletiere;  Stephen C. Pelletiere is author of "Iraq and
the International Oil System: Why America Went to War in the Persian Gulf."

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: MECHANICSBURG, Pa.


It was no surprise that President Bush, lacking smoking-gun evidence of Iraq's
weapons programs, used his State of the Union address to re-emphasize the moral
case for an invasion: "The dictator who is assembling the world's most dangerous
weapons has already used them on whole villages, leaving thousands of his own
citizens dead, blind or disfigured."

The accusation that Iraq has used chemical weapons against its citizens is a
familiar part of the debate. The piece of hard evidence most frequently brought
up concerns the gassing of Iraqi Kurds at the town of Halabja in March 1988,
near the end of the eight-year Iran-Iraq war. President Bush himself has cited
Iraq's "gassing its own people," specifically at Halabja, as a reason to topple
Saddam Hussein.

But the truth is, all we know for certain is that Kurds were bombarded with
poison gas that day at Halabja. We cannot say with any certainty that Iraqi
chemical weapons killed the Kurds. This is not the only distortion in the
Halabja story.

I am in a position to know because, as the Central Intelligence Agency's senior
political analyst on Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war, and as a professor at the
Army War College from 1988 to 2000, I was privy to much of the classified
material that flowed through Washington having to do with the Persian Gulf. In
addition, I headed a 1991 Army investigation into how the Iraqis would fight a
war against the United States; the classified version of the report went into
great detail on the Halabja affair.

This much about the gassing at Halabja we undoubtedly know: it came about in the
course of a battle between Iraqis and Iranians. Iraq used chemical weapons to
try to kill Iranians who had seized the town, which is in northern Iraq not far
from the Iranian border. The Kurdish civilians who died had the misfortune to be
caught up in that exchange. But they were not Iraq's main target.

And the story gets murkier: immediately after the battle the United States
Defense Intelligence Agency investigated and produced a classified report, which
it circulated within the intelligence community on a need-to-know basis. That
study asserted that it was Iranian gas that killed the Kurds, not Iraqi gas.

The agency did find that each side used gas against the other in the battle
around Halabja. The condition of the dead Kurds' bodies, however, indicated they
had been killed with a blood agent -- that is, a cyanide-based gas -- which Iran
was known to use. The Iraqis, who are thought to have used mustard gas in the
battle, are not known to have possessed blood agents at the time.

These facts have long been in the public domain but, extraordinarily, as often
as the Halabja affair is cited, they are rarely mentioned. A much-discussed
article in The New Yorker last March did not make reference to the Defense
Intelligence Agency report or consider that Iranian gas might have killed the
Kurds. On the rare occasions the report is brought up, there is usually
speculation, with no proof, that it was skewed out of American political
favoritism toward Iraq in its war against Iran.

I am not trying to rehabilitate the character of Saddam Hussein. He has much to
answer for in the area of human rights abuses. But accusing him of gassing his
own people at Halabja as an act of genocide is not correct, because as far as
the information we have goes, all of the cases where gas was used involved
battles. These were tragedies of war. There may be justifications for invading
Iraq, but Halabja is not one of them.

In fact, those who really feel that the disaster at Halabja has bearing on today
might want to consider a different question: Why was Iran so keen on taking the
town? A closer look may shed light on America's impetus to invade Iraq.

We are constantly reminded that Iraq has perhaps the world's largest reserves of
oil. But in a regional and perhaps even geopolitical sense, it may be more
important that Iraq has the most extensive river system in the Middle East. In
addition to the Tigris and Euphrates, there are the Greater Zab and Lesser Zab
rivers in the north of the country. Iraq was covered with irrigation works by
the sixth century A.D., and was a granary for the region.

Before the Persian Gulf war, Iraq had built an impressive system of dams and
river control projects, the largest being the Darbandikhan dam in the Kurdish
area. And it was this dam the Iranians were aiming to take control of when they
seized Halabja. In the 1990's there was much discussion over the construction of
a so-called Peace Pipeline that would bring the waters of the Tigris and
Euphrates south to the parched Gulf states and, by extension, Israel. No
progress has been made on this, largely because of Iraqi intransigence. With
Iraq in American hands, of course, all that could change.

Thus America could alter the destiny of the Middle East in a way that probably
could not be challenged for decades -- not solely by controlling Iraq's oil, but
by controlling its water. Even if America didn't occupy the country, once Mr.
Hussein's Baath Party is driven from power, many lucrative opportunities would
open up for American companies.

All that is needed to get us into war is one clear reason for acting, one that
would be generally persuasive. But efforts to link the Iraqis directly to Osama
bin Laden have proved inconclusive. Assertions that Iraq threatens its neighbors
have also failed to create much resolve; in its present debilitated condition --
thanks to United Nations sanctions -- Iraq's conventional forces threaten no
one.

Perhaps the strongest argument left for taking us to war quickly is that Saddam
Hussein has committed human rights atrocities against his people. And the most
dramatic case are the accusations about Halabja.

Before we go to war over Halabja, the administration owes the American people
the full facts. And if it has other examples of Saddam Hussein gassing Kurds, it
must show that they were not pro-Iranian Kurdish guerrillas who died fighting
alongside Iranian Revolutionary Guards. Until Washington gives us proof of
Saddam Hussein's supposed atrocities, why are we picking on Iraq on human rights
grounds, particularly when there are so many other repressive regimes Washington
supports?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (92%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); CYANIDES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARMIES
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICS
(73%); TERRORISM (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (51%) BIOLOGICAL AND
CHEMICAL WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  KURDS;  CYANIDE;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (82%); DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(59%) DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES);
PELLETIERE, STEPHEN C; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); GULF
STATES (78%)

REGION: IRAQ;  IRAN;  HALABJA (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             196 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRIEFLY NOTED;
IRANIAN CLERIC REBUKES BUSH

BYLINE:  By Nazila Fathi (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 74 words


Ayatollah Muhammad Yazdi, a member of Iran's conservative Guardian Council,
lashed out at statements in President Bush's State of the Union address that
said Iran was violating human rights and trying to develop weapons of mass
destruction. Ayatollah Yazdi rejected the president's claims and responded with
his own: that White House policies after the Sept. 11 terror attacks violated
the rights of Muslim immigrants.   Nazila Fathi (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); REFUGEES (87%); TERRORISM (86%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (86%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (86%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (85%); PUBLIC POLICY (85%); HIJACKING (85%); RELIGION (84%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (84%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (84%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  IRAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  STATE
OF THE UNION MESSAGE (US);  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

PERSON: YAZDI, MUHAMMAD (AYATOLLAH); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); FATHI, NAZILA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: IRAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 7, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRIEFLY NOTED;
GUANTANAMO SUICIDE ATTEMPTS

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 80 words


Suicide attempts among terrorism suspects held at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba are on
the rise, the Pentagon said yesterday.

At least 5 of the more than 600 detainees at the naval base have tried to hang
themselves in the past three weeks, said a Pentagon spokeswoman, Lt. Cmdr.
Barbara Burfeind. Amnesty International urged the United States authorities to
investigate the suicide attempts to determine whether the manner in which
interrogations are conducted may have contributed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); NAVIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
SUICIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HIJACKING
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  SUICIDES AND SUICIDE
ATTEMPTS;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
PRISONERS OF WAR;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             198 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Orders Life Sentence For Dissident With U.S. Tie

BYLINE:  By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 334 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Monday, Feb. 10


A Chinese court today sentenced a dissident based in the United States, Wang
Bingzhang, to life in prison for espionage and leading a "terrorist group,"
according to a brief announcement by the government-controlled New China News
Agency.

The announcement did not give any details of the charges or the evidence
presented at Mr. Wang's one-day trial in the southern city of Shenzhen, which
took place in January. A statement released in December by the Ministry of
Public Security accused him of passing state secrets to Taiwan and posting
essays on the Internet that threatened state security.

Mr. Wang, a longtime pro-democracy activist, has lived in exile in New York
since 1982 and holds a green card from the United States. But he remained a
Chinese citizen and so is not eligible for any special assistance from the
United States Embassy here, according to consular law.

Colleagues also based in the United States have said Mr. Wang's trouble began
last summer, when he went to Vietnam to meet with labor activists from China.
But on July 3, he and two traveling companions surfaced in China, where they
were apprehended by the police.

The Free China Movement, a human rights organization based in the United States,
has accused Chinese security officials of kidnapping the three; the two others,
both residents of the United States, have since been released.

In 1988, Mr. Wang had previously entered China illegally, using false documents,
to support a fledgling underground pro-democracy party. He was detained and then
expelled.

It is unclear what if any connection Mr. Wang might have had to terrorism,
because his activities and concerns have all been related to traditional
dissident activities like promoting free trade unions and multiparty democracy
for his homeland.

But since joining the United States-led effort against terrorism, the Chinese
government has tried to portray as terrorist-related a wide variety of
activities that previously would have been regarded as political crimes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); EVIDENCE (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); LABOR UNIONS (67%); POLITICS (61%) ESPIONAGE;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  TERRORISM;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: WANG BINGZHANG

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (78%); SHENZHEN, GUANGDONG, CHINA (73%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);
GUANGDONG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); TAIWAN (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             200 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Walking the Beat in Gaza

BYLINE:  By David Kimche;  David Kimche, director general of Israel's foreign
ministry from 1980 to 1987, is on the advisory council of Israel Policy Forum.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV


As Prime Minister Ariel Sharon tries to piece together a majority in Israel's
Knesset, polls show that a despairing public does not believe any new government
is likely to stop violence with the Palestinians. The only viable plan is the
so-called road map of the "diplomatic quartet." Yet there is no sign that this
will soon become reality, as Mr. Sharon has criticized it and Washington is
otherwise preoccupied with Iraq.

In this vacuum of ideas, the greatest help Washington could give to Israel is,
paradoxically, something the Palestinians have long wanted: an American-led
delegation of observers in the territories, who would ensure that the
Palestinian Authority is making a credible effort to end terrorism while also
guarding against Israeli human-rights violations. The body would best be made up
of former intelligence and law-enforcement officials from North America and
Europe.

The benefits to America are obvious. Not only might the observers actually help
bring peace, evidence of concern for the Palestinians could build support in a
skeptical Muslim world for the Iraq campaign. The plan would also aid the
Palestinian Authority's moderates, who could claim a political victory and shore
up dwindling support among their people for antiterrorism efforts.

Israel, however, would be the biggest beneficiary. It has long been reluctant to
accept international monitors, who have a poor record in the region; United
Nations observers in Southern Lebanon in the late 1970's were so ineffective
that Israel eventually took control of the area to protect itself. Some worry
that observers would limit the military's ability to defend itself. Others
oppose bringing in outsiders from a world that, many Israelis feel, is "against
us."

This is shortsighted. Monitors can strengthen Israel's security -- as long as
they are supervised by the United States, our best friend in the world. I
learned this from my former boss, Prime Minister Menachem Begin, no slouch when
it came to protecting Israel. During his tenure, an American-led multinational
observer force was established in the Sinai after the Camp David treaty with
Egypt.

I headed the team that negotiated over the force with Egypt. Mr. Begin
repeatedly told me that a neutral third party was needed to keep peace between
two former enemies who were still prone to suspect the worst of each other. We
persisted, and those troops remain one of the few successful peace-keeping
contingents in the region, mainly because Egypt and Israel trust America to be a
fair judge.

If Mr. Sharon followed Mr. Begin's lead, in all probability the Palestinian
Authority would not only agree, it would also feel compelled to make the
arrangement work. Deploying the observers would need to coincide with the
reconstruction of Palestinian security services, which have been hobbled by
Israel. The observers, stationed in liaison offices staffed by both Israeli and
Palestinian officers, would determine whether the authority is doing its utmost
to control violent Fatah factions and to destroy Hamas and Islamic Jihad
terrorist cells.

Palestinian security forces have proved capable of quashing terrorists if they
are given the green light by their political leaders -- in the mid-90's Yasir
Arafat went on the offensive against Hamas and Islamic Jihad and there was a
prolonged period with very few attacks on Israelis.

It is certainly worth a try, as nothing else -- Israeli military strikes,
curfews and border closings -- has worked. And as a former intelligence officer,
I am confident that Israel would be able to defend itself under the scrutiny of
objective observers.

As the violence abated, the observers would also verify compliance with the road
map, including meaningful Palestinian political reforms, the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from areas taken during the intifada, a freeze on Israeli
settlements and, eventually, a two-state solution. Indeed, without third-party
monitors, the road map is likely to be just another Middle Eastern dead end.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(78%); PEACEKEEPING (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); POSTWAR
RECONSTRUCTION (69%); ARMED FORCES (64%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%) PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

PERSON: KIMCHE, DAVID

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(96%); EGYPT (93%); IRAQ (92%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP;  WEST BANK

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             203 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Ex-Leader Sentenced To 11 Years for Her War Role

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 477 words


Biljana Plavsic, the former president of Bosnia and the only woman among more
than 80 people indicted for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, was sentenced
to 11 years in prison yesterday for persecution, a crime against humanity.

"No sentence which the trial chamber passes can fully reflect the horror of what
occurred or the terrible impact on thousands of victims," said Judge Richard
May, speaking from the high dais in the courtroom of the international war
crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Mrs. Plavsic, 72, who had acknowledged guilt and had shown remorse for her role
in Bosnia's 1992-95 ethnic war, stood silently, as if frozen, while receiving
her sentence.

The judge said Mrs. Plavsic had not conceived or planned the violent Serbian
campaign of ethnic separation that killed tens of thousands of Muslims and
Croats and expelled many more from their lands with "great brutality," but that
she embraced, supported and contributed to it. "This is a crime of utmost
gravity," he said.

But the three-judge panel had decided on a reduced sentence, he said, because
Mrs. Plavsic had voluntarily come to the tribunal, pleaded guilty and expressed
remorse. They also took into account her age and her postwar actions, when she
played a crucial role in carrying out the Dayton peace agreement that ended the
Bosnian war.

The sentence was immediately criticized by victims of the war and by some human
rights groups as being too lenient. But others said the major issue in Mrs.
Plavsic's confession and guilty plea was that they would make denials by other
Serbian leaders much more difficult.

"In a region where denial and revisionism are central and where the tribunal is
seen with skepticism, Mrs. Plavsic's gesture is striking," Alex Boraine, a
member of South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, told the court
earlier.

That gesture continues to go unmatched. In the same courtroom used for the
sentencing yesterday, Slobodan Milosevic, widely held to be the instigator of
the war, continues almost daily to deny any responsibility for the genocide and
war crimes for which he is on trial.

On Wednesday, one of Serbia's most hard-line nationalists, Vojislav Seselj,
appeared in the same court for the first time after getting a hero's sendoff in
Belgrade. He was going to the tribunal, he told reporters, not to be tried for
war crimes but to defend his 10,000 Serbian fighters -- a band of volunteers
with a reputation for cruelty. He intended "to destroy the evil tribunal, an
American instrument against the Serbs."

Mrs. Plavsic changed her plea to guilty in October, almost two years after
surrendering to the court. In exchange, prosecutors dropped the genocide charge
against her, the gravest accusation she faced. Although prosecutors had asked
for a sentence no less than 15 years, a spokesman said yesterday that they would
not appeal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%);
GUILTY PLEAS (89%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); PEACE PROCESS (72%); RELIGION (54%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; PLAVSIC, BILJANA

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
CROATIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             207 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Court For Crimes Of War Opens In The Hague

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 11


Fiercely opposed by the Bush administration and long awaited by other countries,
a new and permanent international criminal court for dealing with dictators and
war criminals formally opened today with the swearing in of its bench of 18
judges.

The court's task will be to try individuals -- not nations or armies -- accused
of large-scale crimes against civilians. The judges, 11 men and 7 women from all
over the world, will be part of what was called today the most ambitious
initiative in the history of modern international law.

Dressed in black gowns, the 18 judges took their oath of office in a
14th-century hall of the Dutch Parliament, before jurists, diplomats,
politicians and government ministers from more than 100 nations.

One by one, their right hands raised, the judges pledged to perform their duties
"honorably, faithfully, impartially and conscientiously." They also promised to
respect "the confidentiality of investigations and prosecutions and the secrecy
of deliberations."

The group elected a president, Philippe Kirsch, a Canadian judge and
international law specialist.

Supporters hope the new institution will play a crucial role in averting as well
as prosecuting major human rights abuses. Although the court is independent of
the United Nations, Secretary General Kofi Annan was present and said he was
looking forward to supporting its cause, "which is the cause of all humanity."
He urged the judges to act without fear or favor. "Unspeakable crimes must be
deterred," Mr. Annan said, adding that deterrence has been missing in the past.
"It is needed today as much as ever, and it will be needed in the future."

But the Bush administration, fearing that a politicized prosecutor could indict
American officials or military personnel on missions abroad, has actively
campaigned against the institution and pressed many governments into deals to
disregard any subpoena issued for an American citizen. Washington has obtained
such deals from 21 nations, mainly poor countries dependent on United States
aid.

No American officials attended the ceremony, but some American legal experts
did, among them Theodor Meron, a professor at New York University Law School who
was recently appointed president of the Yugoslavia war crimes tribunal, as well
as two elderly lawyers who had played a role at the Nuremberg trials. One of
them, Benjamin B. Ferencz, 82, said the current American leadership "seems to
have forgotten the lessons we tried to teach the rest of the world."

Several speakers tried to dispel the fears of America and others -- including
China, India, Iraq and Turkey -- who are not among the 89 that have ratified the
Rome Treaty that created the court in 1998. Prince Zeid al-Hussein of Jordan,
who presided over the court's parent body, said the new court "is not the
world's crucible for vengeance" but a "court of last resort." Its statutes
dictate that it must defer to national courts first.

The prosecutor, who is expected to be selected in April, can issue indictments
only in cases where national courts are unwilling or unable to deal with grave
atrocities, like war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The court has
no jurisdiction over single abuses, but only over those that have been
"systematic or widespread." A panel of judges must approve any indictment before
it can be issued.

The shadow of a possible war in Iraq was also very present today. As the new
court pledged to uphold the rule of law, several speakers expressed fears of a
breakdown of international law if the United States and Britain waged war on
Iraq without United Nations approval. With neither the United States nor Iraq
members of the court, however, it seems unlikely that this new tribunal will
play any role in prosecutions stemming from the war. British troops however
could in theory be vulnerable in case of abuses.

The court's jurisdiction covers only crimes committed after July 1, 2002. Anyone
can bring charges, individuals, groups, governments, and the United Nations
Security Council.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); WAR CRIMES
(91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); SUBPOENAS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); ARMIES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); LAW SCHOOLS (75%); POLITICS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); APPOINTMENTS
(69%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (65%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (60%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); NETHERLANDS (94%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); IRAQ
(79%); TURKEY (79%); GERMANY (58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             208 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: KABUL;
Untrained Afghan Police Force Needs to Be Overhauled, Amnesty International Says

BYLINE:  By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, March 12


Earlier this month, residents in an ethnically Hazara neighborhood of Kabul took
to the streets. Their target was the police, whom they accused of trying to
kidnap a local woman. They demanded, as well, that members of their own ethnic
group be hired to patrol their neighborhood.

The protest illustrated the depth of mistrust toward an unaccountable and
unrepresentative police force that has built up during 23 years of war --
through Soviet rule, warlordism, the Taliban and, still, under the new
government.

Today, Amnesty International released a report saying that Afghanistan and the
international community needed to make the overhaul of the country's police
force an urgent priority to restore the rule of law.

The report laid out a picture of untrained and ill-equipped police officers who
answer more to local military commanders than they do to their police superiors.

Amnesty also said police officers were engaging in torture, arbitrary arrest and
extortion. "Rather than protecting all people in Afghanistan, some police
officers are actually committing human rights violations," the report said.

Amnesty noted that approximately 50,000 people work as police officers in
Afghanistan, but it argued that "they are not a united, civilian police service,
having often no training or experience."

Much of the force consists of former mujahedeen with military backgrounds but
little or no police training. Outside of Kabul, they are answerable to regional
commanders for whom they fought against the Taliban. Amnesty reported unclear
lines of control over the police, even at the top levels of government.

The police have also been severely afflicted by the dearth of resources that
permeates every aspect of Afghan life. Provincial police officers interviewed by
Amnesty had not been paid in four months. They lacked uniforms, boots and even
pens and paper. In many cases, the only vehicle available to them was a
commander's private car.

The lack of resources has numerous ramifications, the report noted. With police
buildings crumbling around the country, for example, prisoners have to be kept
in leg irons to prevent them from escaping.

The German government has helped reopen the police academy in Kabul, which is
now training 1,500 cadets, and the State Department's Bureau for International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement plans to train another 7,000 police officers in
Kabul.

But Amnesty cited a profound need for "in service" training for officers. Most
have never received any. InKandahar, only 120 of 3,000 officers have any
training, Amnesty said. In Bamiyan, half of the officers in a force of 700 have
police training; the rest are former mujahedeen.

The results are clear, the report stated. Police officers untrained in
investigative techniques often resort to coercion. Former detainees described
being beaten, subjected to electric shocks and hanged from ceilings by their
arms.

Last November, at least two students were killed by police fire during a protest
at Kabul University. Five officers were ultimately arrested for excessive use of
force, but Amnesty said the handling of the demonstration showed the need to
teach crowd-control techniques.

Detainees often reported being offered their freedom in return for money. The
National Security Directorate, Afghanistan's intelligence service, also has the
power to arrest and detain. It engages in arbitrary detention and torture,
Amnesty said, often with the purpose of extorting money from detainees'
families. There are no independent oversight bodies to report police violations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); TALIBAN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EXTORTION (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); TORTURE
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); RULE OF LAW (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); CIVIL WAR
(76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); ETHNIC GROUPS (73%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%); NARCOTICS
ENFORCEMENT (73%); MILITARY TRAINING (73%); TERRORISM (60%); ETHNICITY (57%)
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  POLICE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: WALDMAN, AMY

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             209 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Guns of Kabul

BYLINE:  By Said Tayeb Jawad;  Said Tayeb Jawad is chief of staff for President
Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Just over a year ago at the conference in Bonn on organizing a post-Taliban
government, the factions of Afghanistan pledged "to withdraw all military units
from Kabul." A glance around this city, especially at night, reveals the
emptiness of those words. Clumps of armed Afghans in olive fatigues loom up out
of the darkness. Kalashnikovs slung over their shoulders, they search, harass,
shake down or wave on, at whim.

My country is at peace. And yet Kabul, once a vibrant and sophisticated capital,
is like an armed camp. It is time to demilitarize our major cities.

For Afghans, who have seen horrors beyond human imagination committed at the
point of a gun, the unjustified armed presence here and in the provinces is a
terrifying sight. In Kabul but also in the provinces, where the rule of gun
should have been mitigated by the presence of the International Security
Assistance Forces, the sight of the armed men is enough to deter most Afghans
from participating in rebuilding their country, even as we move toward national
elections in 2004 as called for in the Bonn agreement.

These armed groups can turn Afghanistan once again into a dangerous and
explosive place, a menace to Afghans and the international community. For the
truth is this: Afghans are a moderate people. But the violence of the militias
opens the door -- as it did in 1992 -- to fundamentalism and dictatorship by
pushing a desperate population to seek refuge in groups like the Taliban.

Afghans are acutely aware of this danger. In my work with President Hamid
Karzai, I am constantly approached by Afghans who are concerned about the
persistent presence of the militias. "My constituents didn't ask me for schools
or clinics," said one delegate to last summer's loya jirga, the grand council
that selected the president. "They wanted the weapons collected. They wanted the
warlords disarmed."

To fulfill this wish, President Karzai last month unveiled a comprehensive
disarmament, demilitarization, and reintegration program, including job training
and incentives for men-at-arms to return to civilian life. But Afghans cannot do
this alone. We need the strong backing and unequivocal support of the United
States and other members of the international community to bring about the
withdrawal of the armed groups from our cities that was solemnly pledged in
Bonn.

Kabul should receive immediate attention, for it is a special case. Provincial
visitors and dignitaries in their distinct local dress are subject to
humiliation and browbeating from armed men. They conclude that Kabul, the
capital, is not really theirs. They return home with their faith in the
unparalleled Afghan experiment in nation-building eroded.

But the problem holds in the provinces as well. In many places, regional
commanders who have usurped the trappings of legitimacy hold the population
hostage. The Afghans have repudiated them, but their gunmen impose silence,
while they violate human rights and expand their hold on power and the economy
in their regions. Until these men are disarmed, the Afghan people cannot invest
themselves in the future of their country.

The international community needs to help us to move militias out of urban
centers to barracks and confine them there, and to put into effect President
Karzai's disarmament, demilitarization and reintegration program, which includes
recruiting a limited number of irregular fighters into the national army and
channeling the rest toward productive employment.

We can maintain order in the cities by means of a national police force working
closely with the International Security Assistance Force in Kabul and the newly
formed Provincial Reconstruction Teams elsewhere. The United States should
expand the mandate of these teams to include some temporary role in law
enforcement.

The United States, the United Nations and leading international groups have
built up an impressive track record in the disarmament and demobilization of
local militias in other countries. In Kosovo, a carefully developed if
imperfectly run program led to the surrender of tens of thousands of weapons,
the demobilization of the bulk of the Kosovo Liberation Army resistance
fighters, and the transformation of the rest into a civil defense force that
could at least be monitored. Meanwhile, an international police force maintained
order and helped train graduates of the Kosovo police academy.

We want the international determination that drove the Kosovo disarmament
process to focus now on Afghanistan. With the international community's
assistance, we can ensure peace and prosperity in our country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Illustrations by Anthony Russo)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (88%);
RELIGION (86%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (85%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ARMS
CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); DISARMAMENT (75%); SHOOTINGS (74%); FIREARMS (74%); ELECTIONS (73%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (72%); POLITICS (72%);
TERRORISM (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) FIREARMS;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  ISLAM;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (78%) JAWAD, SAID TAYEB; KARZAI, HAMID (PRES)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (97%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  KABUL (AFGHANISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             212 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Middle East: Egypt: Torture Sentence For Police Is Overturned

BYLINE:  By Abeer Allam (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 100 words


A Cairo criminal court overturned a three-year prison sentence handed last
October against two police officers accused of torturing a detainee to death to
force him to confess to a robbery.

The court said the main witness in the case was not trustworthy, because he had
a long criminal record including false testimony. Human rights groups have long
criticized Egypt for the systematic use of torture against detainees. In the
past decade, many victims have filed torture complaints. Some have been
compensated, but in most cases, charges have been dropped for lack of evidence.
Abeer Allam (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (88%); MISCONDUCT
(88%); SENTENCING (88%); EVIDENCE (88%); LARCENY & THEFT (88%); WITNESSES (88%);
TESTIMONY (88%) ROBBERIES AND THEFTS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  TORTURE;  POLICE
BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  PERJURY

PERSON: ALLAM, ABEER

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (90%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (90%)

REGION: EGYPT

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             222 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cuba Executes 3 Who Tried to Reach U.S. in a Hijacking

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, April 11


After a swift and secret trial, the Cuban authorities executed at dawn today
three men who hijacked a ferry last week in a failed effort to reach the United
States, a Cuban government statement said.

Four other men who used a gun and knives to help commandeer the boat were given
life sentences, the statement said.

Although the death penalty has been infrequently applied in Cuba, the three
faced a firing squad after having been convicted of what the statement called a
"very grave acts of terrorism."

The executions came at the end of a week in which some 78 nonviolent dissidents
received prison terms ranging up to 28 years for conspiring with American
diplomats against the government.

The Cuban authorities, who said there had been seven hijackings in the last
seven months, have long been critical of American policies that they say
encourage illegal immigration. Human rights advocates, diplomats and American
lawmakers condemned the executions as excessively harsh and questioned the
motivation of the Cuban government.

"This is excessive in the extreme and raises the question as to whether or not
this is altogether rational," said Wayne S. Smith, once the top United States
diplomat in Havana. "It just goes too far. There is no rational, sensible
explanation."

Today's executions were believed to be the first in two years, said Curt
Goering, senior deputy executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A. He
said in a statement that the men had "almost certainly" been denied due process.

"These executions, combined with the harsh sentences handed down last week to a
number of recently arrested dissidents, is contributing to a climate of
repression that hasn't existed in Cuba since the 1960's," Mr. Goering said.

The sister of Jorge Luis Martinez Isaac, one of the executed hijackers, said
their mother had no idea he would face the firing squad today.

"The news they gave her today was, 'Your son is dead,' " the sister, Yordanis
Montoya, said in Miami, where she lives.

"When she learned he had been shot, she raced to the cemetery," she said. "When
she got there, she said, 'Down with Fidel,' and the police chased her away."

The executions came a day after the Cuban authorities said they had foiled a
hijacking attempt on the Isle of Youth. According to Granma, the Communist Party
newspaper, several men who assaulted a soldier and stole his assault rifle were
arrested last night near the airport.

The hijackings have angered Cuban officials, who feel that American policy not
only encourages illegal immigration but also is lenient on those who come here
by force. United States officials this week repeated that American courts would
prosecute anyone involved in a hijacking.

The Cuban authorities have been indignant, however, over the release on bail of
several men who hijacked a plane to Miami last month.

Some political analysts had wondered if the authorities had sought the harsh
sentences to deter any further hijackings, which could scare off already jittery
tourists. Caribbean tourism in general has been down since the outbreak of the
Iraq war, and Cuba's economy is heavily dependent on foreign visitors.

"They are executing people who hijack a boat," Mr. Smith said. "Will that
reassure Americans who think it is safe to go to Cuba?"

The Cuban authorities see the hijackings as related to a series of provocations
by the Bush administration and its conservative allies in Miami, according to an
official statement in Granma. There is little doubt, Cuba analysts said, that
the executions will only harden the government's critics.

The death sentences also infuriated those who, like Rep. Charles B. Rangel,
Democrat of New York, had been advocating a dialogue with Cuba. "This about ends
that discussion," Mr. Rangel said in a telephone interview. "I don't know how
far they are going to go, but they know how to support their enemies and get rid
of their friends."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); HIJACKING (90%); SENTENCING (89%);
CONSPIRACY (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); SHOOTINGS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (75%); REFUGEES (74%); TERRORISM (73%); DUE PROCESS
(73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); BAIL (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); ARRESTS (69%); EXECUTIVES (65%);
POLITICS (63%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  HIJACKING;  FERRIES;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: GOERING, CURT; GONZALEZ, DAVID

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (73%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: CUBA

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             225 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

LETTER FROM ASIA;
Flawed Khmer Rouge Trial Better Than None

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 15


It seems straightforward enough. Some of the worst mass killers of our times are
living freely now in Cambodia, playing with their grandchildren and tending
their flower gardens. They should be put on trial.

Last month, after six years of difficult negotiations, Cambodia and the United
Nations agreed to set up an international tribunal to try the top leaders of the
Khmer Rouge, inventors of the killing fields. But instead of cheering, human
rights groups have risen up in opposition.

The problem is that -- retreating from its policy in similar tribunals in other
countries -- the United Nations has effectively ceded control of the proceedings
to local judges under a complex formula that gives them the power to make the
final call on who is prosecuted and who is convicted. Cambodian law will take
precedence over the guidelines agreed upon for the tribunal, reducing the United
Nations -- in the words of its legal counsel, Hans Corell, last year -- to "a
technical assistance provider to a Cambodian court."

In Cambodia, where the judiciary is weak, corrupt and politically docile, that
means Prime Minister Hun Sen will be the master of ceremonies, with results that
are predictable only to him. On the world stage, it means that the new Cambodian
formula, with its more relaxed approach to international law, will now be a
United Nations-sanctioned precedent that other countries can demand for
themselves.

"Justice is not served by diluting international standards to suit the occasion
or a government in power," Amnesty International said in a statement last
December.

In addition, some experts are challenging the decision to limit the trial to the
top leaders and "those who were most responsible," effectively granting amnesty
for lower ranking killers.

"From the perspective of truth and justice, a de facto show trial of a few
senior political figures would almost be a worst-case scenario," said Steve
Heder, an expert on Cambodia at the School of Oriental and African Studies in
London.

But this trial is the only one on offer. The Cambodian formula is the best the
United Nations is going to get after running up against a brick wall in its
talks with Mr. Hun Sen's men.

Time is on the side of the killers, who caused the deaths of 1.7 million people
through execution, starvation, disease and overwork when they ruled Cambodia
from 1975 to 1979. Their chief, Pol Pot, is dead. With the surviving leaders old
and sick, this could be the last chance to put them in the dock.

So at its bluntest, the question now is whether a potentially flawed trial is
better than no trial at all. Even if real justice is not done, will it be worth
it to see these extraordinary creatures on display, facing their accusers and
making their elaborate excuses?

It would offer at least a gesture to their victims.

The formula agreed upon is not in itself fatally flawed. It's how it's applied
that counts. "The proof of the pudding is in the eating," said the former
American ambassador, Kent Weidemann, admittedly stringing together cliches.
"Don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good. Let's give it a shot."

The worry is that the door has been left open to the kind of manipulation that
is standard practice in Cambodia.

After much wrangling, the two sides agreed to set up a mixed tribunal with both
foreign and Cambodian prosecutors and judges. In an awkward supermajority
formula, Cambodian judges would dominate but would need the vote of at least one
foreign judge for any decision.

The Cambodians would have the advantage in resolving disputed rulings.

The first caution in any analysis is that a trial could still be derailed. Mr.
Hun Sen has an almost perfect record of making promises he has no intention of
keeping and of undermining the country's democratic processes. Negotiations to
create a tribunal have been punctuated by breakthroughs that came to nothing.

The arguments in favor of proceeding are essentially based on wishful thinking:
Who knows? Things could go well.

Mr. Hun Sen could break his habit of preaching what he does not practice. He
could turn out to be a champion of democracy in disguise. He could loosen his
dictatorial grip and let justice take its course.

If things go terribly wrong, the United Nations can pull out at any point.

"It would be a shame to waste this opportunity," Mr. Weidemann said. "If it
fails, it fails; but honestly, I think that would be a real shame."

Certainly, the arguments of the idealists stand on firmer ground.

International standards must not be compromised. It is foolhardy to base one's
hopes on the good faith of the Cambodian government. The country needs to see
real justice done as a foundation for democratic reform. The Cambodian people
deserve better than this after all they have suffered.

The alternative, though, seems to be to let the old killers fade away
undisturbed. Do the people who make these sensible arguments really want to be
the ones who finally close the door on any trial for Khmer Rouge leaders?
Honestly, it would be a real shame.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Three inmates held at a Khmer Rouge prison in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia, from 1975 to 1979. Cambodia and the United Nations agreed last month
to set up a tribunal to try top leaders of the Khmer Rouge, who were responsible
for about 1.7 million deaths. (Photographs from Photo Archive Group/Tuol Sleng
Museum of Genocide)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); AMNESTY (86%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); DISEASES & DISORDERS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%);
LAWYERS (74%); GRANDCHILDREN (73%); PARDONS (69%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES
(61%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  AMNESTIES AND PARDONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (74%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             229 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Top Suspect In '91 Massacre Of Croatians Surrenders

BYLINE:  By PETER S. GREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, April 21


A former Yugoslav Army commander, charged with directing the 1991 massacre of
nearly 300 Croatian civilians during the siege of the Danube port of Vukovar,
turned himself in to the Serbian authorities today.

Serbia's government called the surrender of the commander, Capt. Miroslav Radic,
a major victory in its crackdown on organized crime and war-crimes suspects
after the assassination last month of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.

A spokesman said the government also expected "concrete movement" soon in the
case of the former Bosnian-Serb military leader, Ratko Mladic.

Mr. Mladic is charged with genocide against Bosnia's Muslims and the 1995
massacre of more than 7,000 Muslims from Srebrenica.

Mr. Radic, who officials said would be extradited to face trial at the
international war crimes tribunal in The Hague, is one of three former Yugoslav
People's Army officers charged in connection with the Vukovar massacre. Gen.
Mile Mrksic, who commanded the artillery that left Vukovar a pile of rubble,
turned himself in last year, and he maintains that he is innocent. The third
Vukovar commander, Veselin Sljivancanin, is still at large.

Serbia's government has cracked down on organized crime gangs and the many in
their ranks indicted for or suspected of war crimes. The police have questioned
more than 7,000 people and detained more than 2,000 since the deputy head of the
Red Berets Special Operations unit was arrested and charged with shooting Mr.
Djindjic.

The authorities say Mr. Djindjic's killers hoped to scare the Serbian government
into halting its plans to send suspects to The Hague.

The three-month siege of Vukovar became a symbol of the brutality of the
government of Slobodan Milosevic, whose own trial in The Hague is continuing.

In August 1991, the Yugoslav Army attacked Vukovar as it carved up the
disintegrating Yugoslav federation to build an ethnically pure Serbian homeland.
On Nov. 19, 1991, Yugoslav Army units arrived at Vukovar's hospital, where
several hundred ethnic Croats sought refuge.

The next day, most of the refugees were herded on to buses and taken to the
village of Ovcara, where soldiers from Mr. Radic's special infantry unit were
said to beat them for several hours. Almost 300 were taken to a nearby field,
where they were shot and killed. Investigators from Physicians for Human Rights
exhumed the remains in 1992.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); ORGANIZED CRIME (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); CRIME
PREVENTION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ARRESTS
(73%); RELIGION (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); CROATIA (94%); NETHERLANDS
(93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2003 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Senator Santorum And His Critics

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

Dan Savage's observation that it is socially acceptable to be a homophobe, but
not a racist (Op-Ed, April 25) brought to mind a prophetic statement by Bayard
Rustin, who battled both racism and homophobia in his 60-year career as an
activist and organizer.

Twenty-five or 30 years ago, Rustin said in a 1986 interview, the barometer of
human rights in the United States was the condition of black people. That is no
longer true. The barometer for judging the character of people in regard to
human rights is now those who consider themselves gay or lesbian.

Given the hateful views of gay men and lesbians espoused unapologetically by
leaders like Senator Rick Santorum -- and the sobering fact that it was only
four months ago that New York enacted legislation to protect gay citizens from
discrimination in housing, employment and public accommodations -- we have a
long way to go.

BENNETT SINGER
Brooklyn, April 26, 2003

The writer is co-director of a new PBS documentary about Bayard Rustin.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 3, 2003



CORRECTION: Because of a transmission error, a letter yesterday about homophobia
and racism omitted quotation marks around a passage and thus misattributed it.
It was Bayard Rustin, not the letter writer, who said: "Twenty-five or 30 years
ago, the barometer of human rights in the United States was black people. That
is no longer true. The barometer for judging the character of people in regard
to human rights is now those who consider themselves gay or lesbian."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%);
INTERVIEWS (87%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (66%) HOMOSEXUALITY

PERSON: RICK SANTORUM (72%) SINGER, BENNETT; RUSTIN, BAYARD (1910-87)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (66%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             236 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Voluntary Funds For Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 166 words


A United Nations committee decided to finance the special courts that are to try
leaders of the Khmer Rouge through voluntary contributions. Diplomats warned
that the financing plan by the Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee could
yet deny justice if governments failed to contribute generously.

The financing plan, approved by consensus, still needs adoption by the full
General Assembly, but routine approval is expected as all 191 assembly members
are also members of the humanitarian committee. Secretary General Kofi Annan,
who estimated the courts' budget at more than $19 million, has cautioned against
voluntary contributions. United Nations and Cambodian officials reached an
agreement on the courts in March, after more than five years of negotiations.
The plan calls for special courts to be created within the Cambodian justice
system and has been criticized by human rights groups, who say the United
Nations has effectively ceded control of the proceedings to local judges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); APPROVALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%) FINANCES;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             240 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
When Do-Gooders Don't Know What They're Doing

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast


EVERY so often, tales of terrible suffering and injustice in faraway lands come
tugging at the conscience of the world's privileged. Do something, these stories
implicitly demand. Sign a petition or, these days, double-click on a mouse to
save a life.

E-mail can instantly mobilize the moral condemnation of millions. So it was with
an urgent appeal on behalf of Amina Lawal, an illiterate Nigerian woman
sentenced to death by stoning for the crime of having a child out of wedlock.

In recent weeks, an e-mail petition of mysterious origin, carrying the name and
logo, in Spanish, of Amnesty International has been zapped around the globe.
Recipients were asked to "sign" electronically, then send it along to others.
Ms. Lawal's execution was imminent, the message warned; the Nigerian Supreme
Court had already upheld the death sentence.

It soon appeared, however, that the e-mail petition had problems. Amnesty
International said it had nothing to do with it, though it has been campaigning
vigorously on Ms. Lawal's behalf. And the case hasn't reached the Nigerian
Supreme Court, much less been ruled on.

Still, when the petition first came to Deborah Harding, a vice president of the
Open Society Institute in New York, she saw no reason to hesitate. She signed
(or tried to -- the technology failed her) and passed it on to friends and
colleagues.

"I felt like this is not one I can sit on," Ms. Harding said. "I sent it along."

From Nottingham, England, to Beirut, Lebanon, to Washington D.C., people were
e-mailing their protests -- until Ms. Lawal's Nigerian advocates began sending
their own electronic appeal to cease and desist. In trying to save the woman's
life, they said, the signers may be putting her -- and her Nigerian supporters
-- at risk.

"The information currently circulated is inaccurate, and the situation in
Nigeria, being volatile, will not be helped by such campaigns," said a "Dear
Friends" electronic letter circulated last week from the organization Baobab for
Women's Human Rights, based in Lagos. "If there is an immediate physical danger
to Ms. Lawal and others, it is from vigilante and political further (over)
reaction to international attempts at pressure."

This collision of well-intentioned foreigners and imperiled Nigerians
illustrates the hazards of using modern global communications to enable people
in the developed world to apply pressure in developing nations over a range of
issues, without some understanding of the situation on the ground.

Ms. Lawal, 31, who lives in her parents' home in a village of mud huts off a
rutted highway in Muslim-dominated northern Nigeria, became an international
cause celebre last August, when an Islamic court in Katsina, her home state,
found her guilty of adultery. The court said Ms. Lawal had confessed to having a
child out of wedlock, and sentenced her to death by stoning after her daughter
had been weaned.

Many Nigerians found the ruling horrific, including Olusegun Obasanjo, the
nation's president and an evangelical Christian. Whatever the verdict of the
state court, Mr. Obasanjo said, the sentence defied the Nigerian Constitution's
ban on cruel and unusual punishment. That is something Nigeria's federal judges
would have to take into account, if Ms. Lawal's case came before them.

The case is still under appeal in Katsina state court, and is scheduled to be
heard on June 3. Only after state-level appeals are exhausted can the case move
on to the Nigerian federal courts. Similar cases are currently under appeal, and
some previous sentences have been reversed. Ms. Lawal's lawyers have said they
are prepared to take the case up to the Nigerian Supreme Court.

Over the last two years, the Islamic penal code, or Shariah, has been instituted
in roughly a dozen northern states, leading to riots that by some estimates have
left 10,000 people dead. The most recent, last December, was set off by a
newspaper commentary that speculated jokingly about what the prophet Muhammad
would have made of the Miss World beauty pageant, which was to be held in Abuja,
Nigeria's capital. The unrest gutted the main northern city of Kaduna.

In other words, the subjects of religion and religious law are sensitive in
Nigeria, whose population is half Muslim and 40 percent Christian, with 10
percent subscribing to various indigenous beliefs.

That is why Nigerian women's groups were alarmed by the petition in support of
Ms. Lawal. The claim that she was to be executed June 3 could, these groups
feared, prompt the proponents of Shariah to take matters into their own hands,
if they believed that Ms. Lawal's supporters might succeed in overturning the
sentence. That many of these supporters were foreigners might embolden them even
more.

"I really don't know where to put the blame," said Ndidi Ekekwe, a program
officer with Baobab. "But before anyone signs anything, they should take the
extra step of confirming the facts, because it could just do more harm."

MS. EKEKWE pointed to a case in 1999 of an unmarried teenage girl in the
northern state of Zamfara who was found guilty of fornication and sentenced by a
Shariah court to 100 lashes by cane. That case too was met with international
protest. The governor of Zamfara, an outspoken proponent of Shariah, responded
by having the sentence carried out before her lawyers could file an appeal.

The chief appeals judge in Ms. Lawal's case has already said he isn't interested
in the opinion of outsiders.

"The world has no work to do," the judge, Grand Khadi Aminu Ibrahim Katsina,
said in an interview earlier this year. "That's why they're focusing their
attention on this."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Amina Lawal, sentenced to death by stoning for having a child
out of wedlock. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PETITIONS (92%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); APPEALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (85%);
RELIGION (83%); SENTENCING (76%); LITIGATION (76%); WOMEN (76%); VERDICTS (76%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); SUPREME
COURTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (71%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (61%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  ISLAM;  ADULTERY;  ELECTRONIC MAIL;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (55%)

PERSON: LAWAL, AMINA; SENGUPTA, SOMINI

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (68%); LAGOS, NIGERIA (57%); NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND (54%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%); LEBANON (79%);
ENGLAND (68%)

REGION: NIGERIA

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             243 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mass Graves, Pointed Questions

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

As mass graves continue to be unearthed in Iraq, I find myself agreeing with
Thomas L. Friedman, who, referring to Saddam Hussein, wrote that the war "could
easily be justified by his mass destruction of his own people" (column, May 14).

Or it least it could have been.

Imagine if the Bush administration was filled with people who had long
championed human rights and who had argued that it was the obligation of the
United States to free the Iraqi people from Saddam Hussein.

But it isn't, and they didn't.

Instead, the president and his administration argued during the prewar buildup
that a war was necessary to free the American people from the worry that Saddam
Hussein could somehow get to us with his weapons of mass destruction. The war
was about us, not them.

Yes, it is wonderful that the Iraqi people are free of Saddam Hussein, but the
American people are now shackled with the reality that the primary justification
for the war was a myth.

MITCHELL TURKER
Portland, Ore., May 14, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(87%); US PRESIDENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
(85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORISM (72%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (67%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%); THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (88%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES);
TURKER, MITCHELL; FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (79%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             244 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Chief of Secret Police Is Indicted by Judge in Chile

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 256 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, May 15


A retired army general who led Chile's secret police under the former dictator
Augusto Pinochet was indicted today in the 1974 kidnapping of a Spanish priest
who was tortured and then disappeared.

Judge Jorge Zepeda indicted Manuel Contreras, the former chief of Mr.

Pinochet's feared secret police, known as DINA, charging him with arresting the
priest, Antonio Llido, and taking him to a secret torture center where witnesses
said he was savagely beaten.

"For this, the former members of the now defunct DINA have been indicted as
authors of the crime of kidnapping," the judge said in his ruling.

Like hundreds of Chileans who went missing in the 1970's and 80's, Mr. Llido was
never seen again. The suspicion is that he was killed, despite efforts at the
time by the Vatican and the Spanish government to secure his release.

Mr. Contreras, now 73, was sentenced to 15 years in prison last month for the
kidnapping and disappearance of a young left-wing activist in 1975. He has
already served time for plotting the 1976 car-bomb murder in Washington of a
Chilean diplomat, and the courts accuse him of masterminding the similar killing
of a dissident army commander in Argentina.

Mr. Contreras, the highest-ranking Chilean military official convicted of human
rights crimes, has denied the charges.

Eight other top DINA members were also indicted in the case of Mr. Llido, who
was accused of helping a rebel group.

The priest's disappearance was crucial to Spain's efforts in the late 1990's to
prosecute Mr. Pinochet for rights abuses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (91%); ARMIES (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE
(90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); MURDER (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%);
SENTENCING (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%);
TESTIMONY (76%); CORRECTIONS (76%); MISSING PERSONS (73%); LIBERALISM (73%);
RELIGION (72%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (66%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  MISSING PERSONS

PERSON: CONTRERAS, MANUEL (GEN) (RET); PINOCHET UGUARTE, AUGUSTO

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); SPAIN (90%); ARGENTINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHILE;  SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             246 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Hunger Strike Puts Spotlight on British Asylum Policy

BYLINE:  By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 28


The torture was as commonplace as it was brutal, Adas Amini told British
authorities when he arrived here two years ago from Iran, seeking asylum. He had
been beaten on the soles of his feet, he said. He had been strung up, his body
horribly contorted and left to hang for hours on end, and he had endured
drawn-out mock executions.

But Mr. Amini, 33, a poet and political dissident who says he spent six years in
Iranian prisons, has so far been unable to persuade the British government,
which is under relentless political pressure to reduce the number of immigrants
that stream into the country each year, that he is telling the truth.

Traumatized and in despair at the Home Office's apparent determination to
continue challenging his asylum application, he turned last week to desperate
measures. Eight days ago, he stopped eating. Two days after that, he took a
needle and crudely stitched up his eyes, mouth and ears with green thread,
saying he wanted to protest how he, and other Iranians here seeking asylum, have
been treated.

"I would rather die like this gradually, a thousand times than face the
injustices, the oppression, the lack of any human rights or any humanity I was
facing in Iran," he told the BBC in whispered Persian through an interpreter,
his lips straining against their stitches.

Speaking from a house in Nottingham he shares with others seeking asylum, he
added: "I spent many years in prison being tortured. I was forced to flee here.
Shouldn't a human being have a square foot of earth to live on to live in
peace?"

Mr. Amini's case puts a stark human face on a problem that most Britons usually
consider in the abstract. From 2000 to 2002, 300,000 people applied for asylum
in Britain, more than in any other industrialized country, according to the
United Nations high commissioner for refugees. The numbers seem overwhelming to
a country that has grown less and less tolerant of new arrivals, particularly in
the already overcrowded southeast.

In the face of mounting public concern, and pressed further by the opposition
Conservative Party and right-leaning newspapers like The Daily Mail and The Sun,
the government has enacted a series of laws that make it harder for would-be
asylum seekers to enter the country, to live here once they arrive and to win
asylum once they apply.

One provision, for instance, had the practical effect of denying even minimal
food and housing allowances to asylum seekers who failed to register their
applications as soon as they arrived. But a recent court ruling held that the
government was interpreting the law too harshly, and ordered an overhaul of its
procedures.

The Home Office refused to comment on Mr. Amini's application, saying it did not
discuss individual cases. But earlier this week, a spokesman said that his
protest was "deeply regrettable."

Mr. Amini's plight illustrates a common problem in an immigration system awash
in applicants, drowning in bureaucracy and under increasing, if tacit, pressure
to deny asylum requests. After numerous meetings, hearings and exchanges of
paperwork, the case was adjourned five times, his lawyer said, three times
because the government failed to supply the correct interpreter.

Mr. Amini appears to have a legitimate case for asylum. Among other things, a
doctor at the Medical Foundation for the Care and Victims of Torture, a
London-based group that examines asylum applicants for proof of their claims,
concluded that Mr. Amini had suffered "repeated torture" and had been left "very
psychologically damaged."

"All this medical evidence has been ignored," a spokesman, Sherman Carroll, said
in a statement. "Instead, the Home Office has clutched at straws to have the
case thrown out. One of their claims is that Mr. Amini can't be in much danger
because although he has been imprisoned on numerous occasions, he has always
been released afterwards."

According to the group, Mr. Amini is a Kurd whose offenses include writing and
circulating poetry critical of the Iranian government; membership in an
underground Communist group; and the murder of a member of the security
services, a claim that was thrown out of court after he served two years in
prison.

Mr. Amini appeared to be granted asylum several weeks ago at a hearing in
Nottingham. But because no Home Office representative was present, the
government indicated afterward that it was considering whether to appeal the
decision.

The case has received a great deal of attention in recent days, and tonight it
appeared that things were progressing in Mr. Amini's favor. Speaking by
telephone from Nottingham, Sam Azad, the Midlands regional coordinator for the
International Federation of Iranian Refugees, said Mr. Amini's lawyer had been
informed that the Home Office had no grounds for further appeals.

Although Mr. Amini's benefits of about $62 a week -- all that asylum applicants,
who are not allowed to work while their applications are pending, receive from
the government -- were halted without explanation in February, today he
unexpectedly received a check for $251, Mr. Azad said.

But Mr. Amini, who remains at home in Nottingham, has not yet been granted
asylum, and has received no written notice from the Home Office of any change in
its stance. So his protest continues.

"He has said all along, 'I did not start this for myself,' " Mr. Azad said. " 'I
started my protest first for all the abuses of human rights in this country
against asylum seekers, and second because of the collusion of Britain with the
Islamic regime of Iran with their calling Iran a safe country to deport any
asylum seeker back to.' "

Mr. Azad said Mr. Amini was weak but alert. Earlier this week, Dr. Chris Udenze,
his doctor, said he felt Mr. Amini had embarked on his protest with a clear head
and that it would violate his rights to force him to eat. "We have to respect
his rights to make a decision like this for himself," Dr. Udenze said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abas Amini, who has been seeking asylum in Britain since his
arrival from Iran two years ago, says he spent six years in Iranian prisons. In
despair after challenges to his request, he sewed up his eyes, mouth and ears.
(Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%);
IMMIGRATION (78%); REFUGEES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (75%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); WRITERS (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             247 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: BRITISH TROOPS;
Photos Raise Allegations Of Torture

BYLINE:  By LIZETTE ALVAREZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 30


A British soldier was arrested today after he left a roll of film at a photo
store that appeared to show an Iraqi prisoner being tortured, the Defense
Ministry said today.

The film depicted a bound and gagged Iraqi inside a net that was suspended from
a forklift, according to The Sun, which first reported the story this morning.
The Sun also reported that the roll included pictures of soldiers performing sex
acts near Iraqi prisoners.

Howard Rhoades, a spokesman for the Defense Ministry, said a soldier had been
arrested and was being questioned by the military police in connection with the
photographs, which had been left at a shop in Staffordshire in central England.
He has not been identified, but The Sun reported that he belonged to the Royal
Regiment of Fusiliers, which fought in southern Iraq and is part of the Seventh
Armored Brigade, known as the Desert Rats.

The story came to light after a lab technician who was developing the film
alerted the local police. The police arrested the soldier at his home in
Tamworth, Staffordshire.

If the allegations prove true, the soldier, and perhaps others at the scene in
Iraq, would be in violation of the Geneva Conventions, which require that
prisoners of war must be treated humanely.

This is not the first allegation of mistreatment leveled against a British
soldier.

Lt. Col. Tim Collins, the commander of the First Battalion of the Royal Irish
Regiment, who once urged his troops in a rousing speech to be compassionate
towards enemy captives, is facing accusations of having abused Iraqi soldiers
and civilians.

Colonel Collins, who is known as Nails to his troops because of his steely
demeanor, is accused of punching, pistol-whipping, kicking and threatening Iraqi
prisoners of war to force information from them. He is also accused of firing
his pistol near the feet of civilians.

British forces were widely viewed as patient and calm on the battlefield and
during the war's chaotic aftermath in places like Basra.

The American military also faces accusations of cruelty to prisoners. About two
dozen detainees have taken their complaints to Amnesty International, the
London-based human rights group, alleging that American and British soldiers hit
and beat prisoners, and in one case used electric shocks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (92%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POWS & MIAS
(89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (75%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); TERRORISM (61%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY
FORCES;  TORTURE;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  TERRORISM;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (82%)

PERSON: ALVAREZ, LIZETTE

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ENGLAND (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  GREAT BRITAIN;  STAFFORDSHIRE (ENG)#000T031218SRAQA01#

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             250 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

19 Die as Suicide Bomber Destroys Bus Near Chechnya

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 5


A woman blew up a bus carrying military workers to a Russian air base west of
Chechnya early today as it paused at a railroad crossing, killing at least 18
people, many of them women, and herself. The attack wounded perhaps 15 more.

It was the third suicide bombing in the region in just over three weeks, as well
as the third in which a woman was either the bomber or a participant. The
bombings have belied Russian officials' efforts to portray Chechnya as settling
into a more peaceful state following a Moscow-run referendum on March 23 in
which most voters were said by the Kremlin to have approved a political
structure that would firmly deny Chechnya the independence sought by rebels.

Some of the wounded were in grave condition and were not expected to survive,
doctors said this afternoon.

Russian police had made no arrests by this evening. They ascribed the bombings
to Islamic militants who they say have been waging an increasingly violent
guerrilla war against the Russian military and Chechnya's Kremlin-backed
government.

On Moscow radio Ekho Moskvy this evening, a spokesman for the political leader
of the Chechen rebels, Aslan Maskhadov, denied that the rebel government had any
role in the attack.

Today's bombing came as the Kremlin, deep into an effort lasting months to
defuse the Chechen conflict, was pressing the Russian Parliament to approve an
amnesty for some guerrilla fighters who have not been involved in acts of
terrorism.

Guerrilla leaders have rejected the amnesty as a ploy to clear scores of Russian
soldiers who face punishment for crimes and human-rights abuses there, and who
would also be cleared of any wrongdoing.

The white bus, a shuttle carrying about 40 servicemen and civilian workers to
their jobs at the nearby Prokhladny air base, was leaving Mozdok, a military
town about 35 miles northeast of the Chechnya border, when the explosion
occurred about 7:30 a.m.

Accounts of the attack differed. But a woman who lives about 200 yards from the
site, Lyudmila Botiyeva, said in a telephone interview that the bomber ran after
the bus after it had picked up several airmen and military workers just outside
the town.

Civilians sometimes hitch rides on the shuttles, but in this case, she said, the
driver was reported to have refused to open the door. The woman nevertheless
blew herself up as the bus slowed at a rail crossing northeast of town.

"I was outside and heard a tremendous explosion," Ms. Botiyeva said. "I even
thought it was in my house or courtyard, the sound was so strong. I rushed out
into the street. Cars were honking, alarm systems sounding, and immediately, the
military arrived."

That account, repeated by military officials, was disputed by a nurse at the
civilian Mozdok City Hospital who identified herself in a telephone interview
only as Oksana. She quoted one victim as saying that the woman had in fact come
aboard the bus before the blast.

Russian television this afternoon showed a row of bloodied bodies laid beside
the bus, its windshield cracked and pocked by shrapnel fragments.

The Interfax news agency said most survivors were taken to the main military
hospital in Mozdok, where many soldiers wounded in the nearly four-year-long war
in Chechnya have been treated.

The emergencies ministry in North Ossetia, the province where Mozdok is located,
told the government's RIA-Novosti agency tonight that the death toll had risen
to 18, and said two more victims were in critical condition. Interfax quoted the
head of the Mozdok hospital as saying that the precise number of wounded was
uncertain because some were being treated at a civilian clinic.

Radio Mayak, a state-run network, quoted an army official today as saying that
as many as 14 of the dead were women who worked at service jobs on the air base,
but that could not be verified. Nor was it clear whether the toll included the
bomber.

But at Mozdok City Hospital, two nurses said in telephone interviews that at
least eight of the nine patients sent there immediately after the bombing were
women, and that two, including a hairdresser at the base, had died.

An Islamic warlord, Shamil Basayev, is reported by a guerrilla-related Web site
to have claimed responsibility for two deadly suicide bombings last month inside
Chechnya.

In the first, on May 12, a woman was among a group that drove a truck packed
with explosives into government offices in Znamenskoye, a north Chechnya town,
killing 59. On May 14, a lone woman blew herself up at an Islamic festival,
killing another 16 people.

Last December, two truck bombs penetrated elaborate defenses to destroy
Chechnya's main regional government offices in Grozny, the capital, killing
about 80 people.

Suicide bombers, including some women, have been used against Russians in
Chechnya through much of the current conflict, the second separatist war there
since the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, leaving the vast country of Russia to
sort out the relationship between Russia's capital, Moscow, and its many
autonomous regions and republics.

Their boundaries were often established by Soviet rule, and many of their
peoples -- like the Chechens, deported en masse under Stalin -- harbor
grievances from the Communist era.

But in recent months, as Russian forces have largely neutralized the guerrillas'
ability to wage organized battles, the bombings have become more deadly and
spectacular.

Tonight on Radio Mayak, a spokesman for the Federal Security Service, the
domestic arm of what was once the K.G.B., charged that the attack was the work
of a woman trained as a suicide bomber by Arab terrorists and financed by Abu
Omar As-Seif, a Saudi paymaster whom Russian troops once reported killing in
late 2001.

Russian television showed the country's prosecutor general, Vladimir Ustinov, as
he informed President Vladimir V. Putin of the bombing.

"This came from other countries," he said. "We will establish where they are
hatched and how they are financed."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In an image made from TV, an official stood near a bus wrecked
by a suicide bomber in Mozdok, Russia, 35 miles from the border of Chechnya. The
attack killed at least 18 people, as well as the woman with the bomb. (RTR via
Associated Press) Map of Russia highlighting Mozdok: The bus, carrying military
workers, was leaving Mozdok.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (93%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
AMNESTY (88%); INTERVIEWS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); RAIL CROSSINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); APPROVALS (76%); REFERENDUMS (75%); ARRESTS (73%); NURSES & NURSING
(73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); HOME SECURITY
(69%); PARDONS (64%); RELIGION (53%); SECURITY & ALARM SYSTEMS (50%) BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
REFERENDUMS;  WOMEN;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: WINES, MICHAEL

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             251 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Latin Lands Don't Share Powell's Priorities

BYLINE:  By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, June 9


Meeting with foreign ministers from Latin America and the Caribbean today,
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell moved to smooth over differences from the
diplomatic wrangle that preceded the war in Iraq, but encountered divergences on
issues like trade and human rights.

At the annual assembly of the Organization of American States here, Mr. Powell
was nearly alone in focusing on the triple scourge he described as "tyrants,
traffickers and terrorists." For the most part, representatives of the 33 other
nations taking part emphasized the need for social justice, warningthat
democracy itself could be threatened by mounting economic difficulties and
inequality.

"Clearly, we live at a time when not only has our economic growth been seriously
hampered, but also more and more questions are raised about how our governments
should act to overcome such obstacles," the organization's secretary general,
Cesar Gaviria, told the delegates. "It has surely been a mistake to have
believed that development is determined solely by economic factors."

On Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Powell was attending an O.A.S. conference in Lima, Peru,
on strengthening democratic values. Since then, however, the nations of Latin
American and the Caribbean have complained consistently that as far as the Bush
administration is concerned, they have "fallen off the map," in the words of an
official from one South American nation, except in connection with the war
against terrorism.

Both Chile and Mexico are currently members of the United Nations Security
Council, and as such were the objects of intense American lobbying during the
diplomatic maneuvering before the war in Iraq. But in a region that has
experienced numerous American interventions over the past century, there was
little popular support for the United States position, and neither country ended
up voting as Washington wanted.

Mr. Powell also met little enthusiasm for his strong condemnation of recent
human rights abuses in Cuba. He challenged the foreign ministers to work with
the United States to "hasten the inevitable democratic transition in Cuba." He
also reminded them that the Inter-American Democratic Charter, which the group
approved in 2001, "declares that the peoples of the Americas have a right to
democracy," adding, "It does not say the peoples of the Americas except Cubans
have the right to democracy."

Canada's foreign affairs minister, Bill Graham, said that " many of my
colleagues do not believe that this O.A.S. of ours is the appropriate forum to
discuss this" because Cuba does not have a chance to defend itself and is seen
as a victim of the longstanding American embargo.

The conference here began Sunday, two days after the United States and Chile
signed a free-trade agreement in Miami that was a result of nearly a decade of
on-again, off-again talks. Many Chileans have expressed concern that their
government's opposition to the Iraq war could hamper approval of the accord by
the United States Congress, but Mr. Powell, who met with Chile's president,
Ricardo Lagos, and other senior officials today, made a point of arguing
otherwise.

"We were disappointed in the Chilean position," he told reporters traveling on
the plane with him from Washington, but "we're anxious to talk about the future
and not the past." For that reason, he said, "I don't see any lasting
consequences" to the deep-rooted opposition all over Latin America to the
invasion of Iraq.

In his remarks this morning, Mr. Powell acknowledged that "an unfettered market
alone does not guarantee sustained development." But he also urged the
organization's members to support the United States' plan for a Free Trade
Agreement of the Americas by 2005, saying it would lead to "a partnership of
strong, equal and prosperous countries living and trading in freedom."

But there has been both resistance to the American proposal and skepticism that
the separate pact with Chile, which is widely seen as less generous than an
agreement with the European Union that went into effect on Jan. 1, can serve as
a template for a regional agreement.

Mr. Powell described the accord with Chile as "an important way station" on the
path to hemispheric free trade, but opposition is strong, especially in Brazil,
which is the co-chairman of the trade talks and feels that Washington is
demanding a lot and offering relatively little.

"They're not going to eliminate agricultural subsidies, and the reason is very
simple," the Brazilian president, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, said in a speech
last week, referring to Washington's position on the export sector in which
Latin America is most competitive. "Bush is seeking re-election in 2004."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, right, with President
Ricardo Lagos of Chile yesterday at the government palace in Santiago, the
capital. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); SOCIAL
JUSTICE (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (77%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); FREE TRADE
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); ECONOMIC GROWTH
(77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (75%); TRENDS (74%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); TRADE TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (62%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (60%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND
TRENDS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (54%) ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%); LIMA, PERU (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); LATIN AMERICA (94%); CUBA (94%); CHILE (94%); IRAQ
(94%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (93%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); CANADA (79%); PERU (79%);
MEXICO (79%)

REGION: LATIN AMERICA;  SANTIAGO (CHILE)

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             252 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Mexico: Three-Way Extradition

BYLINE:  By Antonio Betancourt (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 126 words


In a decision hailed as strengthening international justice, the Supreme Court
upheld the extradition of an Argentine ex-navy officer to Spain on charges of
torture, genocide and terrorism during Argentina's 1976-1983 military
dictatorship.

The Argentine, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, was arrested three years ago in Cancun.
The Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon, who tried to extradite the Chilean dictator
Augusto Pinochet to Spain to face charges relating to crimes committed during
his rule, sought Mr. Cavallo's extradition. Human rights experts said the
extradition of Mr. Cavallo would be the first time someone accused of rights
abuses in one country would have been sought for trial in a second nation and
extradited by a third.   Antonio Betancourt (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (96%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); MILITARY RULE (87%); TERRORISM (87%); JUDGES
(86%); APPEALS (86%); ARRESTS (85%) EXTRADITION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
TORTURE;  TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: BETANCOURT, ANTONIO; CAVALLO, RICARDO MIGUEL

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); ARGENTINA (92%); CHILE (92%)

REGION: ARGENTINA;  MEXICO;  SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Gays Who Marry In Canada Face Hurdles

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


Gay Americans who visit Canada to marry may revel in their newfound status
there, but they will come home to a confusing patchwork of overlapping
jurisdictions and competing laws and are likely to face a struggle for
recognition, legal experts say.

It is too soon to tell the legal implications here of Canada's decision to allow
same-sex couples to wed, the experts said. But the ease of marrying in Canada --
it has no residency requirement -- is expected to lure numerous Americans
seeking to sanctify their relationships or make a political statement.

When they return, they will find a landscape of legal battles and a federal
government that has determined that marriage may only occur between a man and a
woman.

"Couples who marry in Ontario and return to the United States seeking the same
rights, responsibilities and obligations that heterosexual married couples
receive should be aware that discriminatory laws in this country remain a
problem," said Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign,
a gay advocacy group. "We will continue working to end marriage discrimination
in this country."

Most experts predict that a newlywed gay couple will eventually seek to test the
legality of their Canadian marriage, although no one knows the exact
circumstances. It might, for example, be a couple in Texas seeking to adjust
their immigration status through marriage.

Canadian visitors to the United States may also press the point. If one gay
married partner driving to Florida is hurt in a car accident, does the other
have a spouse's right to make medical decisions or file a wrongful death suit?

Some critics of same-sex marriage say that, regardless of the legal
distinctions, Canada's move should be viewed as an assault on the traditional
nuclear family and serve as a wake-up call to Americans.

"Marriage is the foundational institution of civilization," Ken Connor,
president of the Family Research Council, said in a statement. Same-sex unions
"devalue" the sanctity of marriage, he said.

"Unless the American people rise up to defend this indispensable institution, we
could lose marriage in a very short time," Mr. Connor added. "What's happening
in Canada is a warning to America."

Gay rights groups are advising their members not to force the issue in the
United States until they can determine what kind of case would set the best
legal precedent. In the meantime, Canadian-wed couples can expect a mixed
reception in the United States, with some businesses and localities recognizing
their union, and federal offices and a majority of states rejecting it.

Federal law is clear on same-sex marriages. In 1996, Congress approved the
Defense of Marriage Act, which said that marriage applied only to persons of the
opposite sex. For purposes of income taxes, Social Security, immigration and
other federal activities, the Canadian marriage would not be recognized.

Still, marriage is an institution regulated by the states. The Constitution
establishes that one state will recognize the public acts and rulings of another
under the "full faith and credit" clause. Historically, people who have been
married in one state have been treated as married in all.

But marriage in Canada leaves lawyers to seek other precedents. Generally, a
principle of "comity" has applied with foreign countries, under which Americans
recognize foreign marriages and may expect their own to be accepted abroad.

Thirty-seven states have their own versions of the Defense of Marriage Act. But
those that do not include some large states like New York and Ohio, making them
likely testing grounds for a challenge by advocates of gay marriage.

Some states, like California, send mixed signals. The state approved an
initiative in 2000 that asserted, "Only marriage between a man and a woman is
valid or recognized in California." But California has also been at the
forefront of expanding domestic partners' rights.

Vermont, which already allows for civil unions, may be expected to embrace
Canadian marriages. Hawaii and Connecticut, which allow benefits for
nontraditional pairs, may also endorse the marriages, as may cities that now
maintain registries for domestic partners. Legal challenges for civil marriage
rights are pending in Massachusetts and New Jersey.

Some gay marriage advocates warn that couples should not be hasty in their
decision to wed in Canada. While marrying is relatively easy, getting divorced
is another matter, requiring a year's residency in the country.

"The trend is going to be a little bit of chaos for a while," said Jon W.
Davidson, senior counsel at Lambda Legal, a lesbian and gay legal group. "It's
very exciting. They're calling it the Canadian earthquake."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); COHABITATION (90%); MARRIAGE (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LGBT RIGHTS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (89%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE
LAWS (79%); SOCIAL SECURITY (78%); MARRIAGE LAW (78%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (78%);
WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%);
APPROVALS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); EXECUTIVES (67%); IMMIGRATION (65%);
WRONGFUL DEATH & SURVIVAL (50%) MARRIAGES;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;
DISCRIMINATION;  RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (55%)

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (58%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: CANADA

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             257 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Study Says Government Has Improperly Detained Foreign Children

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


Foreign children fleeing violence and persecution in their home countries are
often improperly detained for months in bleak detention centers in the United
States without access to lawyers or psychological services, a study released
today said.

The report, which surveyed 33 detention centers around the country, found that
undocumented children who arrive in this country without caretakers are often
strip-searched, shackled and housed with juveniles who have been convicted of
crimes.

The study was conducted by the human rights group Amnesty International, which
advocates for less restrictive placements or foster homes for children who are
awaiting determination of their legal status.

"We found frequently instances of abuse such as solitary confinement for such
offenses as poor hygiene or poor sportsmanship or misuse of grammar," said
William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A.

"We found use of shackles and belly chains and leg irons on children as young as
7 when they appear in court," Mr. Schulz said. "What is most disturbing about
this is it reflects a mentality that would punish those who have been seriously
harmed already in their home countries rather than offering them protection and
a quick adjudication of their claims."

Government officials said they welcomed the report and were reviewing the
conditions at its centers. For decades, the federal immigration service was
responsible for unaccompanied immigrant children. In March, the children were
transferred to the care of the Department of Health and Human Services, a move
hailed by advocates for immigrants.

Officials at the Department of Health and Human Services inherited the
often-criticized detention system from the immigration service and said they
were working hard to improve it. About 500 unaccompanied minors are currently
being held while the government seeks to adjudicate their immigration claims.

"It's an important piece of information for us as we move forward in
implementing this program," Wade Horn, the department's assistant secretary for
children and families, said of the Amnesty report.

"We've been out visiting the various facilities we have contracts with to ensure
that those facilities are in fact appropriate," Mr. Horn said in an interview.
"What we've been doing is trying as best we can to put in place a system where
the focus is on the individual needs of the child and making sure the placement
is consistent with the needs and circumstances of that child."

The study found that nearly 50 percent of the detention facilities surveyed had
improperly housed immigrant children in the same cells with juvenile offenders.
Nearly 60 percent of the centers used solitary confinement to discipline
children, even for minor infractions.

More than a dozen of the centers failed to provide lists of lawyers so that the
children could be represented in court.

Mr. Schulz said he was encouraged by his talks with officials at the human
services department and said they seemed committed to improving the system.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); RESEARCH REPORTS (91%); CHILDREN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (90%);
FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); PRISONS (89%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION
CENTERS (89%); FOSTER CARE (78%); CHILD WELFARE (78%); REFUGEES (78%); JUVENILE
CRIME (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (78%); FAMILY (78%); POLITICAL
ASYLUM (78%); PSYCHOLOGY (77%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (71%)
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  LEGAL
PROFESSION;  MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS;  SEARCH AND SEIZURE

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT; IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             258 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The International Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 185 words


To the Editor:

In "U.N. Renews U.S. Peacekeepers' Exemption From Prosecution" (news article,
June 13), you say the American deputy representative at the United Nations
Security Council claims that it would violate the United States Constitution and
"a central principle of international law" if the International Criminal Court
could prosecute an American without the United States' having ratified the
court's treaty.

But it would hardly violate the Constitution or international law if, say, the
British government were to prosecute an American for committing murder on the
streets of London. Similarly, there is no impropriety if, in certain cases of
genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity committed on its territory,
Britain delegates prosecutorial powers to the International Criminal Court.

That the United States hasn't ratified the court's treaty is irrelevant. All
that matters is that the government on whose territory an American might commit
such crimes has ratified the treaty, as 90 governments to date have done.

KENNETH ROTH
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, June 13, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (69%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Innocence of Youth Is Victim of Congo War

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: BUNIA, Congo


The warlords have killed even childhood here.

As militia groups battle for control of this provincial town in Congo's
northeast, Bunia's young are paying a high price. The war has shuttered their
schools, left them lame and hungry, killed their parents before their eyes. It
has turned children into merciless killers and haunted them with memories of
mayhem unfitting for the most hard-bitten grown-ups. Girls have been raped,
toddlers have been butchered, babies left crying among dead bodies.

The other day, as a convoy of ambassadors from the United Nations Security
Council cruised along Bunia's main street for a brief visit, Jean de Dieu Udaga,
a serious-looking boy of 14, stood in front of a makeshift hospital. His parents
had been gunned down in front of him last month. He had run for his life, with
legs chewed up by shrapnel.

Today, his legs have almost healed, but nothing else has. Jean, one of this
town's countless orphans, has no place to go beyond the flimsy mattress on this
hospital floor -- no place except, children's advocates fear, into the ranks of
the child soldiers who parade these streets with hand grenades instead of toys.

What this rattled generation might one day wreak is impossible to know. For now,
the question on the minds of relief workers is whether and how to bring to
justice the adults who have violated their rights. The Security Council
delegation, on its recent visit to Bunia, promised an end to impunity for rights
abusers.

So far, the United Nations peacekeeping mission in this country has been able to
do little to stanch the violence. The Security Council now faces the hard
question of whether to fortify the mission's mandate, which expires at the end
of June. It is scheduled to take up the matter on June 23.

All the countries involved in the four-and-a-half-year war in this country --
the Congolese government in Kinshasa, as well as neighboring Uganda and Rwanda
-- have ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, but
that seems like a cruel abstraction now. Under international law, militia
leaders who recruit child soldiers, to say nothing of those who rape and kill
children, can be tried as war criminals. A report by the United Nations
secretary general turned up 10 different armed groups in this country that were
recruiting child soldiers.

"We very much hope that the perpetrators of the violence, wherever they are
coming from, will pay," said Kristine Peduto, a child protection adviser for the
United Nations mission in Bunia. "Those who are raping, those who are killing,
those who are responsible for human rights abuses, and especially the abuse of
children."

On the day the Security Council came to visit, a group of idle, restless
teenagers stood on a street corner, recounting the horrors they had seen.

An 18-year-old said his parents had fled, leaving him to care for his little
brother. A 20-year-old with a carefully trimmed flattop said he saw two men get
gunned down as they ran to safety. His brother had been killed the same day, his
mother was killed two years ago in their home village.

A third youth, Djamila, cocky and 17, recalled seeing a man stabbed to death a
few feet away. His parents had run away too, leaving him to support himself by
selling bread and cigarettes on the streets. He described his predicament with a
cool shrug. His parents, he said, could not have protected him from the terror
of Bunia anyway.

"They could kill my father," Djamila said matter-of-factly, "or they could kill
me in front of my father."

Across the road stood what was once a counseling center for traumatized
children. It has since been looted. Schools have been closed for two months.

Down the street, later that day, Jean de Dieu, the 14-year-old orphan, stood
rubbing his wounded leg and staring off into space. Marie Salome, whose own
children were recovering on a mattress next to his, said Jean de Dieu often
stares off into space. He often refuses to eat too. Sometimes, she said, he
broods and his eyes fill with tears.

On this afternoon, Jean de Dieu stepped outside to watch the convoy of United
Nations ambassadors. He especially liked watching the French soldiers who led
the way, standing stiff in their jeeps with stylish sunglasses and menacing
machine guns. Watching them, he said, took away his worries for a little while.

Not far from the hospital that same afternoon was Sahra, 6. She too had lost her
parents to the war a few weeks before. Ever since, she had stopped speaking.

No one yet knows the number of orphans scattered in and around Bunia. The United
Nations mission here has registered 250 children who have been separated from
their parents; in Beni, a town 60 miles to the south where many of Bunia's
residents fled during the latest fighting, the United Nations has registered
another 2,000 abandoned children.

The plight of Bunia's children is by no means unusual by the standards of this
war. Of the estimated 3.3 million Congolese who have died, amajority have been
civilians felled not by bullet wounds but by preventable diseases, like diarrhea
and measles. Children make up a large share of the victims.

More than 12 percent of children do not reach their first birthday, according to
estimates by the United Nations Children's Fund. The number of street children
in Congolese cities has swollen. Villages and small towns are rife with
malnourished youngsters with swollen bellies and yellowing hair.

According to a 2001 report by the United Nations Children's Fund, 16 percent of
children under the age of 1 suffer from acute malnutrition. "The war has taken
an enormous toll on children and other civilians," the Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict, a New York-based organization, said in a report released in
mid-June.

On the way to the airport at the end of the same day, the Security Council
convoy passed by a displaced people's camp. A young man, now 19, was too afraid
to step beyond its barbed wire fence. At age 16, prodded by his village elders,
he had signed up with a local militia and been shipped off for training to an
army camp in neighboring Uganda.

Blessedly, in his view, he was released just as he was about to be sent away to
fight. The United Nations Children's Fund negotiated with the Ugandan government
for his release, along with dozens of other boys.

Today, he keeps a low profile in the tarpaulin tent he shares with his family.
He never steps out. Among the rebels that now rule this town are young men who
were once his brothers in arms. They would force him to join, he said, or kill
him. All the other child soldiers who were demobilized with him two years ago
have signed up to fight again. Night after night, boys as young as he was once
leave the camp and join the local militia. Most of them, he says, are pressured
by their elders, as he once was.

That evening, after the Security Council members had boarded their planes and
left Bunia to the dark, a barefoot boy came running up a dirt road, his eyes
round and red, howling in terror. The boy's father, an operating room nurse at
the hospital that Jean de Dieu now calls home, had been strangled and left to
die. The boy was the first to discover his body, slumped over a chair with a
bedsheet tied around his neck.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two weapon-toting boys in Bunia, Congo, are among the thousands
of youths living in the grip of war. (Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg.
A1); A teenage boy's arm was cut off in a machete attack in Bunia, where militia
groups are battling for control.; A teenager, rear, one of Congo's many child
soldiers, uses a bag printed with cartoon figures to store grenades.; Jean de
Dieu Udaga, 14, has lived at a hospital in Bunia, Congo, since his parents were
killed in front of him. (Photographs by Michael Kamber for The New York
Times)(pg. A11) Map of Congo highlighting Bunia: Rival militias are vying for
Bunia, in Congo's northeast border area. (pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (89%); CHILD
WELFARE (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
ADOLESCENTS (78%); ORPHANS (78%); CHILD ABUSE (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(77%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); SEX OFFENSES (76%);
PEACEKEEPING (75%); SHOOTINGS (73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (71%); CHILD ABUSE
PROGRAMS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); POLITICS (60%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (60%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SEX CRIMES;  GRENADES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI

CITY: KINSHASA, CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (95%); RWANDA (79%); UGANDA (79%)

REGION: CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE);  BUNIA (CONGO)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             263 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Judge Sends Argentine to Prison on Genocide Charge

BYLINE:  By EMMA DALY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: MADRID, June 29


The former Argentine naval officer extradited from Mexico was jailed without
bail today pending his trial here on charges of genocide and terrorism relating
to the years of Argentina's military dictatorship.

In an unusual act of international judicial cooperation, and a victory for the
Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon, Mexico's Supreme Court ruled this month that the
former officer, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, could be extradited to Spain for crimes
reportedly committed in a third country, Argentina.

Judge Garzon failed three years ago to have Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former
Chilean dictator, extradited to Spain on similar charges, and human rights
activists hailed the Cavallo decision as a vindication of the principle of
"universal jurisdiction" for very serious crimes.

Mr. Cavallo is accused of kidnapping, torturing and murdering hundreds of
people, including several Spaniards, at the School of Naval Mechanics, known as
ESMA, in Buenos Aires, which functioned as a clandestine torture center.

As many as 30,000 people were killed or disappeared in Argentina from 1976 to
1983, part of a policy to wipe out opposition to the military dictatorship. Many
were tortured, drugged and thrown from aircraft into the River Plate or the
Atlantic Ocean, or buried in mass graves.

This systematic pursuit of opponents prompted the charges of genocide and
terrorism, although the Mexican court ruled that Mr. Cavallo could not be tried
on the charge of torture because the statute of limitations had expired.

When ordering Mr. Cavallo's imprisonment today, Judge Garzon wrote, "All the
structures of the Argentinian state were put at the service of one purpose: to
end all subversion."

Judge Garzon interviewed Mr. Cavallo twice in his office at Spain's National
Court in Madrid. At their first meeting, in the morning, the 51-year-old
Argentine said he had not seen the charges, and was handed an indictment that
runs to almost 200 pages. In the afternoon, Mr. Cavallo refused to make a
statement, maintaing that, as an Argentine Navy captain, doing so would violate
his country's rules.

A Spanish state prosecutor, Pedro Rubira, whose office argued against legal
efforts to have General Pinochet extradited, asked for Mr. Cavallo's release,
saying that Spain did not have jurisdiction in the case. Judge Garzon disagreed.

In the ruling ordering that Mr. Cavallo be sent at once to Soto del Real Prison
outside Madrid, Judge Garzon wrote, "It should not be forgotten that he is
accused of the international crimes of genocide and terrorism, which assault the
very essence ofhumanity, and whose victims are not only those directly affected
but also the international community."

Outside the court, a small crowd of protesters carried banners recalling the
30,000 who "disappeared" in Argentina's so-called dirty war.

On Jan, 12, 1977, Malou Cerruti watched helplessly as soldiers seized her
husband, Omar Masera, at their home, along with her father, Victorio Cerruti.

"I never heard anything from them again," she said. "I found out from human
rights groups that they were in ESMA. I don't know how long they were kept there
alive." But within weeks they had signed over the family fortune, estimated then
at $10 million, to their torturers.

"Now I want Cavallo to tell us where they were killed, if they are buried in
mass graves or if they were thrown out of planes," said Ms. Cerruti, one of 23
witnesses set to testify against Mr. Cavallo. "And where the money went."

Marcelo Hernandez, a left-wing activist, was kidnapped along with a colleague
and benefactor, Conrado Gomez, and held at the School of Naval Mechanics for two
years. He was released, but Mr. Gomez, who was forced to turn over his cars,
property, race horses and cash to his torturers, was never seen by his family
again.

"This is a good sign to the world," said Mr. Hernandez, who will testify at Mr.
Cavallo's trial. "But I will not sing with joy because I still have those
memories -- one can never be happy again after that. I'm not seeking vengeance,
but justice for the thousands of Conrados."

He, Ms. Cerruti and Federico Gomez, son of Conrado, say that Mr. Cavallo and his
military comrades used the money stolen from their victims to set up a network
of businesses across Latin America.

At the time of his arrest in 2000, Mr. Cavallo, who went by the name of Miguel
Angel Cavallo, was living in Mexico, where he ran the private National Registry
of Motor Vehicles. He has acknowledged being a member of the Argentine military,
but denied involvement in torture.

After Judge Garzon closes his phase of the case, it will be sent to a
three-judge tribunal. Lawyers for the prosecution said Mr. Cavallo's trial was
not likely to start before 2004.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A protester at the National Court in Madrid hung a poster of
Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, who was jailed without bail on a charge of genocide.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); JUDGES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY RULE
(90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); TORTURE (90%); NAVIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); JURISDICTION (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); BAIL (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (78%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(75%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (94%); BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (57%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (95%); ARGENTINA (95%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             277 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slow on Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 97 words


To the Editor:

Re "Clearing of Illinois Death Row Is Greeted by Cheers Overseas" (news article,
Jan. 14):

When the United States abolished slavery a century and a half ago, we were
behind the times compared with our European counterparts.

Perhaps the difference between the resoundingly positive international reception
of Gov. George Ryan's commutations and the embittered debate his action has
prompted domestically suggests that the American people are once again trailing
behind the international community on issues of human rights.

MATTHEW LANGER
Princeton, N.J., Jan. 14, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
SLAVERY (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); PARDONS (83%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); AMNESTY (59%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;
MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS

PERSON: RYAN, GEORGE (GOV); LANGER, MATTHEW

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); EUROPE (90%)

REGION: ILLINOIS

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2003 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IMMIGRATION;
U.S. Plan to Monitor Muslims Meets With Widespread Protest

BYLINE:   By BARRY JAMES,  International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 685 words


American plans to fingerprint and register visitors from a number of
predominantly Muslim countries met with widespread protest and indignation
yesterday. The foreign minister of Pakistan made plans to fly to the United
States this weekend to protest in person, and the government of Indonesia
advised its citizens to avoid traveling to the United States.

Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri, the Pakistani minister, said the decision to place his
country on a list of nations whose male citizens must be fingerprinted,
photographed, interviewed and registered was blatantly unfair in light of
Pakistan's crucial role in combating Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

"Our effort is to get Pakistan out of the list," Mr. Kasuri said in a television
interview before he was to fly to the United States today. He will attend a
one-day meeting of foreign ministers from the 15 nations on the Security Council
at the United Nations in New York on Monday before visiting Washington for talks
with American officials.

"We are a front-line state. It's unfair to bracket us with other countries," he
told Agence France-Presse in an interview last week, when word of the American
plans had already begun to leak.

The American requirements have become a major political issue in Pakistan, where
the perception that the United States is hostile to Muslims and to Pakistanis
has stoked a rising tide of anti-American sentiment.

"We understand American concerns regarding security, but Pakistan cannot be
equated with other countries, that's what we are telling the United States," Mr.
Kasuri said.

Pakistanis comprise the largest number of Muslims visiting or temporarily
residing in the United States.

The Patriot Act, which is intended to allow authorities to track potential
terrorists, was passed in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, and requires
men from the designated countries who are visiting or living in the United
States without permanent resident alien status to register with the Immigration
and Naturalization Service. The measure concerns only males above the age of 16.

An embassy spokesman said the Pakistani ambassador to the United States, Ashraf
Jehangir Qazi, emphasized that Pakistan was an important partner in the campaign
against terrorism.

Meanwhile, the Indonesian government advised its citizens to put off all
nonessential travel to the United States after the country's foreign minister,
Marty Natalegawa, dismissed the new regulations as "arbitrary, hard to
understand and unacceptable."

A spokesman said the government was telling its citizens not to travel "to avoid
unwanted difficulties."

Bangladesh, which this week was added to the list of 25 countries whose
nationals have to register, also is officially upset. Its foreign secretary,
Shamser Mobin Chowdhury, said the registration requirement was an affront to
Bangladesh's "credentials as a moderate, Muslim democracy" that was committed to
the global effort against terrorism.

Human rights groups have condemned the registration requirement as racial
profiling and said the measure had created a climate of fear after some who
turned up to register had been detained because of visa violations. Foreigners
who fail to register face possible arrest, detention, fines and deportation. In
addition, visitors from the designated countries are being fingerprinted and
photographed at points of entry.

Despite more stringent immigration tests, the Immigration and Naturalization
Service acknowledged earlier this month that more than 300,000 people ordered to
be deported were still living illegally in the United States.

Earlier this week, immigration authorities extended until Feb. 7 the deadline
for registering for citizens of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Eritrea, Lebanon,
Morocco, North Korea, Oman, Qatar, Somalia, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates
and Yemen, who originally had been told to register by Jan. 7.

Pakistanis and Saudis must report by Feb. 21. Citizens of Bangladesh, Egypt,
Kuwait and Jordan were told this week to register between Feb. 24 and March 28.
Men from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Sudan and Syria had to register last month, by Dec.
16.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 21, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on Saturday about protests abroad over American plans to
fingerprint and register visitors from predominantly Muslim countries misstated
the title of an Indonesian official who said the plans were unacceptable. The
official, Marty Natalegawa, is a Foreign Ministry spokesman, not the foreign
minister.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); RELIGION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); TERRORISM (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%);
IMMIGRATION (89%); FINGERPRINTING (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); TRAVEL WARNINGS (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(75%); US PATRIOT ACT (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); RACIAL PROFILING (73%);
AGENCY RULEMAKING (72%); RACE & RACISM (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); PLATFORMS &
ISSUES (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%); UNITED
NATIONS (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (96%); INDONESIA (93%); BANGLADESH (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             281 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Palestinians Attack Jewish Settlement, Killing One Israeli

BYLINE:  By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Jan. 17


Two Palestinian gunmen attacked an isolated Jewish settlement near the embattled
city of Hebron tonight, killing one Israeli and wounding three others. One of
the attackers was killed while the other escaped.

Tonight's attack came amid a wave of arrests as a jittery Israel approached
national elections on Jan. 28. The Israeli Army has rounded up scores of
Palestinians this week in a stepped-up campaign in response to a suicide bombing
in Tel Aviv less than two weeks ago that killed 22 people.

In the attack tonight, the two gunmen knocked on the door of what was described
by Israeli radio as a trailer home on an isolated hilltop in the Givat Harsina
settlement just north of the settlement of Qiryat Arba, known for its strongly
Zionist views.

An Israeli military spokesman said nine people were inside at their Sabbath
dinner around 7:30 p.m.

The man who answered the door shot and killed one of the the assailants, but
fell dead in the exchange of gunfire. The family's 4-year-old daughter and two
other people were wounded. The army said a second assailant escaped and
apparently managed to flee into the nearby Palestinian city of Hebron.

Hebron, where a tiny enclave of militant Israeli settlers live among a large
Palestinian population, has long been a trouble spot, and particularly so during
the recent conflict.

The violence today comes after an extensive roundup of Palestinians by the
Israeli Army. Beginning Tuesday, there have been reports of 20 to 30 arrests a
day, usually in raids looking for a specific suspect. Many of the arrests have
been made by a special undercover unit called Duvdevan, with soldiers dressed
like Arabs, others by troops from the Paratroop Brigade or other elite units
that have virtually taken over the major Palestinian cities. There were nine
arrests overnight in a series of operations in the West Bank, army radio
reported this afternoon.

In part the arrests appear to reflect worries that Palestinian suicide bombers
will strike again before the election, as they did in Tel Aviv the Sunday before
last. But Israeli officials also say the increased activity reflects better
intelligence -- some of it gleaned from earlier arrests and closer coordination
between the army, which has surrounded the Gaza Strip and reoccupied the West
Bank, and the Shin Bet, Israel's domestic intelligence service.

The Israeli human rights organization B'tselem reported two weeks ago that more
than 1,000 Palestinians were in custody, the most since 1991, during the earlier
intifada. Some old prison camps have been reopened, but the facilities are
strained and the Shin Bet does not have enough interrogators to keep up with the
flow of detainees.

A would-be Palestinian suicide bomber in a small booby-trapped boat was killed
off the coast of Gaza today when an Israeli ship shelled the craft, causing it
to explode, the Islamic militant group Hamas said.

A leaflet issued by Hamas identified the bomber as Mahmoud al-Jeemasi, said to
be in his 20's. The incident occurred in an area off the northern part of the
Gaza Strip, where a Palestinian fishing boat packed with explosives rammed into
an Israeli patrol boat two months ago, killing the bomber and slightly injuring
four Israeli crewmen.

An Israeli military spokesman also reported the shelling and explosion of the
small craft, but said it appeared to be unmanned.

This evening the army briefly lifted curfews so that residents of Nablus,
Bethlehem and Hebron could leave their homes long enough to buy provisions.

In Gaza City, several thousand people gathered for a rally in support of Iraq in
the face of a possible American-led war. It was a relatively small turnout by
the standard of Gaza rallies. Some chanted a slogan from the Persian Gulf war in
1991, when Saddam Hussein launched Scud missiles at Israel: "Our beloved Saddam,
strike Tel Aviv."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); SHOOTINGS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); IMPROVISED
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); HAMAS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (74%); RELIGION (73%); RIOTS (72%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (72%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(60%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%) TERRORISM;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  BOMBS
AND EXPLOSIVES;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE

PERSON: KIFNER, JOHN

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (93%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(92%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  HEBRON (ISRAEL);  GAZA STRIP;  IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             286 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRIEFLY NOTED;
BOSNIA SUSPECT

BYLINE:  By Daniel Simpson (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 72 words


NATO peacekeepers in Bosnia handed over to the local police a Muslim man they
had detained since October on suspicion of spying on their troops and having
links with Al Qaeda. Sabahudin Fiuljanin, who denies the allegations, has not
been formally charged with any crime, and the American-led NATO force has come
under pressure from human rights organizations to present evidence against him
before a court.   Daniel Simpson (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
PEACEKEEPING (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (88%); RELIGION (88%); ESPIONAGE (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (82%); HUMAN RIGHTS (82%); POLICE FORCES (59%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (51%) ISLAM;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); AL-QAEDA (91%) AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

PERSON: FIULJANIN, SABAHUDIN; SIMPSON, DANIEL

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             289 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

We Condemn Terror

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 142 words


To the Editor:

In a Jan. 30 news article describing an attempt by pro-Israel activists to
remove a Muslim representative from the New York City Human Rights Commission,
you write that "some experts on the Middle East have said that the Council on
American Islamic Relations has links to terrorist groups."

(The Muslim representative serves as legal counsel to CAIR.)

CAIR, a mainstream national Muslim organization, has issued statements
condemning terrorism in all its forms.

We condemned the 9/11 attacks, suicide bombings in the Middle East, the killing
of the journalist Daniel Pearl, church bombings in Pakistan, the murder of
missionaries in Yemen, as well as other terrorist incidents perpetrated by those
claiming to act in the name of Islam.

IBRAHIM HOOPER
Natl. Communications Dir., Council
on American Islamic Relations
Washington, Jan. 30, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); TERRORISM (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); MUSLIM
AMERICANS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); JOURNALISM (88%);
WRITERS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); BOMBINGS (87%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); MURDER (55%); LAWYERS (55%)
TERRORISM;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL ON AMERICAN-ISLAMIC RELATIONS

PERSON: HOOPER, IBRAHIM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); ISRAEL (92%); YEMEN (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             290 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

On a Mission To Shine A Spotlight On Genocide;
Samantha Power's Mind Leaps From Bosnia to Iraq

BYLINE:  By CELESTINE BOHLEN

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1751 words


By her own definition Samantha Power is a child of Bosnia. Not literally: born
in Ireland in 1970, she came to the United States when she was 9. With her
billowy red hair and long-legged stride, she exudes a purposeful all-American
energy that is far from the bleakness of the Balkans.

But Bosnia is where she came of age, she says, just as a generation before hers
was marked by Vietnam, and another was defined by World War II.

"Our view of American power was born" in Bosnia, said Ms. Power, author of "A
Problem From Hell," about American responses to genocide in the last century
that has prompted new debates about the moral responsibilities that go with
American power.

She came to Bosnia in 1993, joining the swarms of freelance reporters drawn to
the unfolding war.

The story there was shocking -- a widening arc of atrocities against victims
targeted not for what they had done, but for who they were -- all taking place
on a continent where genocide was never supposed to happen again. But more
shocking for this 23-year-old, one year out of Yale University, was that the
American government seemed unwilling to stop it.

The final blow came in Srebrenica, a doomed town that had been designated a
"safe haven" by the United Nations and its international peacekeepers, where in
July 1995 an estimated 7,000 Muslim men and boys were massacred by Bosnian
Serbs.

Ms. Power then realized that newspaper articles -- however grisly, however
accurate -- do not change policy. She left the region in anger and frustration.
"It wasn't about me, Samantha," she said. "It was about impotence." Ms. Power's
response was to embark on what was to become a 610-page book, with a title
borrowed from the phrase once uttered by Warren Christopher, the former
secretary of state. She began as a reporter, and ended up with a mission.

There is an intensity in just about everything Ms. Power does, including the way
she speaks. She weaves ideas together so fast that sometimes she has to jot down
what she has just said, to remind herself how she made the leap from one subject
to another.

She grew up with sports -- her mother was an Irish squash champion -- and her
first ambition was to be a sports broadcaster.

Returning to the United States in the mid-1990's Ms. Power was struck by this
country's rediscovery of the horrors of the Holocaust, through books, films and
newly opened museums. The words "never again" had become a political
commonplace. But to her ears, they seemed a mockery of the policy failures she
had witnessed in Bosnia.

When she went looking for books to explain this discrepancy, she could not find
any, so she decided to write one herself.

"It was a totally innocent book," she said. "This was not a graduate-school
thesis. I just wanted to find out the answer to the question: What was the
American response and why?"

Her friends in this period described her obsession as "all genocide, all the
time." A die-hard Red Sox fan (is there any other kind?) who attended 45 games
last season, she found herself at a party talking to her idol, the pitcher Pedro
Martinez. Only later did she realize that she hadn't let him get a word in, as
she bombarded him with accounts of Rwanda and Bosnia.

The book has been praised for its mix of scholarship and journalism. It starts
with an account of a futile effort by Henry Morgenthau, then the United States
ambassador to Turkey, to persuade Washington to stop the killing of Armenians by
the Ottoman Turks in 1915 and moves on to the compelling and little-known story
of Raphael Lemkin, a Jewish linguist from Poland whose family was killed in the
Holocaust and who waged an obsessive battle to put genocide -- a word he coined
-- on the international agenda.

But the crux of "A Problem From Hell" is an account of how American foreign
policy -- despite the Holocaust -- stayed largely silent in the face of the
atrocities in Cambodia, Iraq, Bosnia and most recently and dramatically in
Rwanda. The United States pushed for the withdrawal of United Nations troops
from Rwanda as the slaughter of 800,000 Tutsis got under way.

In the case of Bosnia, the United States did take action -- albeit belatedly,
and through NATO -- and later in Kosovo led NATO in a bombing campaign to force
the Serbs to stop their atrocities against the rebellious ethnic Albanians
there.

Ms. Power, now 32, wrote the book in five years, traveling to the Balkans and
other site of genocide and managing to graduate from Harvard Law School in 1999.
In 2001 her first publisher, Random House, dropped the book when, by her
account, she refused to make it "more personal, more polemical." New
Republic/Basic Books published the work last spring.

By the time "A Problem From Hell" came out, its analysis of Washington's
paralysis in the face of genocide seemed like an echo from the past. The
terrorist attacks of September 2001 had reshaped the world and made national
security the overriding foreign policy priority.

"Someone said the other day that genocide is so 1990's," Ms. Power said in a
borrowed office in New York, where the United Nations Security Council was
wrangling over the United States' apparent intention to wage war against Iraq.
"There is a way in which nonintervention now seems to be a moot point."

While the Bush administration is ready to intervene in Iraq in the name of
national security, there is no indication that humanitarian intervention, as
cited in Kosovo by the Clinton administration, is still a feature of American
policy.

And yet Ms. Power's book, which has been nominated for several prizes, has
stirred debate in foreign policy circles as diplomats and experts deal with the
question of when and how American power, military and diplomatic, should be
deployed on behalf of humanitarian goals.

Richard Holbrooke, the former United Nations ambassador and architect of the
Dayton accords that ended the Bosnian war, has declared it a "breakthrough
book"; he has distributed copies around the foreign policy circuit, including
one to the United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan.

"It is not about moralism as foreign policy, it is about moral values in foreign
policy," Mr. Holbrooke said. He likened Ms. Power to Maude Gonne, the fiery
Irish nationalist who was W. B. Yeats's longtime love and muse. (Ms. Power was
recently featured in an magazine advertisement for the luxury car Infiniti
promoting a book about projects and people trying to change the world. Ms. Power
said she hesitated before appearing in the ad, but went ahead on the theory that
it would put her theories "into the mainstream.")

Ms. Power bridles at critics who interpret the book as a simplistic call for
military intervention in cases of humanitarian crises. Her point, she said, is
not that the United States failed to intervene in Cambodia, Iraq or Rwanda, but
that it failed to do anything at all.

"If you think of foreign policy as a toolbox, there are a whole range of options
-- you can convene allies, impose economic sanctions, expel ambassadors, jam
hate radio," she said. "There is always something you can do, but if you look at
most of these cases, you see that the toolbox stays closed even when the
violations are bad, really bad, even when they are in the red zone."

In the case of Rwanda, for instance, genocide never came up at any cabinet
meeting, and the word was banned at the State Department. "Be careful," said one
document found by Ms. Power. "Legal at State was worried about this yesterday --
Genocide finding could commit (the U.S. Government) to actually 'do something.'
"

Ms. Power now teaches at the Carr Center for Human Rights Policy at Harvard
University. A colleague there, Michael Ignatieff, said her book "has had a big
echo." He said, "it raises such disturbing questions about how bureaucracies
advertently and inadvertently conspire to deny evil, and to construe themselves
to be helpless against evil."

Everyone, Ms. Power included, agrees that humanitarian intervention is never
simple. By its very definition, it implies a violation of another country's
sovereignty, which can have a destabilizing effect and lead to unintended
consequences; for instance, intervention did not stop ethnic cleansing in
Kosovo, where the Albanians have pushed out most Serbs, Roma and Gorani, a
Muslim minority.

Politics and history must be taken into account: after the Vietnam War,
Americans had no stomach for any involvement in Cambodia, no matter how horrible
the crimes of the Pol Pot regime. Many attribute Washington's passivity to the
genocide in Rwanda in April 1994 to the public's horrified response to the
botched humanitarian mission in Somalia the year before.

Anthony Lake, who was President Clinton's national security adviser, now admits
that the United States failed in Rwanda. "It was a failure of the international
community, and we are the leaders of that community," he said, adding that he
hopes Ms. Power's book will stimulate debate about how best to intervene in
humanitarian crises, including the largely unnoticed civil war in Southern
Sudan, which by his estimate has cost two million lives.

In The London Review of Books, Ms. Power's book was cited as an example of how
humanitarian intervention as embraced by American liberals helped lay the
groundwork for the Bush administration's policy of pre-emptive intervention, as
now foreseen for Iraq. "Having supported unilateralist intervention outside the
U.N. framework during the 1990's, liberals and progressives are simply unable to
make a credible case against Bush today," wrote Stephen Holmes, a professor at
New York University.

But Ms. Power questions the legitimacy of the Bush administration's approach.
"Because it adheres to international law in such a selective way, it lacks the
legitimacy to stand as the military guardian of human rights," she said. "A
unilateral attack would make Iraq a more humane place, but the world a more
dangerous place."

Ms. Power argues that Iraq exemplifies America's failure to recognize that
responding to genocide is in the national interest. In 1989, she noted, the
United States doubled its aid budget to Iraq, months after Saddam Hussein had
used chemical weapons against his Kurdish citizens, as well as against Iranian
soldiers.

Such policies lead to the credibility gap that she said the United States is
facing today as it tries to convince world public opinion of its motives for a
pending invasion of Iraq.

"You can't allow these kinds of crimes to go unnoticed, and not have them come
back and reflect on us," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: PROBLEM FROM HELL, A (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Far left, people departing from Bosnia in 1993.; Left, a
Cambodian woman and child at the Tuol Sleng torture center, where thousands were
killed under Pol Pot's rule.; Samantha Power, once a merely curious journalist,
is now on a mission to change policy regarding genocide. (Photographs by Suzanne
DeChillo/The New York Times above ; Gilles Peress/Magnum Photos below left ; and
Basic Books below right )

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (78%);
LITERATURE (75%); WORLD WAR II (75%); WRITERS (75%); WAR CRIMES (75%);
PEACEKEEPING (73%); HOLOCAUST (70%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(64%); SQUASH (60%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  BOOKS AND LITERATURE

ORGANIZATION: YALE UNIVERSITY (55%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (91%) BOHLEN, CELESTINE; POWER, SAMANTHA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); IRAQ (93%); CAMBODIA
(92%); IRELAND (90%); RWANDA (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  RWANDA;  CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             291 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Iraqis' Use of Poison Gas

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 208 words


To the Editor:

Re "A War Crime or an Act of War?," by Stephen C. Pelletiere (Op-Ed, Jan. 31):

In 1988, as a staff member working for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, I
documented Iraqi chemical weapons attacks on 49 Kurdish villages in Dihok
Province along Iraq's border with Turkey.

These attacks began on Aug. 25, 1988, five days after the Iran-Iraq war ended,
and were specifically targeted on civilians.

As a result of the committee's report, the Senate unanimously approved
comprehensive sanctions on Iraq.

Between March 1987 and August 1988, Iraq made extensive use of chemical weapons
against Kurdish villages as part of a campaign aimed at depopulating rural
Kurdistan. These attacks have been well documented by human rights groups,
forensic investigators and the Kurds themselves. Many occurred in places far
from the front line in the Iran-Iraq war.

The Kurdish survivors of the Halabja attack all blame Iraq, and many report
seeing Iraqi markings on the low-flying aircraft that delivered the lethal gas.
While the most deadly, the Halabja attack was one of between 60 and 180 such
attacks that took thousands of civilian lives.

PETER GALBRAITH
Washington, Feb. 3, 2003

The writer is a former United States ambassador to Croatia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); FOREIGN POLICY (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FORENSICS (73%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); WRITERS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%);
TERRORISM (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (72%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (68%) BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  KURDS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM

PERSON: GALBRAITH, PETER W

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);
TURKEY (92%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             294 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blockbuster Reinstates 2 Disabled Employees

BYLINE:  By BARBARA DELATINER

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: PORT WASHINGTON


NICHOLAS REICHMANN, 19, who has cerebral palsy, and Alice Szaluta, 28, who has a
learning disability, had worked part time at the Blockbuster store in Port
Washington, Mr. Reichmann for two and a half years and Ms. Szaluta for almost
eight years.

Their duties included greeting customers and rewinding and restocking tapes. Mr.
Reichmann also ran a cash register. Both got raises during their tenure, they
said, and Ms. Szaluta (pronounced SAH-loo-tah) received a five-year service
award from the company in 2000.

When a new manager took over last August, their hours were gradually reduced and
then in October, they were not scheduled to work at all, they said in a
complaint filed with the state's division of human rights. The company never
officially notified them that they were being fired, the complaint said;
instead, they found out only when work schedules were posted in December, and
they found the word "terminated" next to their names.

Mr. Reichmann and Ms. Szaluta contended that they were fired because of their
disabilities, and their complaint accused Blockbuster of discrimination. After
three weeks of negotiations, the two got their jobs back last week.

"We've reached an agreement in principle that includes both being hired back,"
said Christopher Murray, a partner in Reisman, Peirez & Reisman, the Garden City
law firm that is representing Mr. Reichmann and Ms. Szaluta at no charge. "We're
just waiting to put it into writing."

Randy Hargrove, a spokesman in Blockbuster's corporate office in Dallas, also
confirmed that the issue had been resolved. "We don't tolerate discrimination of
any type in employment and have disabled employees in many stores," he said.

Just who fired them is a matter of contention. Kenneth J. Gardner, the manager
who came to the store in August, said that Mr. Reichmann and Ms. Szaluta had
been dismissed by Blockbuster's district manager, Caroline Cavaseno.

"A manager is not authorized to fire anyone," he said. "She told me to tell her
what employees were not functioning as required and were not full-time, 20 to 25
hours a week in three shifts. I gave her six names, including Nick, who was
working only five hours a week, and Allie, who was doing one shift a week. She
terminated all of them."

"I'm not prejudiced against handicapped people -- I just took the fall," said
Mr. Gardner, 25, who was suspended by Blockbuster when the complaint was filed
with the state last month and then was dismissed by Blockbuster last Monday. He
said he had worked at Blockbuster for five years in 14 different stores on the
Island and in New Jersey.

Through Mr. Hargrove, the Blockbuster spokesman, Ms. Cavaseno denied that she
had dismissed Mr. Reichmann and Ms. Szaluta and said the matter had been handled
by Mr. Gardner.

A spokeswoman for the human rights division said that last year it had received
209 complaints about discrimination based on disabilities from Nassau and
Suffolk Counties.

Toni Reichmann, Mr. Reichmann's father, an architect who practices in Queens,
said that the issue was not financial. "This isn't about money," he said. "This
is about companies' taking advantage of handicapped people who are entitled to
work if they can do the job. Other companies need to be aware that they can't do
this to the handicapped."

The Reichmanns live around the corner from the Blockbuster store, which is in
the Soundview Marketplace. Mr. Reichmann worked there an average of 10 hours on
weekends, although he had asked for a full-time job there. Two years ago he took
a full-time job as a mailroom clerk at a Wall Street brokerage house, commuting
to work on the Long Island Rail Road while continuing to work at Blockbuster on
weekends.

Ms. Szaluta, who lives about a mile from the Blockbuster store and was driven to
and from work by her mother, had not sought other work since her job at
Blockbuster ended. "I feel too sad and depressed," she said.

Carole Weiner, a customer from Port Washington, said: "The store was filled with
all these people who weren't disabled and couldn't do their jobs, and then there
were Nick and Allie. I saw Nick most of the time, and he was a kid who
demonstrated a kind of devotion and energy to pure work that was tremendous. One
night I was looking for a film that no one else could find, and no sooner had I
gotten home than Nick called to tell me, 'Your movie came in."'

When Mr. Reichmann found out that Blockbuster had fired him, his family called
Craig Johnson, who represents the Reichmanns' district in the Nassau County
Legislature. After Mr. Johnson's office "got no satisfaction from talking to
Blockbuster's regional office and to corporate headquarters," Mr. Johnson said,
"I told them that my law firm would take their case at no charge."

Mr. Reichmann said he was not out for revenge. "They shouldn't have done that to
me and Allie," he said. "It was wrong. I want my job back -- that's the
important thing."

Ms. Szaluta said she wanted back pay and "mostly, I want a great big apology."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Mostly, I just want a great big apology," said Alice Szaluta,
above, who was rehired by Blockbuster. Nicholas Reichmann, shown below with his
mother, Joanne, said, "I want my job back -- that's the important thing."
(Photographs by George M. Gutierrez for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISABLED PERSONS (92%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%); DISABLED WORKERS
(90%); LEARNING DISABILITIES (89%); PART TIME EMPLOYMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION
(89%); DISMISSALS (88%); CEREBRAL PALSY (78%); DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (75%) LABOR;  DISCRIMINATION;  HANDICAPPED

COMPANY: REISMAN PEIREZ & REISMAN LLP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINMENT GROUP

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (54%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: SZALUTA, ALICE; REICHMANN, NICHOLAS; DELATINER, BARBARA

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (65%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: PORT WASHINGTON (NY)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hawks and Doves Line Up on Iraq

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 132 words


To the Editor:

I am distressed by Bill Keller's Feb. 8 column, "The I-Can't-Believe-I'm-a-Hawk
Club."

In my view, a pre-emptive war is justified only when genocide is, or is about to
be, inflicted by a government against its own people or the people of another
country.

That is why, like Mr. Keller, I supported the United States' action in Bosnia.
But it is also why I oppose a war in Iraq.

While Saddam Hussein is clearly a nasty man, there is nothing at this point to
indicate that he has an immediate intent to inflict genocide on his own people
or anyone else. The bombs dropped by "reluctant hawks" are no less lethal to
their victims than those propelled by avid hawks, and they certainly create no
less "collateral damage" for innocent civilians.

NORA ENGEL
Rockville, Md., Feb. 8, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (87%); GENOCIDE
(87%); IRAQ WAR (87%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); TERRORISM (66%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (71%) ENGEL, NORA; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); KELLER, BILL

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             297 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing United Nations: International Court Advances

BYLINE:  By Joya Rajadhyaksha (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 96 words


While the United States continues to oppose the International Criminal Court
being set up to prosecute individuals for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity, Afghanistan became the 89th country to ratify the Rome Statute
establishing the court.

The latest accession comes three days after the election of 18 judges to serve
on the court's first bench. The judges include seven women, as well as a balance
of representatives from different regions and with different areas of legal
expertise. They will be sworn in on March 11 in The Hague.   Joya Rajadhyaksha
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); WAR CRIMES
(91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE
AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: RAJADHYAKSHA, JOYA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             298 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1183 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

France and Germany Unite To Block U.S. on Iraq
France and Germany closed ranks against the United States, blocking attempts by
NATO to begin military planning for a conflict with Iraq and issuing a joint
declaration with Russia calling for intensified weapons inspections as an
alternative to war. The move by the three NATO members marks one of the most
serious cleavages in the history of the alliance.   A1

As the United States edges closer to attacking Iraq, the commander of American
forces in the Persian Gulf said the military would take much of the
responsibility for providing food and medicine to the Iraqi people from the
first day of any war.   A15


The Islamic group Ansar al-Islam, which the United States says has ties to both
Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda, abducted a man from a village in northern Iraq,
bringing to three the number of hostages it has taken in recent days. The
reasons for the latest abduction were uncertain.   A16

Kuwait has been facing a war with a certain ambivalence. New security measures,
including armored cars at major intersections and signs of a partial expatriate
exodus with the six-week closing of two American schools, prompted a recent case
of national jitters.   A17

U.S.-Europe Rift Over Food
Across Britain and most of the rest of Europe, tinkering with the genetic makeup
of crops to make them faster-growing and more resilient is seen as heretical, or
at the very least unhealthy. The United States trade representative recently
called Europe's stance "Luddite" and "immoral."   A3

Scarce Aid for Palestinians
The United Nations agency for Palestinian refugees said that without immediate
help it would run out of money next month to feed more than a million people in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip. It now feeds roughly a third of the Palestinian
population.   A10

Sentence for Chinese Dissident
International human rights groups expressed outrage at the life sentence handed
down to a dissident who had been based in the United States, while the Chinese
government released further details of what it said were his crimes. Wang
Bingzhang was the first political dissident to be charged under China's new
antiterrorism laws.   A10

NATIONAL   A18-27

Columbia Wing Identified, May Yield Clues to Disaster
NASA officials have identified a two-foot-long piece of wreckage from the space
shuttle Columbia as a piece of the left wing and computer equipment that may
contain useful data.   A1

NASA officials acknowledged that the agency never installed sensors meant to
detect collisions with debris in space or warn of soaring temperatures that
could endanger the leading edges of the shuttle's wings during re-entry.   A20

Protection of Wetlands Fading
The Army Corps of Engineers, the country's pre-eminent protector of wetlands, is
dealing with a project along the Texas coast and has been recalculating its
authority in what appears to be a broad retreat.   A1

Charity Head Pleads Guilty
The director of one of American's largest Muslim charities, a man depicted by
federal prosecutors as a key financier for Osama bin Laden, struck an
eleventh-hour plea agreement without admitting any ties to
Al Qaeda or terrorism.   A1

State May Medicate Inmate
Officials in Arkansas may force a prisoner on death row to take antipsychotic
medication to make him sane enough to execute, the federal appeals court in St.
Louis ruled, in a 6-to-5 decision.   A1

Budget Would Raise Rents
The Bush administration is proposing to increase rents charged to thousands of
poor people who receive federal housing assistance.   A18

Struggling With Class Sizes
Florida educators and Gov. Jeb Bush are grappling with just how to carry out a
measure to impose the most restrictive class-size limits in the nation.   A18

Bush Touts Church Unions
President Bush urged suburban churches to do more to promote radical
reconciliation by creating partnerships with poor urban congregations.   A22

Rethinking the Deficit
The Republican Study Committee, a group of the most fiscally conservative House
members have adopted a new attitude toward the deficit they once abhorred. They
are not fond of it, but they say it plays a useful role in fighting off
spending.   A24

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Diocese Protected Priests Says Suffolk Grand Jury
A Suffolk County grand jury accused Roman Catholic church officials on Long
Island of protecting scores of pedophile priests for decades by using sham
policies and a bogus "intervention team" to trick and silence victims, cover up
crimes, avoid scandals and minimize legal and financial consequences.   A1

Judge Prohibits March Near U.N.
A federal judge ruled that the city's refusal to grant a permit for a large
antiwar march past the United Nations does not violate the First Amendment.
Upholding the city's concerns about safety, the judge refused to issue an
injunction on behalf of the demonstrators, saying they should settle for a
stationary rally five blocks north of the U.N.   B1

'Dell Dude' Faces Drug Charge
Benjamin Curtis, 22, who plays "Steven, the Dell dude," in television
commercials, was arrested for buying a small bag of marijuana on the corner of
Ludlow and Rivington in Manhattan's Lower East Side   B2

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-10

Thinking Beyond the Shuttle
The space shuttles were to have been museum pieces by now. Instead, the
remaining three will be the backbone of the American space program for another
decade, possibly two. But the delays do have a silver lining. The design of a
replacement craft will be able to include previously unavailable technologies
like advanced engines.   F1

Health & Fitness   F5

FASHION   B10

SPORTS   D1-7

ARTS   E1-12

Goliath's Misplaced Head
While restoring Andrea del Verrocchio's sculpture of David, conservators
discovered that the head of Goliath resting between David's feet was not where
the Renaissance master had originally placed it. It had originally been slightly
behind the figure of David and to the left of his foot.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

U.S. Offers to End Tariffs On Textiles and Apparel
As the first stage in negotiations to expand free trade in the Western
hemisphere, the administration is offering to lift all tariffs on textiles and
apparel within five years.   C1

Ruling Against Credit Giants
Visa and MasterCard may have to repay $500 million in fees they collected from
people who used their cards abroad, according to a ruling by a California judge.
C1

Oil Companies Cautious
Despite the last few years of robust oil prices, many oil and gas companies are
hesitating about increasing their investments in oil production because they
fear volatile prices, according to a study by Cambridge Energy Research
Associates.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   B9

Ron Ziegler
President Richard M. Nixon's press secretary, who was known for referring to the
Watergate break-in as a "third-rate burglary." He was 63.   B9

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: Divisive diplomacy with Europe; Ethics -- in New York's Legislature?
Andres Martinez on Code Orange at Disneyland.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (88%); SPACE & AERONAUTICS AGENCIES (86%); SPACECRAFT (84%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRORISM (75%);
AL-QAEDA (74%); INSPECTIONS (74%); CLOSINGS (73%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (73%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); REFUGEES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); RELIGION
(69%); COUNTERTERRORISM (68%); SPACE EXPLORATION (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%);
SENTENCING (61%); WETLANDS (61%); SPACE SHUTTLE (60%); WEATHER (60%); COMPUTER
EQUIPMENT (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (55%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (92%); AL-QAEDA (56%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (55%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); IRAQ (94%);
GERMANY (94%); FRANCE (94%); EUROPE (93%); CHINA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
ISRAEL (79%); KUWAIT (79%); GULF STATES (78%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             301 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 18, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

All They Can Be, Except American

BYLINE:  By Peter Schweizer;  Peter Schweizer, a research fellow at the Hoover
Institution, is author of "Reagan's War."

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: TALLAHASSEE, Fla.


As America prepares for war with Iraq, strains on the United States military are
beginning to show. The active-duty forces are stretched thin and the reserves
are stressed by prolonged mobilization. To confront this problem and make the
war on terrorism a truly global one, it's time we consider making our military a
truly global force.

Over the past 16 years, the number of people serving in the active-duty forces
has declined 35 percent. Contrary to what the Pentagon says, it is seriously
open to question whether we could deal with simultaneous wars in, say, the
Middle East and on the Korean peninsula. Meeting recruiting goals is difficult;
some have even suggested the draft -- a plan dead on arrival if ever there was
one.

Increasingly, our military muscle comes from our reserves, but the strain is
showing there, too. In 1989 the reserves were used about a million duty days per
year. Over the past five years -- even before the war on terrorism -- reserve
units have been used 12.5 million to 13.5 million duty days per year, the
equivalent of adding 35,000 troops. Some of our reserve units have in fact
become active-duty units. Just look at Bosnia and Kosovo, where 4,000 reservists
are involved in peacekeeping missions. In short, our reserves are stretched
further than at any time since the Korean War.

To reduce the strain, the United States should advertise overseas for recruits
and create an American Foreign Legion akin to the French Foreign Legion or the
British Gurkhas. Both fought valiantly over two centuries on four continents.
Thousands of foreign citizens gave their lives in service to these countries.

By creating an American Foreign Legion, we would greatly increase the pool of
young men and women available to serve in the armed forces. We would also get
recruits with critical language and cultural skills we are lacking. Imagine the
advantage of having Serbo-Croatian speakers with our units in the Balkans.

As strange as this idea may sound, including foreigners in the military is not
such a big leap. Thousands of noncitizens already serve in the military. Just
last year, President Bush signed Executive Order 329, which expedites the
citizenship process for members of the armed forces.

Obviously there are potential pitfalls to creating an American Foreign Legion.
It might attract human rights abusers and mercenaries, or even members of
terrorist groups bent on creating sleeper cells in the military. And there are
more pedestrian concerns -- language and cultural barriers, and ensuring that
recruits can read and write in English.

But the French model here offers plenty of hope. Under the French system,
possible recruits are heavily screened. (Contrary to the Hollywood image, they
are checked out with Interpol; no hardened criminals allowed.) Then they undergo
vigorous physical and military training and are given aptitude tests. Recruits
serve under French officers and are required to speak French fluently. They sign
a pledge to uphold human rights; punishment can mean an extended stay in
military prison.

If they pass these hurdles, they are in for five years, during which time they
not only learn military skills but also are instructed in French history, values
and government. After completing their half-decade of service, legionnaires are
automatically granted French citizenship.

Finding good recruits would not be all that difficult. As France's experience
shows, the prospect of citizenship would be a powerful motivation for countless
capable young people around the globe.

By creating such a force of, say, 20,000, the United States would find itself
with a valuable new force that could be used to relieve the strain on the armed
forces. But in addition to augmenting our military, we would be creating model
immigrants well schooled in our liberal democratic values.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY RECRUITING (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); KOREAN WAR
(78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (74%); MILITARY
TRAINING (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (65%);
CITIZENSHIP (65%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (61%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
TERRORISM

PERSON: SCHWEIZER, PETER

CITY: TALLAHASSEE, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%); CROATIA (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
KOSOVO (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             302 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 19, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Congo: Rebels Put Rebels On Trial

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 112 words


Nineteen rebels went on trial on charges of killing, raping and looting in
northeastern Congo late last year in a rampage that also reportedly included
cannibalism.

Members of the Movement for the Liberation of Congo, one of many rebel groups
fighting for control of dense northeastern jungles, were brought before a rebel
tribunal for a court-martial to last two days. The Congolese government
denounced the tribunal as illegal and blocked the departure for Gbadolite of
lawyers invited to represent the officers. The rebel group, along with two
smaller factions, has been accused of rights abuses inflicted on civilians in
the region of Ituri near the Ugandan border.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SEX OFFENSES (88%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HOMICIDE (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); LAWYERS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); MILITARY COURTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%) SEX CRIMES;  LOOTING;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  LEGAL PROFESSION

ORGANIZATION: MOVEMENT FOR THE LIBERATION OF THE CONGO

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (93%); AFRICA (90%); UGANDA (79%)

REGION: CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE);  ITURI (CONGO)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             303 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 19, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Cuban Dissidents Are Sent to Prison

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 146 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Feb. 18


A Cuban court sentenced two Cuban dissidents to 18 months in prison today for
advocating political reforms, said the leader of the reform movement, Oswaldo
Paya.

Jesus Mustafa, 58, and Robert Montero, 32, were found guilty of resisting
authority in a scuffle with the police in December in their hometown, Palma
Soriano, in the eastern province of Santiago de Cuba.

The men were local organizers of the Varela Project, a drive begun by Mr. Paya
to gather signatures calling for a referendum on civil rights under President
Fidel Castro.

"There was no breach of the law," Mr. Paya said by telephone. "The sentences
were totally arbitrary, and part of an escalating wave of repression." Mr.
Paya,who in December received the European Union's top human rights award, said
at least 19 members of his illegal Christian Liberation Movement had been
detained in Santiago Province.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); VERDICTS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
POLITICS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EUROPEAN
UNION (73%); POLICE FORCES (71%); REFERENDUMS (69%) POLITICAL PRISONERS;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (58%)

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (73%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (66%)

REGION: CUBA

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             306 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Lifelong Dissident Defies Iran's Rulers on Torture

BYLINE:  By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1231 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN


Ezatollah Sahabi is a war horse of the revolution. He began his dissident
activity half a century ago after the Central Intelligence Agency staged a coup
that overthrew the government and reinstated the monarchy. He spent 12 years in
the shah's prisons, and in the heady early days of revolution he was rewarded
with a seat on the ruling Revolutionary Council.

Then, repulsed by repression in the name of Islam, Mr. Sahabi turned against the
system he helped create, writing and speaking out for the cause of freedom. In
2000, he was silenced -- with prison.

Now, in his mid-70's, Mr. Sahabi is free again, in a manner of speaking. And he
has dared the Islamic Republic to execute him. Death, he said, is preferable to
the torment he suffers at the hands of a justice system that has broken him and
continues to pursue him.

"If you believe I'm such a dangerous person, rid yourself and the country of me
with my execution, for the sake of the country, the nation, the revolution and
Islam," Mr. Sahabi wrote in a letter to the three branches of government that
was written last summer and recently made public. "After all," he added, "there
is another world, where we will all be accountable before God."

Mr. Sahabi's letter is the latest and perhaps most dramatic manifestation of a
battle between political dissidents and a justice system run by clerics that
uses various forms of repression, including torture. "This is one of the most
important documents in the past decade," said Mohsen Kadivar, a mid-level cleric
who was imprisoned for 18 months on charges of spreading lies, defaming Islam
and disturbing public opinion with his writings. "There is a struggle today
between democracy and dictatorship."

This struggle, epitomized by Mr. Sahabi and Mr. Kadivar, reveals a significant,
if unintended, flaw in the judiciary's failure to neutralize its perceived
enemies. Instead of stunning them into silence, it has created a revolving door
between prison and the world outside and emboldened its victims to bear witness
to their suffering.

Of all the hot-button issues of Iran's revolutionary experience, none evokes
such passionate debate as mistreatment and torture in prison.

"The desperation they create in prison is so bad you think it's the end of the
world," said Ahmad Zeidabadi, a 37-year-old journalist who was put in solitary
confinement and then imprisoned with drug addicts and mentally ill people. "The
criminals use rape, especially with the newcomers. And when you're taken
everywhere blindfolded and hear horrible, scary screams, and you are put in a
tiny cell, you have the feeling you will never see normal life again."

Mr. Zeidabadi said that the torture was usually done in private but that other
prisoners learned of it from the victims themselves.

Asked why he is talking about it, Mr. Zeidabadi replied simply, "These things
have to be talked about."

Torture of political prisoners had been a linchpin of the reign of Shah Mohammed
Reza Pahlavi, and many of Iran's revolutionaries had suffered in his prisons. So
the Islamic utopia on earth envisioned by its makers was supposed to abolish a
repressive system that inflicted pain on those who opposed it.

Symbolically, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini made that point from the moment he
stepped on Iranian soil in 1979 to make his revolution. The first place he
visited was the graves of the political prisoners who had died at the hands of
Savak, the shah's secret police force.

Legally, the Islamic Republic's Constitution explicitly bans torture, saying,
"All forms of torture for the purpose of extracting confessions or acquiring
information are forbidden," adding, "Any testimony, confession or oath obtained
under duress is devoid of value."

The Islamic Republic did not end the repression, but simply introduced a new
form of it. In addition to physical abuse, there is an open-ended effort to
degrade prisoners by bringing morals charges against them and their families,
including detailed accusations about sexual habits and activities.

The charges can sometimes be comical. Mashallah Shamsolvaezin, a journalist who
served 19 months as a political prisoner for "harming Islam" in his writings,
said that in one of his interrogations, he was presented with a photo in which
he was shaking hands with a woman, a practice that is officially banned.

"I told my prosecutor I would always shake the hand of a lady who held her hand
out, that only a sick person would retreat from such a gesture," Mr.
Shamsolvaezin recalled. "I told him, 'Every person has three zippers in his life
-- the zipper to his pocket that prevents him from taking bribes, the zipper to
his pants, and the zipper to his mouth.' I said I had pulled up the first two
zippers to keep the zipper to my mouth open."

In Mr. Sahabi's case, it was not only his prison experience but also the
continuation of pressure on him after his release that prompted his letter. He
wrote that he had suffered two heart attacks and convulsions because of the
twisted charges against him, the insults and psychological trickery. Confessions
were extracted under "much duress," he said.

After Mr. Sahabi sent his letter, the main reformist party condemned what it
called "the activities of rogue groups" working in tandem with the intelligence
apparatus and the judiciary and called for an official inquiry. Ayatollah Mehdi
Karroubi, the speaker of the Parliament and one of the recipients of the letter,
called on Ayatollah Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi, the head of the judiciary, to
investigate.

Early in February, Mr. Sahabi appeared before a parliamentary committee to tell
his story. But the antipathy toward people like Mr. Sahabi runs high among those
in power. Ali Mobasheri, a mid-level cleric who runs the Revolutionary Court,
criticized his "lack of good will and unfriendly behavior toward the judiciary,"
adding that Mr. Sahabi had a big cell that had furniture and even a television
set. Mr. Sahabi should not forget that "he is a criminal" who has been released
on bail, he said, and therefore could be imprisoned again.

Mr. Sahabi's case has gotten much attention in Iran because he is a founding
father of the revolution. But the stories of lesser-known prisoners provide
support. One is Muhammad Batebi, a student who was sentenced to 15 years in
prison for endangering national security after he held aloft the bloody T-shirt
of a wounded friend during student riots in 1999.

In 2001, he smuggled a letter out of prison describing his ordeal, which he said
included beatings and having his face held down in a vat of excrement as he
gasped for breath.

All this has prompted Iran's elected and reformist Parliament to push for a law
banning physical or psychological torture to extract confessions.

The Guardian Council, an unelected watchdog body that can veto legislation for
violating Islam or the Constitution, has voted down three drafts of the bill. It
argued that the bill was "un-Islamic," despite the Constitution's ban on
torture. The bill may go to a higher body, the Expediency Council, for review.

Without some basic guarantees, the justice system remains open to abuse.
"There's a minefield in front of us, and we don't have the map," said Mr.
Shamsolvaezin, the journalist. "In democracies, the people have access to the
map of the minefields. But here, the government keeps the map secret. It wants
to keep changing it whenever it wants."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Muhammad Batebi was sentenced to 15 years in prison after he
held aloft the stained T-shirt of a wounded friend during protests in 1999.
(Reuters); Ezatollah Sahabi, center, in his mid-70's, has spent much of his life
as a political prisoner, first of the shah and later of Iran's Islamic
revolutionaries. Now, he has written a letter challenging the government to
execute him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); COUPS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); SOCIETAL ISSUES (75%); WRITERS (70%); POLITICS (69%) POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  ISLAM;  POLITICAL PRISONERS;  TORTURE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%)

PERSON: SCIOLINO, ELAINE; SAHABI, EZATOLLAH

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (77%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); IRAN (77%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             307 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Outlawing Russia's Sex Traders

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 306 words


With criminal ease, Russia's organized gangs use young people's dreams to lure
them into the back rooms of the world. Work in tourism abroad, a well-dressed
woman promises. Model for glamorous magazines in America, a smooth-talking man
suggests. Then, all too suddenly, the struggling shop girl, the lonely young boy
or the frantic single mother wakes up as a prostitute in a foreign country with
no time for dreams and no way to escape.

Last week, the Russian parliament took a much-needed step toward cracking down
on this brutal human trafficking. The Duma drafted a law that would require the
government to warn Russians about the deceitful methods used to turn women and
children into modern-day sex slaves. The bill, which needs to be approved by the
Russian government and then enforced by police, would make trafficking in humans
illegal. And it would require authorities to provide real help for those forced
into servitude. Given Russia's crime-ridden society, it will not solve the
problem. But without it, criminal gangs will be freer to earn an estimated $7
billion a year trafficking in unwilling prostitutes. Human rights groups have
suggested that thousands of Russians are dragged away each year to underground
brothels around the world.

Russia is not the only nation with a booming slave business, but its effort to
change the laws comes at the right time. Under a law passed in 2000, Washington
issues an annual list of nations that are "significant" contributors to this
growing global problem. This year, the law allows President Bush to withhold aid
or impose limited sanctions if countries like Turkey, Bosnia, Indonesia and
Cambodia fail to make an effort to combat this scourge. That threat is an
important tool to force governments like Russia's to lock up slave traders and
help their desperate victims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (88%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (75%); APPROVALS (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); SINGLE PARENTS
(56%); FINES & PENALTIES (53%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%) PROSTITUTION;  EDITORIALS;
LAW AND LEGISLATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  FOREIGN AID;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  WOMEN;  SLAVE LABOR

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (54%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDONESIA (92%); BOSNIA
& HERZEGOVINA (92%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  UNITED STATES;  TURKEY;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  INDONESIA;
CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             316 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Africa's Lost Tribe Discovers American Way

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1570 words

DATELINE: KAKUMA, Kenya


The engines rumbled and the red sand swirled as the cargo plane roared onto the
dirt airstrip. One by one, the dazed and impoverished refugees climbed from the
belly of the plane into this desolate wind-swept camp.

They are members of Africa's lost tribe, the Somali Bantu, who were stolen from
the shores of Mozambique, Malawi and Tanzania and carried on Arab slave ships to
Somalia two centuries ago. They were enslaved and persecuted until Somalia's
civil war scattered them to refugee camps in the 1990's.

Yet on this recent day, the Bantu people were rejoicing as they stepped from the
plane into the blinding sun. They were the last members of the tribe to be
transferred from a violent camp near the Somali border to this dusty place just
south of Sudan. They knew their first trip in a flying machine was a harbinger
of miracles to come.

Over the next two years, nearly all of the Somali Bantu refugees in Kenya --
about 12,000 people -- are to be flown to the United States. This is one of the
largest refugee groups to receive blanket permission for resettlement since the
mid-1990's, State Department officials say.

The refugees will be interviewed by American immigration officials in this camp,
which is less violent than the camp near Somalia. The interview process has been
slowed by security concerns in the aftermath of Sept. 11. Despite the repeated
delays, the preparations for the extraordinary journey are already under way.

Every morning, dozens of peasant farmers take their seats in classrooms in a
simple one-story building with a metal roof. They study English, hold their
first notebooks and pens, and struggle to learn about the place called America.
It is an enormous task.

The Bantu, who were often denied access to education and jobs in Somalia, are
mostly illiterate and almost completely untouched by modern life. They measure
time by watching the sun rise and fall over their green fields and mud huts.

As refugees, they have worked the soil, cooked, cleaned and labored in
backbreaking construction jobs, filling about 90 percent of the unskilled jobs
in the camp in Dadaab, Kenya, where most Bantu people lived until they were
transferred here last year. But most have never turned on a light switch,
flushed a toilet or held a lease.

So the students here study in a classroom equipped with all the trappings of
modern American life, including a gleaming refrigerator, a sink, a toilet and a
bathtub. They are learning about paper towels and toilet cleanser and peanut
butter and ice trays, along with English and American culture.

Refugee officials here fear that the Bantu's battle to adjust to a high-tech
world will only be complicated by American ambivalence about immigrants since
the terrorist attacks in the United States.

The Bantu are practicing Muslims. Women cover their hair with brightly colored
scarves. Families pray five times a day. In Somalia, they were in a
predominantly Muslim country often described as a breeding ground for
terrorists.

The American government requires refugees from such hot spots to undergo a new
series of security clearances before they can be resettled in the United States.
The new system has delayed the arrival of thousands of refugees, leaving them to
languish in camps where children often die of malnutrition.

But most people here are willing to do what it takes to live in a country that
outlaws discrimination. While they wait, they learn about leases and the
separation between church and state, and they practice their limited English.

About 700 Bantu have gone through this cultural orientation. By the end of
September, State Department officials say, 1,500 are expected to be resettled in
about 50 American cities and towns, including Boston; Charlotte, N.C.; San
Diego; and Erie, Pa.

In America, the refugees tell each other, the Bantu will be considered human
beings, not slaves, for the first time.

"It's scary," said Haw Abass Aden, a peasant farmer still trembling as she
stepped off her first flight through the clouds. She clung tightly to a kerosene
lamp with one hand and her little girl with the other. But she regained her
composure as she considered her future.

"We are coming here to be resettled in the United States," said Ms. Aden, 20,
speaking through a translator. "There, we will find peace and freedom."

After centuries of suffering, they are praying that America will be the place
where they will finally belong. The United Nations has been trying to find a
home for the Bantu for more than a decade because it is painfully clear they
cannot return to Somalia.

In Somalia, the lighter-skinned majority rejected the Bantu, for their slave
origins and dark skin and wide features. Even after they were freed from
bondage, the Bantu were denied meaningful political representation and rights to
land ownership. During the Somali civil war, they were disproportionately
victims of rapes and killings.

The discrimination and violence continues in the barren camps today -- even here
-- where the Bantu are often attacked and dismissed as Mushungulis, which means
slave people.

But finding a new home for the Bantu refugees here has not been easy. First
Tanzania and then Mozambique, the Bantu's ancestral homelands, agreed to take
the tribe. Both impoverished countries ultimately reneged, saying they could not
afford to resettle the group.

In 1999, the United States determined that the Somali Bantu tribe was a
persecuted group eligible for resettlement. The number of African refugees
approved for admission in the United States surged from 3,318 in 1990 to 20,084
a decade later as the cold war ended and American officials focused on assisting
refugees beyond those fleeing Communist countries.

"I don't think Somalia is my country because we Somali Bantus have seen our
people treated like donkeys there," said Fatuma Abdekadir, 20, who was waiting
for her class to start. "I think my country is where I am going.

"There, there is peace. Nobody can treat you badly. Nobody can come into your
house and beat you."

The refugees watch snippets of American life on videos in class, and they marvel
at the images of supermarkets filled with peppers and tomatoes and of tall
buildings that reach for the clouds. But they know little about racism, poverty,
the bone-chilling cold or the cities that will be chosen for them by refugee
resettlement agencies.

What they know is this flat, parched corner of Africa, a place of thorn trees
and numbing hunger where water comes from wells when it comes at all -- a place
of fierce heat and wind that whips the sand into biting and blinding storms.

In the classes, the teachers try to prepare the Bantu for a modern world. Issack
Adan carefully guides his students through the lessons, taking questions from
older men with graying beards, teenage girls with ballpoint pens tucked into
their head scarves and young mothers with babies tied to their backs.

The lesson of the day: a white flush toilet. "Come close, come close," Mr. Adan
said as the women approached the strange object doubtfully. "Mothers, you sit on
it, you don't stand on it."

The women nodded, although they seemed uncertain. Mr. Adan showed them how to
flush the toilet and how to clean it. "You wash with this thing and you will
have a good smell," he said.

"A very nice smell," the students agreed.

Then Abubakar Saidali, a 30-year-old student, looked closely at the odd
contraption and asked, "But where does that water go?" For an answer, Mr. Adan
took the refugees outside to show them the pipes that carry the sewage.

Back in the classroom, the students spent the next few hours learning about the
refrigerator, ice cubes and strawberry jam. They watched eagerly as Mr. Adan
washed dishes in a sink and admired the bathtub and shower. One woman demurred,
however, when he invited her to step into the tub.

"It is so clean," she said shyly. "Can I really step in it?"

Some students grumbled that the American appliances seemed more complicated than
their ordinary ways of living. Why worry about cleaning a toilet, some refugees
said aloud, when the bushes never need to be cleaned?

But Mr. Saidali said he was thrilled to learn about modern toilets after years
of relying on smelly pit latrines.

"This latrine is inside the house," marveled Mr. Saidali, a lean man in tattered
sneakers. "It's better than what we are now using. It has a seat for sitting and
the water goes down.

"Even this sink -- it's my first time," he said. "This sink is for washing. It
cleans things very nicely."

Even with the lessons, some Bantu are worried about how they will cope in
America. They know that blacks and Muslims are minorities there. Will Americans
be welcoming? Will they learn English quickly enough? Will they find jobs and
housing and friends? Some officials here worry, too.

"These people are from rural areas," Mr. Adan said. "They don't know much about
modern life."

But the refugees who arrived on the plane here said they were eager for the
challenge.

Uncertain of what might be needed in the United States, they carried most of
their precious possessions -- broken brooms, chipped mugs, metal plates -- as
they boarded a rattling bus that roared deep into the camp as the sun sank
beyond the horizon.

The refugees knew they would be sleeping on the ground again and going hungry as
they have often done. But they also knew that this was only the first phase of
an incredible journey.

First stop, Kakuma. Next stop, America.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Somali Bantu refugees at a camp in Kakuma, Kenya, take classes
to prepare for new lives in the United States. (Joao Silva for The New York
Times)(pg. A1); Somali Bantu men, left, were taught how to read signs on public
toilets during an orientation class at the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya. In
another class, right, Somali Bantu women learned how to use and clean a sink.; A
Somali Bantu child was weighed upon arrival at the Kakuma camp. (Photographs by
Joao Silva for The New York Times)(pg. A7) Map of Kenya highlighting Kakuma:
Somali Bantu refugees in Kakuma are learning about American life. (pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (92%); IMMIGRATION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
CIVIL WAR (90%); AIR FREIGHT (90%); LITERACY & ILLITERACY (89%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); EMPLOYMENT
INTERVIEWS (70%); INTERVIEWS (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%); CONSTRUCTION (69%);
TERRORISM (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (61%); TRENDS (61%); RELIGION (50%)
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  SLAVERY;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BANTU TRIBE;
ILLITERACY;  SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SOMALIA (98%); AFRICA (94%); KENYA (94%);
MOZAMBIQUE (93%); MALAWI (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (93%); SUDAN (79%)

REGION: AFRICA;  SOMALIA;  MALAWI;  TANZANIA;  KENYA;  MOZAMBIQUE

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             317 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Sierra Leone: U.N. Court Indicts 7

BYLINE:  By Somini Sengupta (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 101 words


A special United Nations court sitting in Sierra Leone indicted seven men on
charges of crimes against humanity in connection with that West African nation's
the civil war, which ended last year.

The indictments cite those considered to be directly responsible for atrocities,
including Foday Sankoh, the jailed leader of the rebel army, and the
government's internal affairs minister, Sam Hinga Norman. Five of the seven are
in custody and two are at large: Johnny Paul Koroma, a warlord who briefly took
power in a 1997 coup, and Sam Bockarie, Mr. Sankoh's former field commander.
Somini Sengupta (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (87%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI; SANKOH, FODAY; NORMAN, SAM HINGA; KOROMA, JOHNNY PAUL;
BOCKARIE, SAM

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); AFRICA (92%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             324 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Troops Kill 5 Palestinians in Raid on West Bank Camp

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, March 14


Israeli forces shot dead 5 Palestinian militants in the city of Jenin today,
bringing to 10 the number of Palestinians killed in the northern West Bank in
less than 24 hours.

The army said its soldiers, acting on intelligence, were seeking to arrest
members of Islamic Jihad when they entered a house in the Jenin refugee camp
early this morning. It said they spotted four men armed with semiautomatic
rifles inside and opened fire, killing all of them.

The army said soldiers shot two other men in firefights outside the house, but
did not know if they survived. Palestinian sources said one of them died and
identified him as a member of Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a group connected to
Yasir Arafat's Fatah faction.

Palestinians in Jenin described the men who were killed inside the house as part
of a group that guards the camp at night against Israeli incursions. They said
the men had just returned to their house to sleep when the Israelis attacked.

The army said the soldiers found ammunition, bulletproof vests, and Israeli Army
uniforms inside the house. The house was near that of a top Islamic Jihad leader
in Jenin, Bassam Saadi, who was not at home at the time of the raid.

On Thursday night, Israeli soldiers killed five Palestinians in firefights
during a raid on the village of Tamoun, near Jenin.

Some Israeli politicians and analysts criticized the army today as being too
quick to shoot, and an army investigation continued into the accidental killings
on Thursday of two armed Israeli security guards in the southern West Bank. An
elite unit mistook the guards for terrorists it was hunting, the army said.

The guards, who wore civilian clothes, were protecting a cellular telephone
antenna on a hill near the city of Hebron, an area of great tension and frequent
violence.

Alex Fishman, an Israeli military journalist, called the killings part of an
"ongoing fiasco" resulting from "flawed professionalism" in the army. "One of
its symptoms is a too-light finger on the trigger," he wrote in the newspaper
Yediot Ahronot.

The army says its soldiers follow strict rules of engagement. Unless their lives
are in danger, they are supposed to first call out a warning, then shoot in the
air, then shoot at the ground and the lower part of a suspect's body.
Palestinians and human rights groups say those rules are often broken.

One of the guards was killed when soldiers fired into his car; the other was
shot from a helicopter.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Palestinian mourners carried the body of one of five militants
killed by Israeli forces in an attack on a refugee camp in Jenin, in the West
Bank. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); ARMIES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); AL
FATAH (79%); TERRORISM (78%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (78%); REFUGEE & RELIEF
CAMPS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); RELIGION (72%); VEHICLE & BODY
ARMOR (72%); IMMIGRATION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); FIREARMS (71%);
INVESTIGATIONS (64%); WRITERS (62%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)
PALESTINIANS;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (84%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (84%); AL-AQSA MARTYRS
BRIGADES (56%)

PERSON: BENNET, JAMES

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  JENIN (ISRAEL)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Court Outlaws a Basque Party, Seeing Terrorism Links

BYLINE:  By EMMA DALY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: MADRID, March 17


Spain's Supreme Court outlawed the radical Basque political party Batasuna
today, agreeing with the government's allegation that it forms an integral part
of the violent separatist group E.T.A.

The unanimous decision by 16 judges on the court's Special Tribunal means that
the group, which usually wins between 10 and 15 percent of the Basque vote, must
immediately cease all political activity and will not be able to run in local
elections in May.

Francisco Hernando, president of the court, told reporters that Batasuna, and
its predecessors Herri Batasuna and Euskal Herritarrok, had violated the Law on
Political Parties passed last summer and aimed at groups that support terrorism.

Although the full ruling will not be made public for several days, Judge
Hernando said the decision "outlaws the specified political formations and
therefore requires their dissolution and their removal from the Register of
Political Parties." In practice, Batasuna has not been able to operate since
August, when a Spanish judge issued a temporary ban on the party for alleged
terrorist activities.

Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar, who narrowly escaped an E.T.A. assassination
attempt in 1995, welcomed the ruling, saying, "Terrorists will not be able to
set the rules of the game, in Spain or outside Spain."

Angel Acebes, the interior minister, accused Batasuna of identifying victims so
that E.T.A. could then kill them. Justice Minister Jose Maria Michavila said any
attempt to set up a similar party would be swiftly contested in the courts.

Koldo Gorostiaga, a Batasuna member of the European Parliament, said the move
showed the lack of democracy in Spain. "The formal decision to outlaw Batasuna
is important, but it is less important than the extraordinary impression given
by Spain in saying that there is no democracy in the Basque Country," he said by
telephone from his office in Brussels.

Moderate nationalists in the Basque country also condemned the decision, saying
it would not help to end a conflict that has claimed more than 800 lives in the
last 30 years.

"It will not resolve the intolerable lack of liberty, the threats and extortion
suffered by many people in the Basque country," said Joseba Azkarraga, justice
minister in the Basque regional government, a coalition of moderate nationalist
parties.

"The ruling is not good news for those Basque citizens left without a party to
vote for," added Begona Lasagabaster, spokeswoman for Eusko Alkartasuna, a party
in the coalition. She also noted the swift passage of the legislation and
subsequent ban on Batasuna in less than six months. "It makes one wonder how far
the division of powers really extends," she said.

Mr. Azkarraga also noted the court's decision to publish its decision as the
world's attention is focused on a possible war with Iraq.

Batasuna can appeal to the Constitutional Court, and must do so if it wants to
bring the case to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

Inigo Iruin, Batasuna's lawyer, argued last week that the state had failed to
prove anything except Batasuna's failure to condemn E.T.A. attacks, and that
that did not constitute support for terrorism as expressed in European law.

"The Strasbourg tribunal requires that support for terrorism be direct, clear,
real and effective, as well as a direct invitation to commit violence," the
lawyer told the tribunal last week, adding that silence is not a crime under
that definition.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORISM
(91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); ASSASSINATION (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); BASQUE
HOMELAND & FREEDOM (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); POLITICS (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (79%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); JUDGES (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); APPEALS (78%); VERDICTS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); LEGISLATION
(76%); EXTORTION (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); IRAQ WAR (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(69%) ELECTIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  BASQUES;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (94%) ETA (BASQUE SEPARATIST GROUP)

PERSON: DALY, EMMA; AZNAR, JOSE MARIE (PRIME MIN)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

STATE: BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN (95%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (97%); IRAQ (79%); BELGIUM (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (74%)

REGION: SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             329 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 19, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Island Of Peace?

BYLINE:  By Radhika Coomaraswamy;  Radhika Coomaraswamy, director of the
International Center for Ethnic Studies in Colombo, teaches at the New York
University School of Law.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


While the rest of the world seems to be marching to war, Sri Lanka, wearied by a
military stalemate after 18 years of war, is walking slowly, haltingly and
surprisingly toward peace.

It is a peace tempered, however, by the remembrance of the 64,000 people who
have been killed. The yearlong cease-fire between the government and the rebels,
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, has not generated a spirit of celebration.
Mistrust between the Tamil minority and the Sinhalese majority remains strong,
and the campaign by the Tigers to consolidate their control of the areas they
dominate is making everyone uneasy.

Nonetheless, there is some reason for optimism. Both sides seem to have realized
that a military victory is neither possible nor desirable -- at least for the
moment. The Tigers failed in their campaign to expel government forces from the
north in 1997 and 1998. Besides, they realize that even if they had succeeded,
the international community would have refused to recognize them as a separate
state because of their appalling history of suicide bombings and assassinations.
Peace gives the Tigers an opportunity to gain legitimacy and recognition.

The government, too, seems to recognize that war won't work. It is clear that
without a peace a Sinhalese-dominated army will always face resistance in the
Tigers' stronghold, the north and east; that the Tigers and their sympathizers
will always be able to disrupt the rest of Sri Lanka; and that the death toll of
an all-out war will not be internationally acceptable. For these reasons the
government of Ranil Wickremesinghe seems committed to peace through
negotiations.

In addition, the cease-fire has had tangible benefits. The economic growth rate
for the last quarter exceeded 5 percent, up from a 1 percent decline a year ago.
With the help of international reconstruction money, people who fled war are
returning to their homes, land is being cleared of mines, and commerce is
reviving. This traffic of people and goods has opened vistas and opportunities
-- so much so that some commentators argue that the Sri Lankan peace process is
unique in putting economic normality before political normality.

The Tigers, meanwhile, have declared that they are willing to explore a
federalist model as an alternative to a separate state -- an important shift in
their thinking. And because of the work of Norwegian mediators, negotiators on
both sides seem committed to resolving conflicts in the peace process through
committees and expert groups rather than by the piecemeal efforts of earlier
negotiations.

These successes have given peace advocates a reason for optimism. This optimism,
however, isn't blind. Serious problems remain in the areas dominated by the
Tigers. Political opponents have been abducted and killed. Members of the Muslim
minority have rioted, citing harassment and demands for money by the Tigers, and
some young Muslims are even seeking a separate province.

Another cause for concern is the government, in which the prime minister and the
president are from opposing parties. Both support the peace process, but differ
on how much to accommodate the Tigers. Any solution requires bipartisan support.

In many ways the conflict in Sri Lanka has been about control over material
resources. But it has also been a question of imagination. Since independence in
1948, the Sinhalese have been taught that Sri Lanka is a Sinhala Buddhist
homeland. The Tamils, divided by language and culture from the Sinhalese, have
been taught that the north and the east should be their traditional homeland.

If Sri Lanka is to thrive, the international community needs to continue to
press for respect for human rights and to make sure that funds for
reconstruction are not squandered. The Tigers will have to adapt, learning to
respect the rights of their own people and embracing a democratic ethos. It is
imperative that all parties in the negotiations sign on to a human rights
agreement that would be monitored by international observers.

And Sri Lankans have to start imagining themselves differently, to accept the
plurality of their heritage and the multiethnic nature of their society. Judging
from the outpourings by both Sinhalese and the Tamils in the national newspapers
and journals since the peace process began, however, that will be a long time in
the making.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Robert Van Nutt)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); PEACE
PROCESS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); ARMIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); POLITICS (76%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (75%); BOMBINGS (73%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (71%);
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (63%); RELIGION (60%); ETHNICITY (59%) TAMILS (ETHNIC
GROUP);  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%) LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM

PERSON: COOMARASWAMY, RADHIKA

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%)

REGION: SRI LANKA

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             334 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Roundup;
Opponents Lose Challenge to Government's Broader Use of Wiretaps to Fight
Terrorism

BYLINE:  By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


An effort by a coalition of civil liberties groups to bring a Supreme Court
challenge to the government's use of expanded surveillance authority under a
post-Sept. 11 statute failed today. The justices, without comment, refused to
permit the groups to file an appeal from a ruling by a special federal appeals
court that the USA Patriot Act granted broad new authority to use wiretaps
obtained for intelligence operations to prosecute terrorists.

The American Civil Liberties Union, the National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers and two Arab-American groups needed the court's permission to file their
appeal because under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, the 1978 law
that set up a special court system for reviewing intelligence wiretap requests,
the government is the only party and only the government can file a Supreme
Court appeal.

The decision last November by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of
Review, a court composed of three federal judges who ordinarily sit on other
federal appeals courts, was the first ruling that court had issued in its 25
years of existence. The review court permitted the A.C.L.U. and the defense
lawyers to file briefs as "friends of the court," but the United States was the
only party.

The case that produced the November ruling was a government appeal of a decision
by the lower court in this special system, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act Court, which had rejected the broad interpretation that Attorney General
John Ashcroft claimed for the USA Patriot Act. The 11 judges of that court made
their ruling in secret last May, with the decision remaining unknown to the
public until Congress released it three months later.

In their petition to the Supreme Court, the civil liberties union and the other
groups told the justices that the important issues coming before these special
courts "should not be finally adjudicated by courts that sit in secret, do not
ordinarily publish their decisions, and allow only the government to appear
before them."

The petition argued that the review court had misinterpreted the USA Patriot Act
to permit foreign intelligence wiretaps to be used for law enforcement purposes.
If that interpretation of the statute was correct, the petition said, then the
law itself was unconstitutional under both the First Amendment's guarantee of
free speech and the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable searches.

The other groups joining the petition were the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination
Committee and the Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services.

The government did not file a response to the groups' petition. Attorney General
Ashcroft said today that he was "pleased the Supreme Court declined to consider
a challenge of the government's lawful actions to detect and prevent
international terrorism and espionage within our borders."

Last November, Mr. Ashcroft declared the review court's decision in the
government's favor "a giant step forward" and said it "revolutionizes our
ability to investigate terrorists and prosecute terrorist acts."

Ann Beeson, the American Civil Liberties Union lawyer who filed the petition,
acknowledged that the case had been a long shot but said that it was "very
important to keep these issues in the public debate."

While defendants who are prosecuted on the basis of intelligence wiretap
evidence may be able to challenge the use of the evidence, Ms. Beeson said the
civil liberties groups' central concern was for those "innocent targets" who,
under the law, may never find out that they had been the object of surveillance.

Congress is considering several proposals to bring the activities of the special
courts under closer supervision.

These were among the other developments at the court today.

Car Search

Accepting an appeal by the State of Maryland, the court agreed to decide whether
the police can arrest all the occupants of a car when a search turns up drugs or
contraband for which all the occupants deny responsibility.

Twenty other states joined Maryland's appeal of a 4-to-3 ruling by the Maryland
Court of Appeals overturning the conviction of Joseph J. Pringle, a passenger in
a car that was stopped for speeding. The officer searched the car after seeing a
large roll of bills in the glove compartment that the driver opened to find his
registration. Mr. Pringle eventually confessed to ownership of the money and the
cocaine that was also found in the car.

"Simply stated, a policy of arresting everyone until somebody confesses is
constitutionally unacceptable," the Maryland appeals court said.

In its appeal, Maryland v. Pringle, No. 02-809, the state argues that whether
probable cause exists to arrest all the occupants of a car in a similar
situation depends on "the totality of the circumstances" and should not be
subject to a hard and fast rule.

Elections Fund

Without comment, the court turned down a First Amendment challenge to an Arizona
campaign finance law that created a "clean elections fund," supported by a
surcharge of 10 percent on civil and criminal fines collected in the state.

The law was challenged by a state legislator, Steve May, who received a $27
parking ticket and refused to pay the $2.70 surcharge. He refused to accept
public financing for his own campaigns and said he did not want to be forced to
pay for the campaigns of others, including his opponents.

The Arizona Supreme Court upheld the law last October, ruling that because the
law operated in a "viewpoint neutral" manner, it was not an unconstitutional
compulsion of speech but in fact had the effect of expanding free speech. But
the Institute for Justice, the libertarian group that filed Mr. May's appeal,
said the law transformed the act of contributing to political campaigns from one
of "individual volition into an act of compulsion." The case was May v. Brewer,
No. 02-1065.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WIRETAPPING (92%); LAWYERS (91%); ESPIONAGE (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); APPEALS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%);
PETITIONS (89%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (84%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); JUDGES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(78%); LEGISLATION (76%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (74%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (73%);
DISCRIMINATION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) TERRORISM;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  SEARCH AND SEIZURE;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  SEARCH AND SEIZURE;  DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%); NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS (83%); AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE
(59%) SUPREME COURT (US); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION; NATIONAL ASSN OF
CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS; AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE; ARAB
COMMUNITY CENTER FOR ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL SERVICES

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, LINDA

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: MARYLAND

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Cabinet Approves Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 68 words


The cabinet approved a draft agreement with the United Nations to set up an
international tribunal to try former leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

The agreement must still be approved by the United Nations General Assembly and
ratified by Cambodia's legislature. An estimated 1.7 million people died of
starvation, disease, overwork or execution under the Khmer Rouge. None of its
leaders has ever been tried.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); APPROVALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(86%); STARVATION (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%) WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             340 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Compete to Shape a New Constitution

BYLINE:  By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


The blueprint for a reborn state has landed on the desk of President Hamid
Karzai, and with it any number of headaches.

The document is the preliminary draft of a new national constitution, the legal
basis for the Islamic democracy sought by Afghanistan's post-Taliban leaders.
Drafted by a nine-member commission, it will undergo public and expert
consultations, several redrafts and, in October, a constitutional loya jirga, or
grand council, to produce a final version.

So important are the deliberations that the draft is being closely held. For
perhaps nothing more clearly reflects the competing forces tugging at
Afghanistan, and Mr. Karzai, than the legal reform process.

On one side are the Afghan reformists, often returned expatriates influenced by
the West, working with foreign experts to construct a new legal system. They are
aligned with international donors who expect the country to adhere to global
human rights norms and whose support Afghanistan badly needs.

On the other side are conservative and powerful elements of Afghanistan's
population who are deeply suspicious of foreign interference and adhere to a
strict interpretation of Islam. After 20 years of struggle against foreign
interference, they argue, it would be wrong to constrain Islamic law according
to foreign standards. To survive, the government also needs their support, or at
least not their opposition.

"Western countries say mullahs are making the constitution," Farooq Wardak,
director of the constitutional commission's secretariat, said of the pressures
that body faces. "Here, the fundamentalists say the Americans are making the
constitution."

Legal reform represents one of the most essential, but challenging, tasks, here
in the wake of the American-led war that drove out the Taliban's stringently
Islamic government. The country has long operated with three overlapping and
competing legal systems: tribal law; Shariah, or Islamic law; and a formal state
system.

Two decades of war largely eroded the state's role and created a welter of
methods for resolving disputes. A new order will have to accommodate all these
strands while bringing Afghan law more in line with international conventions.

A judicial reform commission also has been set up to review all of Afghanistan's
laws, repair the devastated judicial infrastructure, try to standardize the
training of judges and professionalize the Afghan bar.

Naz Modirzadeh, who wrote a report on legal reform for the Harvard Program on
Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research, said it was urgent that the
commission engage and educate the public, especially outside Kabul, in the next
few months. By October, political positions may be firmly entrenched, she said,
"and meaningful dialogue on sensitive issues may no longer be possible."

Privately, others put it less politely: religious conservatives, tribal leaders,
warlords -- any and all could hijack the loya jirga or challenge the
constitution if they feel excluded by the process.

Dr. Wardak said women's rights would be "heavily taken into account," as would
minority rights, the rights of the disabled, children's rights, even widows'
rights. "We have to be a responsible nation," he said.

First the constitution's drafters must decide what sort of nation they want to
be. One debate is over how to balance regional interests and national unity.
Some warlords favor a federal system, whereas the commissioners are said to back
a strong central government, with a parliament and a president.

A battle also looms over which strain of Islam will be the basis for the legal
system. Eighty percent of Afghans are Sunni Muslims. The 1964 Constitution from
the monarchy era, which was discarded after the king's ouster in 1973, is being
used until the new document emerges, specified that courts should turn to Hanafi
jurisprudence, the Sunni school followed here, when there was no applicable law
or constitutional provision.

But in the intervening years, the country's Shiites, who are up to 20 percent of
the population, have, like much of Afghanistan, been militarized. They either
want their own school, Ja'afari, named as well -- something conservative Sunnis
would almost certainly reject -- or none at all.

Then there is tribal law and custom, which was only strengthened in the vacuum
left by the lack of a functioning state. Some Kabul reformers who consider
traditional law backward would like to eliminate as much of it as possible.
Others say it must be accommodated to ensure that powerful tribal leaders
support the new constitution.

Opponents of tribal law point to practices like transferring an unmarried girl
or woman from one family to another to compensate for a murder. Such practices
violate Islamic law, and would presumably also be banned by a constitution based
on international standards.

The constitution could allow customary laws that contradict neither Islamic law
nor the values of the constitution. How to enforce that, given how little power
the formal legal system now has over the tribal legal system, is another matter.

Perhaps the sharpest debate is over the role of Islamic law in the constitution.
All agree that Islam should form the basis for Afghanistan's legal system, but
dispute how rigid a standard it will provide.

After he was quoted saying that the new constitution would be only 20 percent
Shariah, for example, Justice Minister Abdul Rahim Karimi was publicly chastised
by the country's chief justice, and some members of the public as well. He is
now a man on the defensive.

"We don't want a Taliban approach -- the total exclusion of foreign knowledge,"
Mr. Karimi.

Fazul Ahmed Shirinagna Manawi, a deputy chief justice, said that those who
proposed only 20 percent Islamic law "do not have any understanding of Islam."
He warned Westernized Afghans, who he said were a "little estranged" from Afghan
society, that "what they propose should not oppose the basics of our culture, or
the holy affairs of Islam."

Martin Lau, an Islamic law specialist at the University of London's School of
Oriental and African Studies, said Islamic fundamentalists often fought hardest
for the narrow areas of Islamic law that most clearly conflict with
international human rights standards, like the criminalization of blasphemy or
adultery.

Those would also probably be the areasreformers would most hesitate to tackle.
So certain areas may go unchallenged, like rules of evidence, where Islamic law
holds that the word of one male witness is often equivalent to two female
witnesses.

But Mr. Lau said that did not mean such rules would be enforced. Two judges
interviewed in Logar Province said that while they believed in punishments like
stoning for adultery they were less likely to apply them now than in the Taliban
era.

"There are laws, and there are regimes," said one judge, Muhammad Yaqub.

Some argue that it would therefore be better to discourage enforcement of the
harshest Islamic laws than to provoke a backlash by challenging them outright.

Whatever the end product, the hope is that extensive public consultation will
ensure ultimate acceptance. But some worry that the warlords who still control
much of the country will dominate any public discussion. A group of
professionals in Herat argued in a recent article that a new constitution should
wait until a strong national army has been built.

Dr. Wardak, of the constitutional commission, insisted they need not worry.
"People cannot be represented by their warlords," he said. "We will consult the
people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Law students from the University of Kabul, from left,
Ahshmatullah, Mahmoud Farzam, Hubatullah Azin and Muhammad Hazad. Reforming the
legal system has become one of Afghanistan's most daunting tasks.; An Afghan
woman in a burka at a market in Kandahar. Drafters of a new constitution say
they will take women's rights into account. (Photographs by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); POLITICS (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
(73%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LAW (71%); WOMEN (68%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS
(68%) CONSTITUTIONS;  ISLAM;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (90%) WALDMAN, AMY; KARZAI, HAMID (PRES)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             341 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: MARCHES;
In New York and New Jersey, Hundreds Join In as Antiwar Protests Continue

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SAULNY

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 653 words


Hundreds of people marched and rallied yesterday in the streets of New York and
New Jersey, angrily protesting the war in Iraq in what has become a familiar
scene across the region. "No blood for oil," they chanted under cloudy skies.
"Peace Is Patriotic, Too," their signs said.

The protests were largely peaceful, and, though not as large as the
demonstrations held in New York City and around the nation last weekend, they
were just as passionate.

Many people adorned themselves with the Palestinian flag to denounce the United
States' support of Israel and the Israeli occupation of land in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. The antiwar message, blared from bullhorns and T-shirts,
linked Iraqis and Palestinians as what the protesters called victims of an
unjust empire's disregard for human rights.

At least a thousand protesters ended up in Union Square in Manhattan after
marching from Midtown to the beat of drums and call-and-response chants. In New
Jersey, a smaller but no less enthusiastic group of about 200 people gathered in
a park in Paterson and marched down Main Street.

Those in the Manhattan crowd sang, "Bush, Sharon, you must know, the occupation
has got to go." The raucous shouts briefly quieted around 1 p.m., however, when
a speaker called for a moment of silence in honor of Rachel Corrie, a
23-year-old woman from Olympia, Wash., who was run over by an Israeli bulldozer
and killed on March 16 in southern Gaza.

At 1:30 p.m., the crowd began a slow march down Broadway, led, surrounded and
followed by the police. Along the way on the sidewalks, about a dozen
counterdemonstrators brandished American flags and held up placards expressing
support for United States soldiers in Iraq. When the protest reached Union
Square, the speeches and chants continued.

In Paterson, demonstrators said they were angry that some Arab-Americans were
still being detained in New Jersey prisons on suspicion of involvement in the
Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

"Today we are trying to raise awareness of civil rights," said Thomas Silva, one
of the rally's organizers. "Unless we all stand up for civil rights, we will
lose them. We are all together in this country, and we all love this land. We
must stop this administration from committing acts of aggression."

The organizers of the Paterson event were a coalition of peace groups from
northern New Jersey. Mohammed Younes, president of the American Muslim Union,
told The Associated Press he feared that the protest would turn violent and that
the city's Arab-Americans would be blamed for any problems. He and other Muslim
leaders urged residents to stay away, and the police asked the organizers to
tone down the event.

Many Arab-Americans in Paterson gathered not far from the rally and watched
silently.

"It's nice that they care about the detainees," one merchant said. "But we did
not ask them to come to our town and do it. We don't want any trouble, and
something like this could cause trouble."

After two hours of listening to speakers, the crowd mobilized and walked half a
mile down Main Street, past bodegas, butcher shops and apartment buildings. When
they reached the end of the street, they turned around and walked back to the
rally's starting point.

The rally remained peaceful most of the afternoon. The one exception came when
an unidentified man began shouting over the speakers, "Don't let the terrorists
free!" The police immediately closed in on the man and removed him.

In New York, the police had no crowd estimate and no information on arrests as
of 6 last night. As the evening wore on in Union Square, Osher Zelig Estreicher,
20, said he had come from upstate New York to represent a group of Orthodox Jews
who oppose Israel's actions toward the Palestinians. Four young Palestinian men
approached Mr. Estreicher and greeted him enthusiastically. Then the five began
jumping up and down together and chanting, "Long live Palestine."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Antiwar demonstrators in Manhattan yesterday sought to link
Iraqis and Palestinians as victims of an American disregard for human rights.
(Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PROTESTS (91%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); ARAB AMERICANS
(88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RIOTS (78%); MUSLIM
AMERICANS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (67%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(61%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  IRAQ-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  ISRAEL-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS

PERSON: SAULNY, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%); OLYMPIA, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (96%); NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: IRAQ;  ISRAEL;  NEW YORK CITY;  NEW JERSEY

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             343 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: 75th EXPLOITATION FORCE;
Special Team Seeks Clues To Establish War Crimes

BYLINE:  By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section B; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: TALLIL, Iraq, March 30


The military has assigned a special Army unit to gather evidence in an effort to
substantiate reports that Iraq is committing war crimes, American military
officers said today.

The Pentagon has received numerous reports that Iraqi paramilitary fedayeen have
killed American prisoners of war, used Iraqi civilians as human shields, and
used protected sites like hospitals for military purposes.

The most sensitive part of the inquiry involves reports of how American
prisoners of war may have been treated at the general hospital in Nasariya.
Killing, abusing or exploiting prisoners of war for propaganda purposes is
contrary to the Geneva Conventions.

In keeping with this mission, a special mobile team from the 75th Exploitation
Task Force traveled on Saturday to an undisclosed location near the hospital to
investigate the allegations.

But the team did not find any bodies and could not reach the hospital in
Nasiriya because fighting continues there.

Quoting an unidentified Pentagon official in Washington, CNN reported this
morning that Marines who first visited the hospital in Nasariya found evidence
of torture. They also said that the marines had seen American uniforms,
apparently belonging to soldiers from an Army maintenance unit who were taken
hostage.

American soldiers also received an unconfirmed report that several Iraqis were
recently executed at that hospital, which the report alleges has functioned of
late more as an extension of the Iraqi government's military and security
apparatus than as a center for medical treatment.

The 75th Exploitation Task Force is the only mobile United States team not
specifically charged with searching for germ, chemical or other weapons of mass
destruction. Instead, it was formed and equipped to investigate other kinds of
sensitive sites.

It includes members of the Criminal Investigation Division, which usually
investigates crimes within the military. The division's members are trained in
forensics and in the chains of evidence required by American courts of law, and
they are also sensitive to the need to preserve evidence in a combat
environment. The unit recently added a pathologist to its team of experts and
scientists.

The Iraqi theater is awash in rumors and unconfirmed reports. Before American
officials charge Iraqis with committing war crimes, they want to be certain that
they have accounts from witnesses, backed up wherever possible by documents or
other physical evidence of abuse.

Most of the reports of abuses attribute them to the fedayeen, the paramilitary
forces whom Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld has said he considers
"regime death squads."

The allegations of human rights violations may go well beyond Nasariya, one of
Iraq's largest cities, with a population of 500,000.

Military officials say that between 1,000 and 3,000 mostly young fighters have
infiltrated other southern Iraqi villages and towns from central and
northwestern Iraq, Saddam Hussein's traditional stronghold.

Pentagon officials say the fedayeen's mission is to probe for American military
vulnerabilities and to maintain loyalty in the southern Iraqi cities.

Harry Warren, a physician and soldier who heads the makeshift military's 84-bed
hospital in Tallil, close to Nasariya, said that several of his Iraqi civilian
patients had told his staff and other military officials that they had been paid
to stay in Nasiriya and other southern cities in potential harm's way. Others
have said that the fedayeen had forced them to fight the Americans by
threatening to kill their family members if they refused.

The hospital he runs treats not only wounded American soldiers, but also Iraqi
prisoners of war in guarded, separate tents. Dr. Warren refused to let an
American reporter interview them. But a translator said that one Iraqi civilian
had told him the Americans had bombed his house, injuring him and several
members of his family after the Iraqis had placed an antiaircraft gun in his
back yard.

At the Tallil hospital, Pentagon intelligence analysts interviewed patients and
hunted for information regarding possible war crimes as well as clues to the
fedayeen's tactics and goals.

They wanted to reach the hospital in Nasiriya to pursue the allegation that
American prisoners and Iraqi civilians had been killed there. But so far, they
have not been able to get to the hospital.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); EVIDENCE (90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); MILITARY
HOSPITALS (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
TERRORISM (77%); HOSPITALS (76%); FORENSICS (73%); HOSTAGE TAKING (72%);
PATHOLOGY (71%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (69%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (66%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (55%) ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
TERRORISM;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (93%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) MILLER, JUDITH

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             344 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2003 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: THE DETAINEES;
Immigration Groups Fault Rule on Automatic Detention of Some Asylum Seekers

BYLINE:   By CHRISTOPHER DREW and ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1400 words


The Bush administration's decision to detain people from Iraq and 32 other
countries who are seeking political asylum in the United States has raised
concerns among United Nations officials and immigration groups, who say such
blanket detentions may violate international norms and could undercut America's
traditional role as a beacon for the oppressed.

Homeland Security Department officials said that the decision, made right before
the war in Iraq, was a precaution to keep terrorists from slipping into the
United States, the latest in a series of steps to tighten monitoring of
foreigners since the Sept. 11 attacks. They pointed to several cases in which
terrorists came to this country through asylum applications, particularly Omar
Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian sheik who was convicted in 1995 of conspiring to blow
up the United Nations headquarters and other landmarks in New York.

But critics, including some former top immigration officials, say they fear that
policies governing asylum in the United States, the world's most powerful magnet
for refugees, are being weakened in the administration's move to treat
immigration as more of a national security issue than a social and demographic
one.

The change in asylum rules, announced on March 17 by Homeland Security Secretary
Tom Ridge, is part of an operation that includes heightened security patrols at
points of entry and in major cities, and F.B.I. interviews with more than 11,000
Iraqi-born people in this country. People who enter the United States seeking
asylum from countries on a list of those where Al Qaeda or other terrorist
groups are known to operate will now be automatically detained while their
applications are considered, a process that takes six months or more. Before,
asylum-seekers were held beyond an initial screening only on a case-by-case
basis.

Only about 600 refugees from the 33 countries, mostly in the Middle East and
South Asia, passed initial screenings for asylum at the border last year. Given
the added security after the Sept. 11 attacks, many of them were detained.

The department, however, has generated confusion by refusing to identify
publicly the countries covered under the new detention rule, citing law
enforcement and diplomatic sensitivities.

Civil rights groups have pieced together the list through informal contacts with
government officials. They contend that even if only a relatively few people are
affected directly, the change could send a chilling message to tens of thousands
of refugees all over the world, some of whom have been fighting to come to the
United States for years.

"It's clearly ironic that on the eve of a war to liberate the Iraqi people, we
are telling people that those fleeing tyranny there will be deprived of their
liberty for extended periods when they arrive here," said Eleanor Acer, the
director of the asylum program at the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, in New
York.

United Nations officials reacted swiftly to the new policy. In a letter to
American authorities, Ruud Lubbers, the United Nations' high commissioner for
refugees, said, "The tendency to link asylum seekers and refugees to terrorism
is a dangerous and erroneous one." The United Nations has long suggested that it
is wrong to arbitrarily detain refugees.

Doris Meissner, the federal immigration commissioner from 1993 to 2000, said the
change was similar to other blanket policies imposed by the Bush administration.
After the Sept. 11 attacks, more than 1,200 people from Arab countries were
detained on immigration violations, and the administration required most of the
deportation hearings to be held in secret rather than allowing immigration
judges to decide whether the secrecy was warranted.

"There is a propensity in this administration to establish blanket policies that
prejudge guilt based on country of origin," said Ms. Meissner, now a senior
fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. "Those countries of origin are all
Arab or Muslim countries, and it's sending the wrong message," she added. "It is
not improving our safety and security because it's too blunt an instrument, and
it feeds a view of the United States abroad that we are simply against, and are
going to do everything we can to harm, people in and around the Middle East."

Homeland Security officials countered that there had been at least three
examples of terrorists who were in the United States under the cover of asylum
applications. William Strassberger, a spokesman for the immigration services
within the department, said that aside from Mr. Rahman, they included Mir Aimal
Kansi, who killed two employees of the Central Intelligence Agency outside the
agency's headquarters in 1993, and Gazi Ibrahim Abu Mezer, who was convicted on
1997 charges of plotting to bomb New York subways.

"You see what a quandary this places us in," Mr. Strassberger said. "We feel
strongly that we want to preserve the ability of people to seek refuge here. But
at the same time, we have to protect the public, and we do have heightened
concerns about individuals coming from some specific countries."

"The thinking is that we don't know who they are," he added. "So although we
will detain them while we find that out, there will be no change in their
ability to come here and file a claim of asylum."

David A. Martin, who was the general counsel for the immigration service during
the Clinton administration, also said the new policy might be appropriate. "A
categorical deterrence policy is in general a legitimate rationale," Mr. Martin
said. "In a time of war and a time of risk, to impose it by nationality is
defensible."

The latest change comes after nearly a decade of government efforts to tighten
the asylum process. The early 1990's had a surge in asylum requests after word
spread that work permits were available to anyone who applied for asylum. Since
immigration officials dropped that promise in 1995, the number of asylum
requests has fallen to 65,000 a year from 150,000.

The new detention rule applies only to people arriving at a border or point of
entry, not to refugees already in the United States.

In the past, once people filed asylum applications at the border, officials held
them for at least two days while conducting a relatively cursory screening to
see if they had a credible fear of persecution. Most applicants passed that test
and then could ask to be released while their cases were studied further.

Mr. Strassberger estimated that 80 percent of the people who passed the
screening were released within 90 days. But the Lawyers Committee found that
even before the Sept. 11 attacks, the release rate was actually 10 percent to 40
percent.

One Sudanese woman, who said she had fled to the United States to escape slavery
that she lived under in Kenya for 14 years, said she was handcuffed, placed in
leg shackles and paraded through the Newark International Airport after she
filed for asylum in November 2001.

The woman said she spent five months of the first cold winter she had ever known
at a detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., with one light blanket and little hot
water. Guards who were women watched when she showered.

"You almost get suicidal in those facilities," said the woman, who was not
released until her asylum request was approved. "It is a hard choice, being
treated like really hard-core criminals."

The Lawyers Committee says the 33 countries included in the new rule are:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Thailand,
Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and
Yemen.

Palestinian asylum seekers from Gaza and the West Bank will also face automatic
detention.

Given Mr. Hussein's oppressive regime, Iraqi refugees typically have gained
asylum more easily than other people. Still, one Iraqi woman who requested
asylum before the recent rule change said she feared that the heightened
scrutiny could have a spinoff effect and lead to delays in approving her
application and those of other people from the Middle East.

Referring to the automatic detention of new applicants, the woman, who was once
jailed for a month in Iraq, said, "That's horrible. It's not much different than
what I went though in Baghdad."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 3, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on Monday about the Bush administration's decision to
detain asylum seekers from Iraq and 32 other countries referred incompletely to
opinions of David A. Martin, former general counsel of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. While he said that temporary detention of asylum seekers
from certain countries was defensible in wartime, he opposes discouraging such
people from seeking asylum.

GRAPHIC: Chart/Map: "Eyes on the United States"Citizens from these countries
seeking asylum in the United States will be automatically detained. Case data
from the I.N.S. was available for 10 countries from April 1991 to September
2002. Graph tracks the status of the following countries cases as of Sept. 30,
2002 according to the whether the case is granted, denied, or pending:
LebanonAfghanistanBangladeshSudanIraqPhilippinesEgyptPakistanIranIndonesia Map
of the Middle East, Northern Africa, and South East Asia highlight the countries
from which asylum-seekers will automatically be detained. (Source: U.S.
Committee for Refugees)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL ASYLUM (94%); IMMIGRATION (93%); NATIONAL SECURITY (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
CONSPIRACY (76%); AL-QAEDA (71%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (71%) ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;
ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%);
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (54%) ;HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT; UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: LIPTAK, ADAM; DREW, CHRISTOPHER; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); ASIA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); EGYPT (79%); SOUTHERN ASIA
(69%)

REGION: IRAQ;

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             345 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blasts at Philippine Mosques Follow Bombing at Terminal

BYLINE:  By CARLOS H. CONDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 511 words

DATELINE: DAVAO CITY, the Philippines, April 3


Bombs exploded outside three mosques in this southern Philippine city early
today in what the police said may have been retaliation for a bombing Wednesday
near a ferry terminal that killed 16 people and injured 50.

The police said no one was killed or injured in the mosque explosions, which
occurred hours before President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo arrived here to meet
with authorities about the terminal bombing.

That explosion occurred just half a mile from the city's airport, where a
powerful bomb in a passenger waiting area killed 23 people last month, including
an American missionary. Authorities blamed the Moro Islamic Liberation Front for
the airport bombing. The group, which has been fighting for a separate Islamic
state for more than 25 years, has denied any involvement.

The police said they did not know who exploded the bomb near the ferry terminal
or who attacked the mosques.

Lt. Gen. Rodolfo Garcia, the armed forces vice chief of staff, said the mosque
attacks might be in retaliation for the terminal bombing. Muslim leaders in
Davao City, which is on the island of Mindanao, have appealed to residents to be
calm and to not jump to conclusions about the bombings pending an investigation
by the police.

A spokesman for the Moro Islamic Liberation Front said today that the mosque
attacks "could have been aimed at really igniting a Muslim-Christian war" on
Mindanao.

The Communist-led National Democratic Front, whose New People's Army operates in
Davao City and neighboring areas, condemned the mosque attacks but blamed the
Arroyo administration. It said the attacks were meant to sabotage peace
negotiations between the government and Muslim insurgents and to justify what
the group called a "sustained policy of all-out war in Mindanao."

Mrs. Arroyo met with investigators working on the terminal bombing and visited
some of the injured in the hospital. "This is a grim reminder that we must
always be alert and watchful, and those who wish to do us harm in a manner that
creates a wide swath of fear must not intimidate us," she said.

She also declared a "state of lawless violence" in Davao City and ordered the
military to take the lead in what she called a crackdown "on these lawless
elements and terrorists."

"This is a total war that requires the full attention and resources of the
entire community," Mrs. Arroyo said.

Civil libertarians, however, cautioned the government against using the bombings
to justify attacks on freedoms. Marie Hilao Enriquez of the Manila-based
human-rights group Karapatan said the declaration of a "state of lawless
violence" was alarming. "It is during these times that we are most vulnerable to
attacks by the government itself," she said.

Ms. Enriquez cited a similar declaration by the government in 2001 covering the
island of Basilan, where members of the extremist group Abu Sayyaf were hiding.
She said the crackdown by the police and military resulted in the arrest of 121
people suspected of being members of Abu Sayyaf who are still in jail "despite
overwhelming evidence of innocence."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of the Philippines highlighting Davao.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FERRIES (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (86%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); ARMIES (75%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); PEACE PROCESS
(69%); ISLANDS & REEFS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(60%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (89%) CONDE, CARLOS H; MACAPAGAL ARROYO, GLORIA
(PRES)

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%)

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: PHILIPPINES;  DAVAO (PHILIPPINES)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             346 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terrorism Task Force Detains an American Without Charges

BYLINE:  By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., April 3


For the last two weeks, Maher Hawash, a 38-year-old software engineer and
American citizen who was from the West Bank and grew up in Kuwait, has been held
in a federal prison here, though he has not been charged with a crime or brought
before a judge.

Relatives and friends of Mr. Hawash, who works for the Intel Corporation and is
married to a native Oregonian, say he has no idea why he was arrested by a
federal terrorism task force when he arrived for work at the Intel parking lot
in Hillsboro, a Portland suburb. The family home was raided at dawn on the same
day by nearly a dozen armed police officers, who woke Mrs. Hawash and the
family's three children, friends said.

Mr. Hawash, who is known as Mike, has yet to be interrogated and is being kept
in solitary confinement, his supporters say.

Federal officials will not comment on Mr. Hawash, though they have been pressed
by Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, and by a group of supporters led by a
former Intel vice president, for basic information about why he is being
detained.

In a statement after his arrest, the F.B.I. said he was being held as a material
witness in an "ongoing investigation" by the Joint Terrorism Task Force. Federal
search warrants in the case are sealed.

The case has drawn the attention of civil liberties groups nationwide, who say
Mr. Hawash's case is an example of how the Bush administration is holding a
handful of American citizens without offering them normal legal protection.

Although at least two American citizens are being held without normal legal
rights as "enemy combatants," Mr. Hawash has not been categorized as such. As a
material witness, he is being held to compel testimony. But supporters say he
has not been told anything about what the government may want from him.

"Our friend has fallen into some kind of 'Alice in Wonderland' meets Franz
Kafka," said Steven McGeady, the former Intel executive, who started a legal
defense fund and a Web site for Mr. Hawash.

"You hear about this happening in other countries and to immigrants and then to
American citizens," Mr. McGeady went on. "And finally you hear about it
happening to someone you know. It's scary."

Mr. Hawash's family thought at first that his arrest was connected to two
donations he made three years ago to an Islamic charity, Global Relief
Foundation, whose assets were frozen last year when federal authorities said it
was linked to terrorism. But now relatives say the contributions may not be
related to his arrest, and he may be asked to testify about six people charged
here last year with aiding terrorism.

Asked about the charitable donations -- which totaled a little more than $10,000
-- Mr. Hawash told the local newspaper, The Oregonian, in November: "We believed
that they are doing good work. It's a well-known organization."

Civil liberties groups say material witness statutes are being abused by the
Bush administration to hold people like Mr. Hawash indefinitely. "The government
doesn't have and should not have the power to arrest and detain someone without
charging them," said Lucas Guttentag, director of the American Civil Liberties
Union's Immigrants Rights Project. "If this kind of thing is permitted, then any
United States citizen can be swept off the street and locked up without being
charged."

Since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the courts have made conflicting rulings on
the legality of holding material witnesses without charging them. A federal
judge in Manhattan, Shira A. Scheindlin, said such detentions were "an
illegitimate use of the statute," but another ruling in the same court, by Chief
Judge Michael B. Mukasey, said detaining witnesses to compel testimony was a
legitimate investigative tool.

Attorney General John Ashcroft has defended the tactic, saying it is "vital to
preventing, disrupting or delaying new attacks."

The Justice Department has not said how many Americans have been held without
charges in terrorism investigations since Sept. 11. Civil liberties groups say
they believe the number is about 20, though most are not American citizens.

Mr. Hawash, who was born in Nablus in the West Bank, first came to the United
States in 1984, his family said, and graduated from the University of Texas. He
became an American citizen in 1988. He is married to Lisa Hawash, a native of
Roseburg, Ore. The Web site set up by supporters, freemikehawash.org, founded by
two former Intel executives, shows a picture of Mr. Hawash's wife and three
children.

Mr. Hawash has worked at Intel since 1992, though he was laid off in 2001 and
rehired as a contract employee. Mr. McGeady, his boss there, said Mr. Hawash
went back to Nablus to visit his family several years ago and had trouble
returning to the United States until Intel officials intervened.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
WITNESSES (88%); TESTIMONY (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%);
PRISONS (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); SEARCH WARRANTS (76%); CHILDREN (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CHARITIES (73%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (70%);
INVESTIGATIONS (65%); CHARITABLE GIVING (60%); JUDGES (57%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (50%); RELIGION (50%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

COMPANY: INTEL CORP (84%); AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (82%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION; INTEL CORP

TICKER: INTC (NASDAQ) (84%); ALMUDON (KUW) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (84%);
NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (58%); SIC6513
OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (58%)  SIC3679 OTHER ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS;

PERSON: RON WYDEN (54%) EGAN, TIMOTHY; HAWASH, MAHER; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (92%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); KUWAIT (93%)

REGION: PORTLAND (ORE);  KUWAIT

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             348 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: COURTS;
Tribunals Nearly Ready For Afghanistan Prisoners

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


After nearly 18 months of planning, the Pentagon is at last ready to put in
place its system of military tribunals to try people captured in the war in
Afghanistan, officials and lawyers outside the government say.

The officials and lawyers said the military would, in the next few weeks,
complete work on the structure of the first tribunal, the final list of crimes
that could be prosecuted and the list of military officers who would serve on
the panels, as well as those who would prosecute the crimes and those available
as defense lawyers.

Soon after that, they said, they will announce the first small group of
detainees to face charges of war crimes. The proceedings will take place at the
United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where some 640 detainees are
being held.

Despite the fact that there will be a system in place, many officials said that
there might not be an actual proceeding anytime soon. The Pentagon hopes that
the first handful of prisoners charged will be persuaded to accept plea bargains
in which they could plead guilty to lesser charges in exchange for providing new
information about Al Qaeda.

In essence, the first tribunal is supposed to serve as a continuation of the
plan to get as much information as possible out of the detainees, with the
actual prosecution of any crimes as a secondary goal.

"The priority has always been to gather intelligence from these people," one
official said.

Another official cautioned, however, that there was no guarantee that the
defendants would go along with this plan. In that event, the military would be
obliged to go ahead with a proceeding.

Under the military order signed by President Bush on Nov. 13, 2001, the
tribunals may be used only for noncitizens who were members of Al Qaeda or who
have "engaged in, aided or abetted, or conspired to commit, acts of
international terrorism, or acts in preparation therefor, that have caused,
threaten to cause, or have as their aim to cause injury to or adverse effects on
the United States," or who have harbored those people.

That would seem to prevent the use of the tribunals for people captured during
the war in Iraq unless Mr. Bush amends the order.

Officials have already said that they are planning two other kinds of tribunals
for captured Iraqis. One would be military tribunals for those charged with
crimes in connection with the current fighting. There would be separate civilian
tribunals conducted by Iraqi lawyers and judges with the help of the United
States to prosecute crimes against humanity committed over the past 20 years,
including charges of genocide against the Kurds.

W. Hays Park, special assistant to the Army for war crimes, told reporters that
Iraq was violating several main tenets of the Geneva Conventions. Mr. Park said
Iraq had violated the conventions by broadcasting gruesome pictures of dead
coalition troops and showing prisoners of war forced to answer interrogations,
and had committed treachery by falsely using white flags of surrender to attack
forces and having soldiers disguise themselves in civilian clothing.

Pierre-Richard Prosper, ambassador for war crimes issues, said the use of
civilian garb by Iraqi fighters had "caused numerous civilian casualties and has
put thousands of civilians in harm's way." Mr. Prosper said the convention's
prohibition against using civilian garb was intended to maintain a distinction
between civilians and soldiers.

He also said that Kuwait might establish tribunals for crimes committed in the
1991 gulf war that could not previously be prosecuted because the war ended
before Iraqi officials could be captured.

The prisoners at Guantanamo are in a kind of legal limbo because the
administration has refused to designate them as prisoners of war, a status that
would entitle them to immunity from prosecution for many acts committed during a
lawful war, among other things.

The government contends that the prisoners are "unlawful combatants," and that
position has drawn criticism from human rights groups as well as a group of
British judges who, in an opinion last November, denounced the treatment of the
detainees.

Officials said the prisoners loosely fell into three categories: people who were
probably needlessly detained, a few Qaeda members and a group of people about
whom they know little.

The military has compiled a list of 24 crimes for which the detainees may be
prosecuted, including murder, the taking of hostages, degrading treatment of
prisoners, use of human shields and false use of a white flag to wage war.

Mere membership in Al Qaeda is not considered a crime, but the list includes a
broad-gauge charge of "related offenses," like conspiracy and aiding or
abetting, attempting, soliciting or ordering any of the 24 crimes mentioned.

Human rights organizations have criticized the Pentagon's plans for, among other
things, allowing no appeal to a civilian court. The critics say international
law requires that captured soldiers have the same right of appeal as soldiers in
the host country. In the United States, convictions in military courts are
ultimately appealable in the civilian courts.

The defendants will be represented by military lawyers, and the regulations also
allow for some private lawyers to be retained. But the nonmilitary lawyers would
have to be cleared to examine classified and even some nonclassified documents.
They would probably be hired by detainees' families.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); AL-QAEDA (87%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ARMIES (78%);
POWS & MIAS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); IRAQ WAR
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CONSPIRACY (76%);
GUILTY PLEAS (76%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
NAVIES (73%); JUDGES (72%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  PLEA BARGAINING;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) LEWIS, NEIL A; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             352 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

COPING;
New Fears Rise, Old Fears Stir

BYLINE:  By ANEMONA HARTOCOLLIS;  E-mail: amh@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section 14; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 765 words


FOR some, the war in Iraq may be a sideshow to the main event of this
still-young century, the international war on terrorism. But for a lot of New
Yorkers, who had just started to feel better after the attack on the World Trade
Center, the war, though thousands of miles away, and a few days ago triumphally
winding down, has reopened the psychic wounds of 9/11.

These people see a link between their feelings then and now, of anxiety,
insecurity, even panic. If post-traumatic stress disorder were not an overused
diagnosis, that might be part of it.

Two New Yorkers for whom the war has been an emotional turning point are Janet
Sabel and Dinah PoKempner. Although Ms. Sabel and Ms. PoKempner have never met,
they have several things in common. Both are lawyers for good causes and live
with their husbands and young children on the Upper West Side. They both sailed
through 9/11, which happened in their city.

But they did not sail through the war, which was far more remote. Maybe that is
because 9/11 softened them up for trauma, or maybe battle stress is real whether
it comes in the heat of battle or after the battle is over.

On Sept. 11, 2001, the first hijacked plane flew past the window of Ms. Sabel's
Legal Aid office, across Vesey Street from the towers. She and her colleagues
have never returned, because the building remains contaminated with heavy
metals.

Ms. Sabel took comfort in her work, helping victims of the attack who had lost
their homes and jobs. "I was on a mission," she said. "I was an obsessed person.
I was never so grateful for doing the work that I do."

The other day, sitting near the 107th Street soccer field in Riverside Park in
drizzly rain, watching her son's team lose 5-0, she admitted that after two
years of what -- denial? resilience? -- she felt punched in the stomach.

Ms. Sabel, 47, is an accomplished woman, accustomed to being in control of her
destiny. The war made her feel helpless. "I had anxiety attacks," she confessed.
In the subway, there were times when she felt unable to breathe. When she
listened to the war news, she cried every time Sept. 11 was mentioned.

Unlike the attack of Sept. 11, the war shattered her sense of her city as a
fundamentally safe place. "For the people of our generation," she said, "this
was the first time as a parent we said, 'Oh, my God, I have to protect the
kids."' When she looked at the unsuspecting faces of her children, she imagined
bombs falling. Perils that once seemed real -- that her children might fall off
a mountain while hiking, for example -- seemed puny.

"Will we hear the bombs?" asked her son, Henry, 11, who sublimates anxiety
through information. "No," his mother replied, thinking to herself, "Not until
they're here."

Ms. PoKempner also had a delayed reaction. As general counsel for Human Rights
Watch, which investigates human rights abuses in places like South Africa,
Cambodia and now Iraq, she took the attack of Sept. 11 in stride. "I didn't have
any sense right after 9/11 that the world had changed," she said. "I thought,
'Oh, the world has finally come to America. I know that world."'

She likened the terrorist attack to an unexpected spike in crime: with the right
police tactics, she told herself, the problem could be brought under control.
But standing in a friend's kitchen last week, seven months pregnant with her
third child, her husband out of the country on a business trip, she felt the
world had become a much scarier place.

"I am more afraid now than after 9/11," she said. Pointing to her children,
frolicking near the stove, she explained: "I am afraid for them."

The war may be in its final stages, but there remains the fear of what will
happen next. Will Al Qaeda resurface? Will there be war in Iran or Syria? Will
there be retaliation from the Arab world?

Ms. PoKempner fears that, in a city known for dissent, her children will grow up
in today's equivalent of the Red Scare. She fears that war will cripple the
economy, leaving no money for schools like Public School 87, where her son goes.

Offended by the sight of G.I. Joe dolls at Zany Brainy, a toy store near her
West 93rd Street apartment, she responded by taking her children to an antiwar
rally. Sophie, who is 4, was enchanted by a slogan she heard there: "Drop Bush,
not bombs." If bombs fell on their apartment, she asked, "Will you and Daddy and
Elijah hide under my bed?"

"Yes," Ms. PoKempner said. She added that bombs would not fall on New York,
because that is what mothers everywhere have always told their children. You are
safe. You are loved. I will live forever.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Lisa Haney)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); POST
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); CHILDREN (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (89%); ANXIETY DISORDERS (89%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); WAR
& CONFLICT (73%); HIJACKING (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); LAWYERS (70%); MENTAL
ILLNESS (70%); LEGAL AID (68%); SOCCER (62%); HEAVY METALS & TOXIC MINERALS
(50%) BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

PERSON: SABEL, JANET; POKEMPNER, DINAH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: IRAQ;  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             357 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Battle Over Jenin, on Television

BYLINE:  By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, April 14


Scene one: Israeli soldiers fighting their way through the congested alleys of
the Jenin refugee camp face frequent fire, but stop to open a tin of food for a
distraught, elderly Palestinian woman, who thanks God for their kindness.

Scene two: Palestinian children play dress-up with mock explosive belts
resembling those strapped to suicide bombers, and declare an unyielding
determination to kill Israelis. "My only dream is to see the state of Israel
overthrown," one says.

"The Road to Jenin," a documentary that was broadcast on Israeli television
tonight, is the third provocative film about the combat between Palestinian
militants and the Israeli Army a year ago in Jenin, in the northern West Bank.
It was the most intense battle of the current Mideast bloodletting.

The latest work, by a French-Israeli filmmaker, Pierre Rehov, is a strongly
pro-Israeli account that portrays Israeli soldiers as humane warriors who track
down terrorists and try to spare civilians, while Palestinians possess a
single-minded commitment to war.

The nine days of fighting inJenin, from April 3 to 11 last year, was just one
part of a major Israeli sweep through West Bank cities in response to a wave of
Palestinian bombings. But the fierceness of the fighting has given it monumental
significance for Israelis and Palestinians, and both sides invoke the battle to
argue the righteousness of their cause.

Mr. Rehov's film introduces new combat footage he received from the Israeli
military, but is likely to do little more than reinforce Israeli positions,
while inspiring renewed protest from Palestinians.

Interviews with Israeli soldiers are interwoven with scenes from Jenin, as the
troops explain how they had no choice but to root out Palestinian militants from
the Jenin camp, the leading source of suicide bombings against Israel.

"I had no wish to go to refugee camps in the Palestinian territories, but after
all the terror attacks, we knew something had to be done," one soldier said in
the film.

Palestinian leaders initially claimed that hundreds were massacred in the camp.
Extensive investigations by journalists, human rights groups and aid
organizations found no such evidence -- the final death toll was 52
Palestinians, mostly militants along with some civilians, and 23 Israeli
soldiers.

But many Palestinians still argue that Jenin was a massacre, and point to the
Israeli Army bulldozers that crumpled apartment buildings in the center of the
camp as an example of excessive Israeli force they say has been commonplace
during 30 months of fighting.

"This is a film that saw things from an Israeli point of view, and I do not
think it reflects reality inside the Jenin refugee camp," Fares Qadura, a
Palestinian legislator, told Israeli television during a discussion after the
program.

The film touches only lightly on the Palestinian civilian toll, and does not
address accusations that soldiers ordered Palestinians to go into buildings to
persuade militants to surrender. Israel's army has acknowledged such practices,
and Palestinians said it was widespread in Jenin.

As soon as the last band of Palestinian militants surrendered in Jenin, the
accusations began flying and filmmakers went to work.

First out of the blocks was "Jenin Diary -- The Inside Story," by Sgt. Gil
Mezuman, a reserve soldier who used a hand-held digital camera to capture the
fear, confusion and anguish experienced by his unit, which lost 13 soldiers when
they were lured into an ambush.

The second film, "Jenin, Jenin," by a prominent Arab Israeli actor, Muhammad
Bakri, infuriated many Israelis. Mr. Bakri presented Jenin residents giving
emotional, tearful accounts of fighting, with repeated accusations of Israeli
abuses.

The film showed just a few times before the country's normally idle Censorship
Board sprang into action and banned the film.

Mr. Bakri, who is appealing that ruling, moved to block the showing of "The Road
to Jenin" on the grounds it is a one-sided Israeli account. However, Israel's
High Court ruled this afternoon that the film could air.

Mr. Rehov said he was motivated to make the film after hearing initial media
reports of an Israeli massacre, which he did not believe.

"As a Jew, I could not tolerate that we were being portrayed as monsters," he
said.

His original intention was to show Israeli and Palestinian suffering, with
children on both sides speaking about their dreams. But when he went to Jenin in
January, he said he was shocked at the level of Palestinian militancy and the
adherence to claims that had been proven untrue.

In the year since Jenin's battle, the Israeli Army has maintained either an
armored presence in the town or a tight cordon around it. The center of the
refugee camp has been cleared of debris. It is now an open square that was
recently named after an Iraqi suicide bomber who killed four American soldiers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: ROAD TO JENIN, THE (TV PROGRAM); JENIN, JENIN (TV PROGRAM)

GRAPHIC: Photo: Israeli troops at the center of the Jenin refugee camp on April
14, 2002. Many Palestinians argue that a massacre occurred, a charge that Israel
has hotly denied. Now, the conflict has moved to the airwaves. (Rina Castelnuovo
for The New York Times) Map of West Bank shows the location of Jenin: The Jenin
conflict has inspired three provocative documentaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); ARMIES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (89%); REFUGEES (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); CENSORSHIP (70%); DOCUMENTARY
FILMS (70%); VISUAL ARTISTS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%)
PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  TELEVISION;  TELEVISION;  CENSORSHIP

PERSON: MYRE, GREG; REHOV, PIERRE; BAKRI, MUHAMMAD

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JENIN (WEST BANK);  FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             366 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: New Constitution

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 82 words


The Parliament adopted a new constitution to come into force in July, when a
period of political transition ends.

Under the new system, which will be put to a vote in a May 26 referendum, the
country would have an elected legislature for the first time since the Hutu
government carried out mass killings in 1994, in which more than a half-million
Tutsi were killed. Members of the current Parliament were appointed. Legislative
and presidential elections would be held later this year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); REFERENDUMS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (88%); POLITICS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(84%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CONSTITUTIONS;  ELECTIONS;  LEGISLATURES
ANDPARLIAMENTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  TUTSI TRIBE;  HUTU TRIBE;  WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             374 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: SURVEILLANCE;
G.O.P. MAKES DEAL IN SENATE TO WIDEN ANTITERROR POWER

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Senate Republicans backed down today from an effort to make permanent the
sweeping antiterrorism powers in a 2001 act, clearing the way for passage of a
less divisive measure that would still expand the government's ability to spy on
foreign terrorist suspects in the United States.

In an agreement finalized over the last week, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the
chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, dropped his effort to extend
provisions of the 2001 legislation, the Patriot Act, whose broad powers to
investigate and track terrorist suspects are scheduled to expire in 2005.

As a result, the Senate voted 90 to 4 to approve a measure expanding the
government's ability to use secret surveillance tools against terrorist suspects
who are not thought to be members of known terrorist groups.

Under current law, federal officials must establish a link to a foreign
terrorist group in order to secure or request a secret warrant.

The day's developments represented a major test of the balancing act between
fighting terrorism and protecting civil liberties, and the result delivered a
mixed verdict as many lawmakers expressed reservations about giving law
enforcement officials too much power to fight terrorism.

"There's a delicate balance between liberty and security," said Senator Charles
E. Schumer, the New York Democrat who was one of the authors of the so-called
"lone wolf" counterterrorism measure. "It's a seesaw, and that's the debate that
we're seeing now in Congress."

The overwhelming passage of the measure masked intense behind-the-scenes
maneuverings in recent weeks over the powers that the federal government has
been given to fight terrorism.

Mr. Hatch, Republican of Utah, led a push beginning last month to attach to the
bill an amendment that would have repealed time restrictions built into the 2001
measure.

Mr. Hatch adopted this tactic because he was said to believe that some Democrats
on the Judiciary Committee were seeking to water down the bill by attaching
amendments that would impose tougher legal standards and greater reporting
requirements on law enforcement officials in their use of their new
counterterrorism powers. Many Democrats have complained in recent months that
the Justice Department has kept them in the dark about its counterterrorism
activities since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Mr. Hatch's effort to make the Patriot Act permanent set off immediate criticism
from civil liberties groups and lawmakers, including some Republicans, who said
Congress needed more time to scrutinize how the act was working -- and whether
law enforcement officials were abusing it. Some of the Republican opposition has
come from lawmakers concerned about reach of "big government."

Jeff Lungren, a spokesman for Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., the
Wisconsin Republican who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said that
extending the life of the Patriot Act "will happen over his dead body."

As part of a tentative deal reached last week and completed over the last
several days, Republicans on the Judiciary Committee agreed not to seek a repeal
of the act's sunset provisions at today's vote on the terrorism bill if
Democrats pulled some of their own amendments that the Republicans considered
objectionable.

"The Democrats weren't going to give us a vote on the thing unless there were no
Hatch amendments, period," said a Republican Senate aide who demanded anonymity.
"A lot of the Democrats hated the Patriot Act even though they voted for it, and
they certainly didn't want to see it made permanent. It's an ongoing, simmering
debate."

Margarita Tapia, a spokeswoman for Mr. Hatch, said that the senator was
satisfied with the final result.

"Since a compromise was worked out, we decided not to offer" the amendment
repealing the act's time restrictions, she said. "But that doesn't change his
position. He continues to be opposed to the sunset provisions of the Patriot
Act," Ms. Tapia said.

Indeed, Democrats said they remain concerned that Mr. Hatch and other
Republicans would continue to look for other legislative vehicles to help repeal
the time restrictions -- an idea that Justice Department officials said they
supported.

In the meantime, civil liberties advocates were heartened by the defeat of the
proposal.

"This is a major victory," said Timothy Edgar, legislative counsel for the
American Civil Liberties Union. "Hatch wanted to intimidate the Democrats into
not offering their amendments, and that ploy didn't work because there is
widespread concern that the government has already gone too far with the Patriot
Act. His salvo may have backfired."

With the debate tabled for the moment, focus will shift back to the more limited
counterterrorism measure that was approved by the Senate today, officials said.

The measure, which was sponsored by Senators Schumer and Jon Kyl, Republican of
Arizona, has received the backing of the Justice Department, but its fate in the
House remains uncertain.

"We'll wait to take a look at the Senate bill and see what we're going to do,"
said a senior Republican aide in the House.

The Senate bill's supporters deemed the measure a way of fixing the problems
that arose in the case of Zacarias Moussaoui, who was jailed on immigration
charges in the summer of 2001 after taking flight classes in the Minneapolis
area.

Law enforcement officials have maintained that the F.B.I.'s inability to show
conclusively that Mr. Moussaoui was linked to Al Qaeda or a known terrorist
group -- as the current law for foreign intelligence surveillance requires --
prevented them from securing a warrant against him. Searches of Mr. Moussaoui's
computer and belongings only after the Sept. 11 attacks revealed evidence
linking him to Al Qaeda, and he is now charged with being a part of the
terrorist conspiracy.

"These people don't have cards identifying themselves as members of these
organizations," Mr. Kyl said. "The bottom line is, it's very difficult,
sometimes impossible, to prove that they're affiliated with a specific group. In
some cases they're not. They're simply acting on their own, but they are still
foreign terrorists."

Mr. Schumer suggested that if the foreign link requirement had not been in place
in the summer of 2001 and the F.B.I. had gotten a secret warrant against Mr.
Moussaoui, "perhaps 9/11 might have not have occurred. That's the anguish that
we all face."

Some legal experts have challenged that assertion, saying the F.B.I. had the
opportunity to get a warrant against Mr. Moussaoui but botched it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
US PATRIOT ACT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); APPROVALS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); ESPIONAGE (77%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  SECURITY
AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: ORRIN HATCH (89%); CHARLES SCHUMER (59%); F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (58%)
LICHTBLAU, ERIC; HATCH, ORRIN G (SEN)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             375 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: THE POLITICS;
A Kurdish Leader Assails Heads of Arab Nations For Backing Hussein's Rule

BYLINE:  By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 8


Jalal Talabani, the Kurdish leader who is expected to take a senior post in
Iraq's interim government, said today that the heads of Arab countries should be
called to account for Saddam Hussein's crimes against the Iraqi people.

Mr. Talabani spoke in an interview on a day of political meetings between
ranking American military and civilian reconstruction officials. He said that
the discovery of mass graves in several locations around the country underscores
the responsibility that Arab leaders must take for their support for Mr. Hussein
and the Baath Party, which built and enforced his totalitarian rule.

"The Arab governments must come and see those mass graves and decide what kinds
of crimes were committed by Saddam Hussein," Mr. Talabani said. "And then they
must go to the Iraqi people and apologize."

The Kurdish leader is the second senior opposition figure this week to speak of
the deep rift between a postwar Iraq and the Arab world. Earlier this week,
Ahmad Chalabi, another opposition leader, said it would be up to Arab leaders to
"mend their ways" with Iraq rather than the other way around.

Taken together, the remarks by the two Iraqi political figures appeared to be
timed to head off mounting criticism in the Arab world suggesting that the
United States is attempting to install a group of American-financed exiles and
Kurds as the new government.

A new Iraqi government appears likely to challenge many long-held Arab positions
on democracy, human rights and relations with Israel.

The Iraqi landscape is yielding up mass graves related to the 1991 uprising
against Mr. Hussein, the suppression of Kurdish opposition in northern Iraq, and
more than two decades of secret arrests and executions by Mr. Hussein's security
forces.

The Kurdish leader said he had sent his aide, Barham Saleh, on a tour of Arab
capitals this week. He pointed with pride to a Kurdish newspaper report that Mr.
Saleh said in Cairo that the secretary general of the 22-nation Arab League, Amr
Moussa, should explain to Iraqis why he supported Mr. Hussein and why he opposed
the American-led military campaign to topple him.

Mr. Talabani also criticized King Abdullah II of Jordan for his "strange"
personal attacks on members of the Iraqi opposition, principally Ahmad Chalabi
of the Iraqi National Congress, who is also a potential leader of the interim
government.

Mr. Chalabi, Mr. Talabani and the other leaders of opposition groups now
represented in Baghdad, met today in an attempt to set a date to organize a
national assembly of more than 350 representatives and select a new government.
In the interview, Mr. Talabani said that he supported Mr. Chalabi's assertion
that Iraq's interim government cannot be led by a committee of leaders, but must
form a government of ministers under a single prime minister.

He said there had been no discussion of who would take the post, but he said he
doubted that Mr. Chalabi would take it at the start, due to his poisonous
relations with so many governments in the region.

"How can we deal with the Arabs when the prime minister is hated by the Arabs?"
he asked.

Mr. Talabani also said that Kurdish officials had begun to assert their claims
to a central role in a new Iraqi government.

"We have asked for one of the important posts of president or prime minister,"
he said. "One must be in the hands of a capable Kurd."

The Kurds, long persecuted by Mr. Hussein, have established a self-governing
region in the north of Iraq under American protection. They now face the
challenge of establishing their political power at the national level.

Mr. Chalabi is planning to broaden both his domestic political base in Iraq and
his profile abroad. The Iraqi National Congress, the movement that used to
encompass Mr. Chalabi's supporters, the Kurdish parties and a number of other
political groups, has splintered, and its parts have migrated back to their
individual groups.

As a result, Mr. Chalabi and his aides are planning to revamp their movement by
calling a convention in Baghdad, expanding its membership to 1,000 or more
representatives, and declaring the group a political party. At the same time,
Mr. Chalabi has been invited to make a high-profile visit to Turkey, where he
could project a statesman's profile in the capital of a non-Arab neighbor.

By the end of their meeting today, the opposition leaders still had not
completed preparations to call a national assembly meeting to select and form an
interim government by the end of the month.

The leaders expanded their five-member council by two seats to include a
longtime Baghdad lawyer, Nasir al-Chadirchy, whose father, Kamel, was a leading
democratic political thinker in Iraq during the 1950's and founder of the
National Democratic Party of Iraq. They also created a seat for a representative
of the Dawa Party, a Shiite group.

The inclusion of Mr. Chadirchy added an Arab Sunni Muslim official to the
council. To balance his appointment, another Shiite seat had to be created to
maintain a Shiite majority on the council, roughly reflection the 60-40 balance
of Shiites to Sunnis in the population.

After their political talks, the council met with Jay Garner, the retired
American lieutenant general charged with reconstructing Iraq, and aides to Lt.
Gen. David D. McKiernan, the allied land forces commander in Iraq.

In a closed session, Mr. Talabani said he had criticized the United States
military for its failure to provide basic security on the country's highways. He
complained that an Iranian opposition group, the Mujahedeen Khalq, was still
maintaining checkpoints on some roads north of Baghdad.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); TERRORISM (60%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  KURDS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%); JALAL TALABANI (90%) TYLER, PATRICK E; HUSSEIN,
SADDAM (PRES); TALABANI, JALAL; CHALABI, AHMAD

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); JORDAN (79%); ISRAEL (79%); EGYPT
(58%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             377 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: VICTIMS;
At Mass Grave in Iraq Marsh, An Open Secret Is Laid Bare

BYLINE:  By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: MAHAWIL, Iraq, Wednesday, May 14


When the buses and vans started coming twice a day in April 1991 to disgorge
their loads of victims, Hassan Maki tried to keep a rough count of the Shiites
who were disappearing before his eyes.

They were driven down a dirt road into the salt marshes next to a brick factory.
They were forced out of the vehicles. Mr. Maki could barely see them in the
distance because of the haze that often lies over the marshes here in central
Iraq, about 50 miles south of Baghdad.

Then the gunfire began. The figures wilted onto the ground. A bulldozer came to
cover them with earth in what appears now to be one of the largest mass graves
uncovered in Iraq, with an estimated 3,000 bodies found. After the bodies were
disposed of, the sequence started over with another busload.

An onion farmer, Salim Nasir, once strayed too close to the killing ground
during that time, after the uprising of Iraqi Shiites in the south failed and
Saddam Hussein unfurled his vengeance against them. A gruff officer of the
secret police told Mr. Nasir that unless he wanted a bullet to find him, he
would keep his mouth shut and stay away from his fields when the shooting was
going on.

"I told him I would never go there," he said. "What choice did I have? They
could kill me."

But everyone around the Mahawil brick factory could hear the gunfire as the
victims were shot and their bodies thrown into the marsh or covered with earth
by the bulldozer.

The driver of that bulldozer was some kind of brute, Mr. Maki figured, because
the man once bragged that he had personally killed a mother and child, shooting
the mother first and then laying the infant on her lap and shooting the infant.

About nine days ago, the people of this area began to organize for the final
accounting of what Mr. Hussein did here, and this marsh is yielding up the
bodies that the people of this village knew were there for more than a decade.
The mass graves are spread out over an agricultural area, with one site
consisting simply of a disemboweled ditch, and another spread out over 10 to 15
acres.

The workers here have put a majority of the remains in plastic bags, while
others are laid out carefully as bundles. Faded identity cards unearthed with
the bodies are left in the open so families can see them. The writing on them
may not be visible, but perhaps enough of an image remains to help a family
member make an identification.

Personal effects also stand out among the bones -- a watch here, a set of worry
beads there, clothing with a pattern that might strike a chord of memory.

There are signs of blindfolds binding many skulls, which are marked with
execution wounds, and some bundles seem to contain the mingled bones of more
than one person, perhaps of a mother and child.

As workers struggled to pull the bodies from the marshes on Tuesday, Mr. Maki
said, "I counted here maybe 3,000, not exactly, but that is my estimate."

Mr. Hussein's secret police turned this place into an execution field and mass
grave for Shiites who rose up against his rule in February and March of 1991.
That spring, there was killing all over Iraq. Kurds disappeared in the north,
Shiites in the south.

Mahmoud Shakr Abdel-Hussein, a biochemist on the faculty of Basra Technical
Institute, could have been one of the dead pulled from the marshes. He knows
that. He was arrested for driving wounded Shiite fighters to the hospital during
the uprising.

Along with 400 prisoners, he was led into a warehouse in Basra, where Ali Hasan
al-Majid, one of Mr. Hussein's most brutal enforcers, took a Kalashnikov rifle
and pointed it at the group.

"Where you involved?" Mr. Majid shouted at one man, and then killed him.

"Were you involved?" he said, wheeling on another man, firing again and killing
him. After gunning down 13 men, Mr. Majid, shaking with rage, gave up the weapon
and left.

Mr. Abdel-Hussein was spared that day because he came from a wealthy family that
paid about half a million dollars to free him. He says he is still profoundly
disturbed by what Mr. Hussein did to his people.

All Shiites around here knew that tallying up those who had disappeared was a
task they would have to face after Mr. Hussein was gone. And, of course, no one
is sure that he is gone. "Even until now, when we talk about Saddam, we have to
look over our shoulders because we are still afraid," Mr. Maki said.

The accounting has just begun here, he says, like it has all over Iraq where
graves are being uncovered in the effort to determine the total number of
victims of Mr. Hussein's rule. He said a preliminary survey indicated that more
than 11,000 Iraqis died here, but it will take some time before any estimate can
be confirmed. It seems the digging here could go on for a very long time.

But just to see the landscape of bones mixed with clothing, skulls strewn in the
splay of human detritus and other remains is chilling. At first, it just seems
like hundreds of bundles of clothes have been laid out on the dikes and roads
that cut through the marshes here.

Then the traces of human anatomy appear. A femur from a leg, a humerus from an
arm, a shard of pelvis, and skull peeking out from a gray blanket that someone
assembling remains laid down. The bundles reveal themselves as the former
repositories of living human flesh, before the gunfire sent them on their
journey into the marsh.

"It's a kind of hell out there," said Mr. Nasir, who no longer plants onions
where so many bodies have been desecrated.

"We have always known that there were people here, but we couldn't take them,"
he said. "We knew our Muslim brothers were not buried properly, but we couldn't
say a word."

Amnesty International reports that about 17,000 Iraqis disappeared over 20 years
in Iraq, but the actual figure may eventually go much higher.

American officials learned of the mass grave here on May 3, when the mayor of
Hilla asked marines to protect the area.

Walking through the fields of remains at dawn today, Abdulamir and Sabah
al-Najem were looking for their brother Abbas, who was taken when he was 20. A
friend sent a note to the house that his identification card had been spotted in
one of the lumps of bone and clothing.

Not angry but almost businesslike as he searched, Abdulamir said: "America
helped Saddam do this. America could have finished Saddam back then. Look at the
results."

Rafid al-Husseini, a doctor here, is an organizer of the count. One list has 674
names on it so far, he said.

"It is very hard for the Iraqi people to learn what Saddam Hussein did to us,"
said Ali Kathem, a mechanic in the brick factory. "We knew, but it was a secret
until now."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A blindfolded skull, above, was inspected by Iraqis yesterday
after being dug out of a common grave near Hilla, south of Baghdad. Below,
Iraqis gathered at the gravesite, where about 3,000 bodies have been found.
(Photographs by Kieran Doherty/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); RELIGION (79%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%); TERRORISM (73%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (68%);
POLITICS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) SHIITE MUSLIMS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (75%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); TYLER, PATRICK E

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%)

REGION: IRAQ;  MAHAWIL (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             378 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mass Graves, Pointed Questions

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 65 words


To the Editor:

Thomas L. Friedman ("Two Right Feet," column, May 14) writes of Saddam Hussein
that "this war could easily be justified by his mass destruction of his own
people."

I suggest that if this is the criterion, the United States should immediately
invade Congo and North Korea, whose leaders have destroyed masses of their own
people.

DAVID HILL
Mill Valley, Calif., May 14, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(86%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TERRORISM (84%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (87%); THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (73%) HILL, DAVID; HUSSEIN,
SADDAM (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (90%); IRAQ
(79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (75%)

REGION: IRAQ;  NORTH KOREA;  CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Ex-Minister Jailed For Genocide

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 68 words


A former interior minister was convicted and sentenced to life in prison for his
role in the 1994 genocide. The minister, Eliezer Niyitegeka, was found guilty of
six counts of genocide against ethnic Tutsi and crimes against humanity, said a
spokesman for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The tribunal also
sentenced a former mayor of Bicumbi, Laurent Semanza, to 25 years for similar
crimes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); WAR CRIMES (87%);
CIVIL WAR (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  TUTSI TRIBE;  HUTU TRIBE;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (58%)
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL

PERSON: NIYITEGEKA, ELIEZER; SEMANZA, LAURENT

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (67%)

REGION: RWANDA;  BICUMBI (RWANDA)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             380 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Digging Up the Past in Iraq's Killing Fields

BYLINE:  By Peter Bouckaert;  Peter Bouckaert is senior emergencies researcher
for Human Rights Watch.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: MAHAWIL, Iraq


Balkis Hassun had spent an entire day looking through bags filled with rotting
human remains when I met her. Her 14-year-old son, Ali, had disappeared one day
in March 1991, after she had asked him to go to the river for water. Now, just
as quickly as the hope had risen that she would finally discover his fate, she
started confronting the reality that she would never find his body.

Around us was a scene of utter chaos and horror. Since early morning, a backhoe
had been digging up the earth, often uncovering dozens of corpses in a single
scoop. Bodies were piled everywhere. I noticed an artificial leg among the
remains and, nearby, a corpse with crutches. Occasionally a piercing scream
would rise above the crowd as a body was identified by relatives.

Some of the victims were buried with identification cards in their wallets. Many
in the desperate crowd, however, snatched at the slightest bit of hope, staring
for hours at stained clothing in case they might recognize something belonging
to a missing loved one. I saw one man carry off the remains of a body that he
swore was his brother's simply because he found a pack of his brother's favorite
cigarettes with the remains.

Similar scenes are playing out all over Iraq. Exhuming a mass grave with a
backhoe is like hunting pigeons with a tank. Sadly, most of the desperate
civilians who flock to places like Mahawil will leave with uncertainty, and may
have unwittingly destroyed their last chance to emotionally reunite with their
missing relatives. In addition, the absence of forensic expertise at the graves
means that evidence needed to prosecute the murderers of Iraq may also be
destroyed.

This is in sharp contrast to what happened in 1999 in Kosovo, when NATO forces
worked with the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia to secure
sites and enable exhumations almost as soon as Slobodan Milosevic's troops
pulled out. As soon as possible, the international community must organize a
similar process to aid Iraqi families, to allow at least a possibility for
proper identification and preservation of evidence. In the meantime, coalition
forces must protect the graves.

When I spoke to a Marine commander here, he said his orders were to "secure" and
"assist" at scenes of war crimes. Apparently, this meant securing the sites
where crimes were committed against American soldiers, and assisting when the
graves held the remains of Iraqis. And what did he mean by assisting, I asked.
He told me that the troops had brought water to the site that day.

As I left Balkis Hassun, the woman looking for her young son, she was softly
crying, and soon I was also near tears. It is one thing to think abstractly of
the number of people missing, quite another to sit down and talk to a woman
about the memory of her beloved son. Looking at the marines standing on the
nearby hill taking snapshots, I was at a loss to find words of hope.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); EVIDENCE (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); FORENSICS (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(68%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS
(59%); PROSTHETICS & ORTHOTICS (55%) BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (50%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); BOUCKAERT, PETER

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); KOSOVO (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (90%)

REGION: IRAQ;  MAHAWIL (IRAQ);  SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             391 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinian Doctor, Held by Israelis, Pleads Not Guilty

BYLINE:  By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 286 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, May 30


A prominent Palestinian psychologist who was detained after Israeli troops razed
his family home and killed three of his brothers who were Hamas militants has
pleaded not guilty to charges of weapons possession and incitement, his family
said.

To his supporters, Dr.

Fadel Abu Hein, 42, is a highly respected psychologist who runs a Gaza Strip
clinic that deals with family problems ranging from divorce to the effects of
violence on children.

But Israel says he was also linked to the activities of his brothers, who were
accused of being arms smugglers for Hamas.

Israeli troops surrounded the four-story family compound in Gaza City before
dawn on May 1, and called for the three brothers to surrender. They refused, and
firefights erupted throughout the neighborhood and carried on for more than 12
hours, leaving 12 Palestinians dead, including the three Abu Hein brothers.

The Israelis, who tore down the compound after the fighting, said they found
weapons and leaflets inside the house encouraging attacks against Israel. Dr.
Abu Hein's backers say he was not involved with the activities of his brothers.

The Center for Human Rights said Dr. Abu Hein had been subjected to sleep
deprivation and was forced to remain in painful positions for extended periods
of time during his interrogation. The center also said two other members of the
Abu Hein family remained in Israeli custody.

The Israeli Army declined to comment on the case, which is being heard by a
military court near Erez, a crossing point between Israel and the northern Gaza
Strip.

Before the current violence made travel extremely difficult for Palestinians,
Dr. Abu Hein took part in psychology conferences in the United States and
Europe.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (91%); SMUGGLING (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%);
ARMIES (88%); CHILDREN (78%); FAMILY (78%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); MILITARY COURTS (65%) PALESTINIANS;
SMUGGLING

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%) HAMAS (PALESTINIAN GROUP)

PERSON: MYRE, GREG; ABU HEIN, FADEL (DR)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(79%); EUROPE (65%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             399 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Deal Is Reached On Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 79 words


After six years of difficult negotiations, officials of the United Nations and
the Cambodian government signed an agreement setting out a format for trials of
surviving top leaders of the Khmer Rouge, the brutal regime responsible for the
deaths of 1.7 million people from 1975 to 1979. The agreement must still be
ratified by the United Nations and the Cambodian Legislature and is likely to
face many hurdles before any trials are actually convened.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); POLITICS (83%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY;  LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (96%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             400 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FIELD NOTES;
Down the Aisle With a Social Cause in Mind

BYLINE:  By JONATHAN S. PAUL

SECTION: Section 9; Column 3; Society Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 530 words


FOR decades, style has been overpowering substance at weddings, often veering
into territory better suited to an over-the-top opera production.

Now, some couples in the post 9/11, post-Iraq-war era are trying to balance the
day's sweetness and white-silk idealism with the realities of life beyond the
chapel. Some are turning to charity to give their wedding day a deeper social
context.

"I haven't grown up in a pretty world that allowed me to think that having a big
fluffy wedding is everything," Robin Rivers, a 31-year-old freelance writer in
Seattle, said.

She and her fiance, Ken Henderson, 36, a special effects supervisor for
videogames, are orchestrating a September wedding on Vancouver Island that
reflects their shared link to social causes.

Their invitation, for example, was made of cotton and coffee beans. The
reception menu will be free of wheat products, signifying a dietary regime that
they believe in.

In their planning, one of their first steps was to register with the I Do
Foundation Web site, www.idofoundation.org, through which couples can request
that a portion of each gift purchase be directed to a charity of their choosing.

They chosetwo, Doctors Without Borders and Human Rights Watch, and also asked
that 100 percent of the money received go to the organizations' relief efforts
in Iraq.

She said they could not "stomach getting $500 copper cookware" and allocating
only 6 percent of the cost to charity.

Despite its ideological underpinnings, the garden wedding will be a traditional
one. "I hope it's pretty," Ms. Rivers said. "I'm still a girl."

Meredith Kozin, founder of the Boston-based Web site www.organicweddings.com,
which connects couples to environmental- and social-minded wedding products,
said: "The disposable incomes that we put toward weddings can be used to have a
greater meaning." After Sept. 11, she found many couples wanting to "take it to
a deeper level," she said, while keeping the traditional aesthetics of their
weddings intact. "They just want it to be more impactful," she added.

When Wendy Marston, 33, an advertising copywriter in New York, marries Benjamin
Lehmann, 35 and a production assistant on "Sesame Street," in September, the
couple will donate surplus food from their reception to City Harvest
(www.cityharvest.org), an organization that collects leftovers and redistributes
them to hungry New Yorkers.

"It seemed like an incredibly easy, good thing," she said, adding that it also
serves as a refreshing pause from the "spending, spending, spending" on her
wedding.

Many couples communicate their charity hopes to their guests, in part to draw
attention to the causes and in some cases to answer the question: "Where's my
goody bag?"

Jung Lee, a New York wedding planner, said several of her clients were replacing
party favors with a small card explaining that a contribution had been made on
their behalf.

But, Ms. Marston and Mr. Lehmann have decided that it would be a mistake to
announce at their wedding that the leftovers are going to charity. To do so, Ms.
Marston said, would in effect be asking the guests, "Could you guys not finish
that?"

Their guests, she said, will nibble without guilt.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Felipe Galindo)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (93%); CHARITIES (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); OPERA (78%); PHILANTHROPY (76%); FOOD
CHARITIES (76%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (71%); MEDICAL CHARITIES (71%); FREELANCE
EMPLOYMENT (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (65%); DISPOSABLE
INCOME (62%); SPECIAL EFFECTS (54%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (52%) WEDDINGS AND
ENGAGEMENTS;  PHILANTHROPY

ORGANIZATION: DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: PAUL, JONATHAN S

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (76%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (85%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES (85%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             401 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

LETTER FROM ASIA;
In Warlord Land, Democracy Tries Baby Steps

BYLINE:  By Carlotta Gall

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 10


In the hushed, rose-filled gardens of the royal palace in Kabul, life seems calm
and good. Under the chandeliers of the meeting hall upstairs, President Hamid
Karzai, just back from a trip to Britain and a meeting with the queen, manages
to combine an expression of condolence for German peacekeepers killed in a
suicide bomb attack in the capital Saturday with an upbeat assessment of the
situation in his country.

The heavily armed American bodyguards who stand in the gardens and by the
windows of the palace have become like the wallpaper, so much are they part of
the scene now. The Taliban threat in the south and southeast, the car bomber who
drove this week right into the city, the persistent factional fighting in the
north of the country, all seem far away.

But in the last few months there has been a crisis of confidence in Afghanistan,
a sense that the security situation may be spiraling downward and that the rise
of regional warlords may be more than a temporary phenomenon. Attacks on
peacekeepers and aid workers are increasing. After more than a year of waiting
patiently for results, people here are increasingly asking: are the Americans
getting it right?

Today, as American forces in Iraq struggle to establish order, as one or two
American soldiers seem to fall every day, it seems likely to be a question the
United States will soon face in Iraq as well.

Even the most pessimistic Afghanistan watchers acknowledge that this time is
different from the sliding chaos of the early 1990's. The Americans are not
going to turn their back on Afghanistan the way they did then, and the way they
did in Iraq after the Persian Gulf war in 1991. The Americans are here and, by
allaccounts and appearances, here to stay.

But there is only a year left for Mr. Karzai and his American backers to get
things right before his term is up. The Bonn process, which set up the interim
administration led by Mr. Karzai, lays out a rapid program for a new
constitution to be drawn up and approved by a grand assembly this October, and
for national elections to be held next June.

For Afghanistan, one key to establishing order is the disarmament of the
factional armies around the country. The United Nations and Afghanistan's new
Human Rights Commission have already stressed that if the much delayed
disarmament and demobilization program does not go ahead, the drafting of the
constitution and national elections could be thrown into jeopardy.

"There is a real, but still avoidable, risk that the Bonn process will stall if
security is not extended to the regions, and that Afghans will lose confidence
in the central government if it cannot protect them," the United Nations special
representative to Afghanistan, Lakhdar Brahimi, told the Security Council in New
York last month.

Another difficulty is that the allies are tackling the problems in piecemeal
fashion, a strategy that will only advance the country by tiny steps, critics
say.

United States diplomats and aid officials like to draw attention to a large wall
map in their embassy that is covered in a "blizzard" of yellow Post-it stickers
marking every single project under way in the country. They trumpet the
provincial reconstruction teams, United States military-civil affairs teams that
are trying to win hearts and minds in the provinces by building schools, or
latrines for schools. And they talk of the program to train the Afghan National
Army, which should produce a 9,000-member force by next year.

But the national impact of all of this is virtually nil. As one director of a
donor agency, which completed 160 construction projects last year, said, "The
dimension of the destruction is such that people don't see it."

Compared with the enormous military-political Gordian knot that needs to be cut,
the attention to human needs can only be described as paltry, even irrelevant.

Little has been done to disarm and dismantle the power bases of the factions,
and as time goes on the armed men who rule the districts, regions and whole
provinces are becoming more and more entrenched and increasingly powerful
economically. They are likely to dominate politics during the next year, which
could fatally erode all public trust in the process and the results. The country
could end up being ruled by a mixture of drug lords and fundamentalist
mujahedeen -- in other words, people not much different from the Taliban.

Everyone has a different idea of what the United States should be doing, but
most Afghans and Westerners working here agree that there are two basic
requirements for nation-building that the United States cannot afford to ignore
-- providing security and establishing a functioning political system. They are
interconnected, most here agree; in fact, it is impossible to have one without
the other.

Only a legitimate, national political system will have the authority to
establish a police and justice system with the necessary powers to establish
real security. Without real security, there can be no widespread development;
American soldiers cannot stand on every street corner, or monitor every business
transaction and tax collection.

The problem here, as in Iraq, is that the American military is still running the
show and views Afghanistan through the prism of the campaign against terrorism
and not according to the country's political and economic demands. But if
Afghanistan is to seize the chance this year to start becoming a stable and
prosperous society, there is much, much more to be done.

Many are saying that Washington needs to exert more political pressure -- on Mr.
Karzai to act more decisively, on his government to work more proactively, on
the police nationwide to ensure law and order, on commanders to disarm, on
ministers to reform their ministries and even out the balance of power, on
warlords to give up their fiefs and join the government, on Pakistan to stop
supporting the Taliban and other opponents of the Bonn process. The list goes
on.

All those steps would be a help. But fundamentally, the Americans need to create
an atmosphere in which democratic politics can take hold. That means doing more
than attending to human needs and offering military training. It means, in the
view of many Western officials here and prominent Afghans, putting pressure on
the warlords, disarming them and cutting their power bases, leveling the
political playing field so that the coming elections are free and fair.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Soldiers of the Afghan National Guard entered Kabul Olympic
Stadium last winter for their graduation ceremony, through red smoke created for
dramatic effect. It is hoped they will counter the growing power of the
warlords. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%); ELECTIONS
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); TERRORISM (77%);
ARMIES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); DESERT STORM (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); ARMED FORCES (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (65%); DISARMAMENT (60%);
APPROVALS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  GEOGRAPHIC
PROFILES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (89%) GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (97%); IRAQ (93%); ASIA (92%); GERMANY
(91%); GULF STATES (55%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             404 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Somalia: U.S. Deports Ex-Judge

BYLINE:  By Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 96 words


Abdi Ali Nur Mohamed, a former Somali military judge, was ordered deported from
the United States by an immigration judge in San Diego.

American agents discovered that Mr. Mohamed, an asylum seeker who arrived in the
United States in 1990 and lived there legally, according to officials of the
Department of Homeland Security, had been accused of atrocities in Somalia years
ago. The officials said he had participated in the execution of civilians near
the city of Hargeisa during the dictatorship of Muhammad Siad Barre, who was
overthrown in 1991.   Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); DEPORTATION (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); REFUGEES (88%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); JUDGES (88%); IMMIGRATION LAW (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%) FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  DEPORTATION;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%) HOMELAND SECURITY
DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L; MOHAMED, ABDI ALI NUR; BARRE, MUHAMMAD SIAD

CITY: HARGEYSA, SOMALIA (86%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SOMALIA (96%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: SOMALIA;  HARGEISA (SOMALIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             405 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. Leader Wins a Few At Meeting Of A.C.L.U.

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation wandered into a lion's den
of critics today and emerged, for the most part, unscathed.

In a speech before more than 1,400 avowed "card carrying" members of the
American Civil Liberties Union, the director, Robert S. Mueller III, declared
that the F.B.I. and the A.C.L.U. -- though often at odds -- shared a common bond
of respect for the Constitution and for civil liberties. He even co-opted one of
the group's slogans, saying that in the fight against terrorism, the nation must
be "both safe and free."

Mr. Mueller fielded tough and often skeptical questions from the audience on
everything from the sweeping antiterrorism law known as the USA Patriot Act to
racial profiling. But he also defused tensions with a lively wit that contrasted
with the somber tone he usually adopted in public.

He quipped that the civil liberties union should be thanking him for the recent
surge in its membership, which has risen by 100,000 since the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks as the group has raised civil liberties concerns about the government's
antiterrorism campaign.

"I think you really do owe me," Mr. Mueller said to shouts of laughter.

It was a spirited and unusual meeting of ideological warriors -- the first time,
in fact, that any F.B.I. director has ever addressed the organization, group
officials said.

In court challenges and advertising campaigns, the civil liberties union has
accused the F.B.I. and Attorney General John Ashcroft of running roughshod over
civil liberties in the name of catching terrorists. The Bush administration,
meanwhile, has accused the group of distorting the F.B.I.'s counterterrorism
tactics to stir up publicopposition.

In that climate, some in the audience before Mr. Mueller's speech predicted
angry heckling, and a few of Mr. Mueller's advisers were nervous. "There were
people here who were wary of his doing the event," an F.B.I. official said. "But
it's something he really wanted to do to keep the dialogue open."

Mr. Ashcroft was also invited to speak at the membership conference but
declined, A.C.L.U. officials said.

So it was left to Mr. Mueller to defend the Justice Department, and in an
appearance interrupted by several rounds of applause, many listeners said they
were impressed. Some even gave him a standing ovation.

Many A.C.L.U. leaders and rank-and-file members said they remained convinced
that the F.B.I.'s expanded power threatened the civil liberties of Americans.
But they said they were encouraged by what Anthony Romero, the executive
director of the group, called Mr. Mueller's "courage" in meeting with them and
engaging in a debate.

Turhan Robinson, an A.C.L.U. member from Baltimore, said, "He impressed me both
by coming here today in front of what could have been an angry audience and by
being so forthright in his answers."

On some issues, Mr. Mueller sought to dispel what he characterized as unfair
accusations. He said, for instance, that concerns about the bureau's power to
monitor library checkouts under the Patriot Act had been "somewhat overblown"
and that agents generally visited a library only "when we have a reason for
going in."

"We are going to have to agree to disagree on the Patriot Act," he said.

But he conceded there was room for improvement. In particular, he said a highly
critical report this month by the Justice Department's inspector general, which
found significant problems in the detentions of more than 700 illegal immigrants
as part of the 9/11 investigations, "did a very good job in pointing out areas
where we can do better."

He said he expected that the bureau would adopt several of the report's major
recommendations. These include clearer criteria for deciding who is a terrorism
suspect, more resources to investigate such cases, and better communication, Mr.
Mueller said.

Mr. Romero was so encouraged that he closed the event with a playful question
for the F.B.I. director: Would he consider joining the A.C.L.U.?

"I've got the last response," Mr. Mueller said, turning to the audience. "Which
of you will join the F.B.I.?" There was plenty of laughter, but no firm
commitments.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(77%); US PATRIOT ACT (76%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (76%); WAR ON TERROR (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (66%); RACIAL PROFILING (54%); RACE &
RACISM (54%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (84%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION; FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (93%) LICHTBLAU, ERIC; MUELLER, ROBERT S III (DIR)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             408 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Not Leading the World but Following It

BYLINE:  By Laurence R. Helfer;  Laurence R. Helfer is a professor at Loyola Law
School.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Disparities in the legal treatment of lesbians and gay men in the United States
and their treatment in the rest of the world are becoming more pronounced. As
the United States Supreme Court considers an important gay rights case, expected
to be decided this month, it should realize that much of the globe sees the
issue as a matter of basic human rights.

Last week the Ontario Court of Appeal in Canada ordered the provincial
government to grantmarriage licenses to two same-sex couples, ruling that
restricting marriage to heterosexual couples could not be squared with the
fundamental right to equality in Canada's constitution. The Canadian court's
decision is hardly an aberration. In the last decade, national and local
lawmakers in dozens of countries have enacted laws to bar discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation in housing, employment, public accommodation and
health benefits. Many of these countries are also beginning to recognize rights
for lesbian and gay families.

Lesbian and gay couples now enjoy full marriage rights in the Netherlands and
Belgium and may enter into registered partnerships in seven other European
nations. In November 2000, the European Union adopted a new directive that
mandates all member nations to provide equal treatment to lesbians and gay men
in employment. At the time, this ruling covered 380 million people. With the
union's expansion to 25 countries, it will soon cover millions more.

These legal protections are spreading to parts of the developing world, like
Ecuador, Brazil and Namibia. South Africa's highest court has issued several
rulings in favor of lesbians and gay men since that country became the first to
outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in its constitution.

The legal landscape in the United States is very different. Several states
continue to impose a criminal ban on sex between consenting adults of the same
gender, even in the privacy of their own homes. Others have enacted new laws
restricting marriage to a union between one man and one woman. There are two
states that recognize same-sex partnerships, and nearly a dozen states and many
more municipalities have laws banning discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation in public accommodation and in employment. But the majority do not
have such laws, and the prospects for enacting a federal antidiscrimination
statute are bleak.

A ruling expected soon from the Supreme Court provides an opportunity to redress
at least one of these issues. In the case of Lawrence v. Texas, the court is
considering a constitutional challenge to the Texas sodomy law, which bans
private, consensual sex between homosexual couples. When the court last reviewed
a similar law in Georgia in a 1986 case, a 5-4 majority rejected the
constitutional challenge.

Will the recent trend recognizing gay rights in other countries influence the
court's decision this time around? The justices are sharply divided over whether
it is appropriate to consider foreign and international law when interpreting
the United States Constitution. But in a recent ruling banning executions of the
mentally retarded, a majority of the court took into account that such
executions had received condemnation from the world community.

The international consensus in favor of gay rights is still evolving. But the
court can no longer state, as Chief Justice Warren Burger did in that 1986 case,
that a decision striking down a sodomy law would "cast aside millennia of moral
teaching."

Recent events have created rifts between the United States and the rest of the
world over important questions of law and policy. But respect for human rights
should not be among them. When it comes to protecting the basic civil liberties
of all people, including lesbians and gay men, the United States should lead the
world, not lag behind it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (94%); COHABITATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);
LGBT RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); SAME
SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (89%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); LEGISLATION (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (73%); TRENDS
(73%); APPEALS COURTS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%) HOMOSEXUALITY;
DISCRIMINATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  SODOMY;  SEX CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)
SUPREME COURT (US)

PERSON: HELFER, LAURENCE R (PROF)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (72%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); NAMIBIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); SOUTH AFRICA
(79%); BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: TEXAS

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             413 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRIEFLY NOTED;
RUSSIA: GROUP SAYS TERROR ARRESTS WERE STAGED

BYLINE:  By James Brooke (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 108 words


A leading Russian human rights group has accused the Russian government of
staging a mass arrest of Islamic militants this month in an attempt to show that
Russia is an energetic player in fighting terrorism.

The rights group, Memorial, said its research on the arrests of 55 men described
by the police as "members of the Islamic Liberation Party" showed that 47 were
quickly released and six others were released the next day. Two were charged
with possession of explosives. Memorial said that the two denied owning any
explosives and that the material found under their beds might have been planted
by the police agents.   James Brooke (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); RELIGION (88%) TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: MEMORIAL (ORGN)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%)

REGION: RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             416 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Will Face Charge of Genocide

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 291 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, June 28


The authorities wrapped the former Argentine military official Ricardo Cavallo
in a bulletproof vest today and placed him aboard a military flight to Spain to
face charges of genocide and terrorism connected to Argentina's "dirty war."

The case centers around Mr.

Cavallo's alleged role as a military interrogator in his country's efforts in
the 1980's to silence suspected leftists and antigovernment activists.

On June 10, Mexico's Supreme Court ruled that he could not be tried on torture
charges because the statute of limitations had expired, but that he could go to
trial on genocide and terrorism charges. Two courts rejected Mr. Cavallo's
appeals for injunctions blocking his extradition.

The extradition was one of the first won by the crusading Spanish judge Baltasar
Garzon, who will hear the case against Mr. Cavallo and has taken on major human
rights cases, including that of the former Chilean dictator, Gen. Augusto
Pinochet.

The case is also important because the request for the now-successful
extradition was filed under the terms of a binational extradition treaty, rather
than an international rights agreement, as was the failed effort to get Pinochet
to stand trial in 1998.

Mr. Cavallo, the former director of Mexico's private National Registry of Motor
Vehicles, was arrested in 2000 after five former political prisoners charged
that he had tortured them in Argentina.

His accusers say Mr. Cavallo served at the Navy Mechanical School, one of the
most notorious centers of repression in Argentina during the 1976-83 military
dictatorship. At least 9,000 Argentines vanished -- presumably killed, often
after torture.

Mr. Cavallo has said that he was in Argentina's military, but he has denied any
involvement in torture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); TORTURE (89%); MILITARY RULE (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); STATUTE
OF LIMITATIONS (76%); LITIGATION (76%); INJUNCTIONS (76%); APPEALS (76%);
ARRESTS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%);
JUDGES (71%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (95%); MEXICO (94%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             424 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jackals Gather Round

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Two nights ago in Tehran, President Mohammad Khatami, the pretended reformist
who fronts for hard-line ayatollahs, held a meeting with leaders of the Iraqi
opposition to Saddam Hussein.

The Iranian made his purpose plain: to establish a relationship with men -- and
not just Iraqi Shiites now headquartered in Tehran -- who may be members of the
next government of neighboring Iraq.

Aware that his guests were in contact with Americans, Khatami allowed as how
Iran's relations with the U.S. could be improved. How? He told a joke with the
punch line "Stop casting your shadow over me!"

I am not familiar with that thigh-slapper. Nor do I have any faith in a
repressive regime whose nuclear ambitions and sponsorship of Hezbollah killers
belies its supposed interest in resuming contact with the West.

But apparently some Iranian theocrats observing American troop movements and the
latest bellicose fulminations of Saddam see the handwriting on the wall. (That
ancient Babylonian wall, on which the biblical moving finger wrote, was about 40
miles south of today's Baghdad.) Iran wants friends at the table when Saddam's
power is divvied up.

Of course, Iran continues to play both sides: just across its border, in the
free zone of Iraqi Kurdistan, Iran provides a unit of 600 pro-Saddam terrorists
with ammunition and mines to harass the free Kurds. These terrorists are led by
Musab Zarwaqi, known to be a top lieutenant of Osama bin Laden; inexplicably,
they are not targeted by U.S. bombers.

Syria is another nation seeking a profitable straddle. Israel's Ariel Sharon
made public what intelligence agencies have long suspected: that Syria is the
new hiding place for Iraqi germ and chemical weaponry, and perhaps scientists,
beyond the reach of U.N. inspectors. Saddam did something similar before, in
Gulf War I, by parking his air force in Iran (which then kept the planes).

While providing a black-market conduit for Iraqi oil and a land passage for
Hezbollah weapons, Syria has been touting its cooperation with the U.S. in
tracking other terrorists. Because it voted right on Security Council Resolution
1441, our State Department has been pretending to believe that.

The Saudis and Egyptians, sensing Saddam's demise, are devising Saddamism
without Saddam. The idea is to spirit the dictator and his two bloodthirsty sons
out of Iraq, passing the power to a clique of Sunni generals and Baath Party
politicians, thereby offering spurious "regime change" while averting an
overthrow that might give their own citizens ideas. Algeria is said to be the
location chosen for the Hussein family's permanent vacation.

France has also begun to hedge its bets. Well aware of the likelihood of allied
action or an internal coup before the Ides of March, Jacques Chirac does not
want his country out in the cold as oil-rich New Iraq is put on its feet by the
U.S. and Britain.

Because France is not France without Arab oil, Chirac has suddenly taken to
threatening Saddam with "war of unimaginable consequences" unless he disarms
right away, and France will soon dispatch an aircraft carrier to the gulf. But
still straddling, Chirac insists that the Security Council, and not what Bush
calls "a coalition of the willing," make the decision about whether Iraq has
failed to prove it has disarmed.

And what about that Blix report, due two weeks from Monday? The inspectors are
working frantically but they are not being serious.

Being serious means going into Iraqi Army ammunition depots to find evidence of
recently removed missile warheads. Being serious is surprising the Baghdad
headquarters of the Mukhabarat, nerve center of intelligence collection and war
preparation, to examine computer tapes.

Being serious is transporting Iraqi scientists to Cyprus, with no handlers
present, to take testimony under oath and in secret, same as with witnesses
before a grand jury. Saddam would cry "Spying!" but the U.N. resolution places
the burden on Iraq to prove that no evidence exists.

If Hans Blix's report equivocates and the Security Council delays, the U.S. will
act. The jackals know that. That is why Iraqi officers are sending word to the
opposition through second cousins that "I'm your friend, remember later." That
is why jackal-nations are circling, eager to subvert liberation and make off
with the coming freedom of the Iraqi people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HEZBOLLAH (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); COUPS (89%); POLITICS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); DESERT STORM (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (75%); RELIGION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(70%); DISARMAMENT (70%); UNOFFICIAL ECONOMY (70%); AIR FORCES (69%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (63%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  KURDS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM;  COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); JACQUES CHIRAC (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)
SAFIRE, WILLIAM; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (91%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (98%); UNITED STATES (96%); SYRIA
(93%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); EGYPT (92%); IRAN (91%); ISRAEL (79%); FRANCE (65%)

REGION: IRAQ;  IRAN;  SYRIA;  EGYPT;  SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             425 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE COURTS;
U.S. Asks Judge to Deny Terror Suspect Access to Lawyer, Saying It Could Harm
Interrogation

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 556 words


The Bush administration asked a federal judge in New York last night to reverse
his decision allowing a Jose Padilla, the man suspected in a plot to detonate a
radioactive bomb, access to a lawyer to challenge his detention as an enemy
combatant.

Mr. Padilla is one of only two American citizens known to be held since the
Sept. 11 attacks without being formally charged. Mr. Padilla, a native of
Chicago, has been held since June in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C.

In a new court filing, the government disclosed that Mr. Padilla has been under
interrogation by military personnel for several months. The government said
letting a lawyer into the process "would threaten permanently to undermine the
military's efforts to develop a relationship of trust and dependency that is
essential to effective interrogation." That could "set back his interrogations
by months, if not derail the process permanently."

In the brief, released late last night, the government also said that
interrogations of detained enemy combatants have produced vital intelligence and
"helped to thwart an estimated 100 or more attacks against the United States and
its interests since Sept. 11, 2001."

In the brief the government appears to go into more detail than it has
previously about its strategies of interrogating so-called enemy combatants. The
brief includes a nine-page declaration by Vice Admiral Lowell E. Jacoby, the
director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, who says the government is "now
engaged in a robust program" of interrogation of the detainees.

The government made its request of the judge, Michael B. Mukasey of Federal
District Court in Manhattan, just a day after a federal appeals panel in
Richmond, Va., ruled that the government could indefinitely detain and deny a
lawyer to the other citizen, Yasser Esam Hamdi, who was designated as an enemy
combatant after being captured on the battlefield in Afghanistan.

Although that court distinguished the case of Mr. Hamdi, who was captured
overseas, from that of Mr. Padilla, who was arrested at O'Hare International
Airport in Chicago, the government's filing last night cited the Hamdi opinion
and made clear that the government believes similar principles should apply in
both cases.

Last month, Judge Mukasey ruled that Mr. Padilla could consult with lawyers. But
the judge affirmed President Bush's power to detain enemy combatants and said
the government needed to make only a minimal showing to justify such action.

In the new brief, the government virtually apologized to the judge for failing
earlier "to focus on the grave damage to national security interests" that would
result from interfering with what now appears to be the strategy of isolating
Mr. Padilla.

The government's filing came after Judge Mukasey asked prosecutors to meet with
Mr. Padilla's lawyers, Donna R. Newman and Andrew G. Patel, to arrange how they
might meet with Mr. Padilla.

But, the brief says, the lawyers said they wanted a full week of meetings
directly with Mr. Padilla, without restrictions on the nature of their
questions.

The brief said the lawyers also wanted to be able to ask Padilla about "the
specific questions" that interrogators have put to him and what he has discussed
with them.

One lawyer, Mr. Patel, had no comment last night, saying he had not yet reviewed
the document.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); JUDGES (90%); RIGHT TO
COUNSEL (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (86%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ARMED
FORCES (76%); ARRESTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); AIRPORTS (66%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  RADIATION

ORGANIZATION: DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: MICHAEL MUKASEY (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%) WEISER, BENJAMIN; MUKASEY,
MICHAEL B (JUDGE); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PADILLA, JOSE (ABDULLAH AL-MUHAJIR)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); RICHMOND, VA, USA (79%);
CHARLESTON, SC, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (90%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); SOUTH
CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             426 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detaining 'Enemy Combatants'

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 370 words


A federal appeals court in Virginia ruled this week that Americans who are
labeled "enemy combatants" can be held indefinitely without access to a lawyer.
The court is correct that soldiers on the battlefield do not have the same
rights as ordinary criminal suspects. But this ruling, in the case of a man held
on American soil for months, gives the government too much power to imprison
citizens, and offers too few protections. The Supreme Court should develop a
better set of standards.

The ruling concerns Yasser Esam Hamdi, an American-born Saudi who was captured
in Afghanistan and has been held in a military brig since last April. The
government says that because he fought with the Taliban he can, despite his
citizenship, be held indefinitely and denied contact with family or legal
counsel.

The government has significant discretion in prosecuting wars. It cannot be
expected to hold full-blown legal proceedings on the battlefield. But once Mr.
Hamdi was brought home, it was far less of a burden on the government to provide
him with basic procedural rights.

The court was too quick to accept the government's label of Mr. Hamdi as an
enemy combatant. The government's evidence regarding his military role is
sketchy. Now that he is on American soil, he should be given an opportunity to
contest the government's conclusions.

The court also erred in deferring to the executive branch on when the
hostilities Mr. Hamdi engaged in ended. Unlike wars that begin with declarations
and conclude with treaties, America's "war on terror" may become permanent if
the White House so decides. Under the court's ruling, government could then hold
prisoners like Mr. Hamdi incommunicado forever.

Looming over this case is Jose Padilla, the so-called "dirty bomb" suspect.
Although he was arrested in Chicago, he was designated an enemy combatant
because the government believed he was plotting with terrorists overseas. If the
rules laid down this week apply to him, the government could round up citizens
on American soil and, on scant evidence, hold them indefinitely without access
to the outside world. With or without the label of enemy combatant, Americans
are clearly entitled to more due process than that.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
RIGHT TO COUNSEL (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); TERRORISM (86%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); APPEALS COURTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); TALIBAN (77%); WAR ON TERROR (75%); SUPREME
COURTS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); ARRESTS (72%); PRISONS (71%);
DIRTY BOMBS (64%) EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: HAMDI, YASSER ESAM

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             427 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2003 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lankan Talks End Round Without Major Breakthroughs

BYLINE:   By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Jan. 9


The Sri Lankan government and the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
concluded another round of peace talks today in Thailand with an announcement of
incremental progress but without the dramatic breakthroughs of previous rounds.

The Tigers fought for two decades for a separate state for the country's Tamils,
who are a minority in the mostly Sinhalese country. More than 64,000 people, out
of a population of 18 million, died in the conflict. The two sides signed a
cease-fire agreement in February 2002, and began peace talks in September.

In previous rounds, the Tigers had set aside their demand for a separate state,
and agreed instead to settle for regional autonomy. This round of talks seemed
to steer clear of the larger political issues -- particularly what form the
federalism both sides have agreed to in principle will take -- and instead
yielded progress on the nuts and bolts of repairing a country devastated by war.

A statement from the Norwegian government, which has brokered the talks, said
that the talks had focused largely on rebuilding and the resettlement of
civilians, particularly in the north and east. "Political progress must be
underpinned by tangible improvements in the daily lives of people," the
statement said.

The statement emphasized the need for "speedy provision" of funds by donor
governments, who pledged $17 million for the island nation's reconstruction at a
conference in Oslo in November.

The relatively smooth course of negotiations had hit a bump even before this
round of talks began. The Tigers had been pressing for the resettlement of
civilians in the large tracts of land that the army had taken to secure its
bases during the war. Fearing the Tigers would use the resettlement to surround
the bases, then overrun them should fighting resume, the army was insisting that
the Tigers disarm in those areas. The Tigers said no and pulled out of a
subcommittee that was to address the issue.

The Norwegians' statement said the government would enlist an "internationally
recognized military expert" to analyze the areas to determine whether
resettlement was possible there.

The two sides agreed that most of the resettlement would have to take place
outside the army areas anyway and set a schedule for beginning that process. The
government and rebels will also begin discussing human rights issues at the next
round of peace talks, which will be held from Feb. 7 to Feb. 10.

"Deliberations were constructed in a frank and constructive atmosphere," the
Norwegian government's statement said, "with both parties demonstrating their
conviction that the peace process must be sustained even when difficult issues
are addressed."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 14, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on Friday about peace talks held by the Sri Lankan
government and the rebel group Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam misstated the
amount and intent of aid promised to Sri Lanka by donor governments at a
conference in Oslo last November. It was $70 million, not $17 million, and was
intended for reconstruction of Northeast Sri Lanka, not the whole island.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (92%); PEACE PROCESS (92%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (88%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); PLATFORMS
& ISSUES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); ETHNICITY (59%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(50%) TAMILS (ETHNIC GROUP);  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

PERSON: WALDMAN, AMY

CITY: OSLO, NORWAY (71%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%); NORWAY (94%); THAILAND (88%)

REGION: SRI LANKA;  NORWAY;  THAILAND;

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             431 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE COURTS;
Lawyers Renew Plea to Meet Terror Suspect In Navy Brig

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 417 words


Lawyers for Jose Padilla, a suspect in a plot to detonate a radioactive bomb,
asked a federal judge in Manhattan yesterday to reject a new government effort
to block them from meeting their client.

The lawyers are challenging Mr. Padilla's detention as an enemy combatant.

The lawyers' request was in response to a government filing last week that asked
the judge to reverse a ruling that Mr. Padilla, who is being held in a Navy brig
in Charleston, S.C., could consult his lawyers under strictly controlled
conditions.

Mr. Padilla is one of two American citizens known to be held since the Sept. 11
attacks without being formally charged or given access to counsel. He has been
in military custody since June.

The government has opposed letting Mr. Padilla meet lawyers, saying they might
be unwittingly used to pass information to terrorists.

Last week, the government disclosed in a court filing that military personnel
had been questioning Mr. Padilla for several months and that allowing a lawyer
into the process could harm "the military's efforts to develop a relationship of
trust and dependency that is essential to effective interrogation."

That, the government added, could "set back his interrogations by months, if not
derail the process permanently."

The government included a declaration by Vice Adm. Lowell E. Jacoby, director of
the Defense Intelligence Agency, who rated Mr. Padilla's "potential intelligence
value as very high" and said that allowing him access to counsel "risks loss of
a critical intelligence resource, resulting in a grave and direct threat to
national security."

In their response yesterday, Mr. Padilla's lawyers said the government was "foot
dragging" and questioned whether any such relationship had developed between Mr.
Padilla and his interrogators. The lawyers said the government's assertions were
speculation, and they suggested that Mr. Padilla's potential value as a source
was overstated.

"In the realm of possible reasons," the lawyers wrote, "why these highly skilled
interrogators may not have been able to 'break' Padilla, one cannot discount the
obvious -- Padilla has no information to provide."

The lawyers, Donna R. Newman and Andrew G. Patel, also wrote that they would not
object to "a limited 'gag order' " directing them not to discuss publicly "the
substance of their conversations with Padilla."

The judge, Michael B. Mukasey, is scheduled to take up the case in a hearing
tomorrow. The United States attorney's office had no comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); JUDGES
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%)
TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  RADIATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  LEGAL
PROFESSION

ORGANIZATION: DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: MICHAEL MUKASEY (58%) WEISER, BENJAMIN; PADILLA, JOSE (ABDULLAH
AL-MUHAJIR)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             432 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Definitions of War

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 156 words


To the Editor:

Re "Detention Upheld in Combatant Case" (front page, Jan. 9):

If the definition of "wartime president" has changed from being president at a
time of war that has been declared (Harry S. Truman most recently, as I recall)
to when Congress has authorized money for military force but has not declared
war (Korea, Vietnam, Grenada, Panama, Bosnia and the Persian Gulf war, to name
the major conflicts) to the president's simply declaring a war (on poverty, on
cancer, on drugs, on crime, on terrorism), then we have had a "wartime
president" for as long as I have been alive.

The war on terror is not a real war. It is not declared by Congress. This is a
continuing, never-ending excuse to forward an agenda and, at least as described
in your article, trample civil liberties in the name of "war" -- a conflict that
is politically nurtured despite its terrible and very real roots.

BEBE BROWN
Barnstable, Mass., Jan. 9, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DESERT STORM (88%); TERRORISM (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); DEFENSE SPENDING (56%)
TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: BROWN, BEBE

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             435 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Says Congo Rebels Carried Out Cannibalism and Rapes

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: KINSHASA, Congo, Jan. 15


A six-day investigation in a remote region in northeast Congo has confirmed
systematic cannibalism, rape, torture and killing by rebels in a campaign of
atrocities against civilians, with children among the victims, United Nations
officials said today.

Accused rebel groups include the Congolese Liberation Movement of Jean-Pierre
Bemba, one of two major insurgent movements now promised a leading role in
Congo's government under a hard-won power-sharing agreement to end the central
African nation's war.

Rebels called their terror campaign "Operation Clean the Slate," said Patricia
Tome, spokeswoman for the United Nations Congo mission in the capital. "The
operation was presented to the people almost like a vaccination campaign,
envisioning the looting of each home and the rape of each woman," she said.

The charges are laid out in a preliminary report based on a six-day mission by
United Nations investigators last week to the Ituri region. The investigation
was prompted by reports from clergy and nonprofit groups operating in Ituri. The
findings have been given to the Security Council and to the high commissioner
for human rights, the Congo mission said.

As word of the allegations emerged, Mr. Bemba announced Tuesday that the rebel
group had arrested five of its own members, including its chief of operations in
Ituri, Lt. Col. Freddy Ngalimo.

Mr. Bemba said the five would be tried by a rebel military court. The
allegations named Mr. Bemba's movement and the allied Congolese Rally for
Democracy-National, which are fighting the rival rebel Congolese Rally for
Democracy-Liberation for mineral-producing areas of Ituri.

A series of peace deals secured the withdrawal of most foreign troops last year
in Congo's four-year war, which split the country, the former Zaire, into rebel-
and government-held zones. Despite the peace accords, fighting among the rebel
groups intensified at the end of 2001 in the lawless east.

United Nations investigators said the attacks occurred at Mambasa and Mangina,
near the northeastern city of Beni. The report cited 117 instances of arbitrary
executions between Oct. 24 and 29. It cited 65 cases of rape, including the rape
of children, 82 kidnappings and 27 cases of torture in the same period.

"The testimony given by victims and of witnesses was of cannibalism and forced
cannibalism," including people made by rebels to eat members of their own
families, Ms. Tome said.

United Nations investigators have previously reported that the victims also
included Pygmies, whom rebels routinely enlist as hunters to provide food for
the insurgents. Investigators said they interviewed Pygmies who had gone into
hiding after the rebel campaign.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Congo highlighting Ituri: Five men were charged with atrocities
in the Ituri region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); TORTURE (90%); SEX OFFENSES (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TESTIMONY (77%); PEACE PROCESS (76%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%); ARMED FORCES (64%); RELIGION (52%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  SEX CRIMES;  TORTURE;  CANNIBALISM;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)
CONGOLESE LIBERATION MOVEMENT; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BEMBA, JEAN-PIERRE

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (96%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%)

REGION: CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE);  ITURI (CONGO)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             436 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHEAST ASIA;
Looming Trade Penalties Could Sever a North Korean Link to Japan

BYLINE:  By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 15


With the red star of North Korea emblazoned on its funnel, a 300-passenger ferry
from North Korea eased into the port of Niigata today, dropping anchor in the
midst of Japan's debate over imposing economic sanctions on North Korea.

To conservatives, the ship is an unwarranted lifeline for North Korea's
recalcitrant Communist government, illicitly ferrying to Pyongyang, North
Korea's capital, tens of millions of dollars raked off a vast empire of pinball
and gambling operations operated in Japan by ethnic Koreans loyal to North
Korea.

To liberals, the ship, the Mangyongbong-92, built with donations from ethnic
Koreans, is a human rights issue, providing the lone passenger link between the
roughly 150,000 pro-Pyongyang Koreans living in Japan and their relatives in
North Korea.

More than that, at a time when Japan is alone among Asian nations in seriously
debating economic sanctions against North Korea if it does not drop its nuclear
weapons programs, the ship has emerged as a lightning rod of sorts.

If North Korea remains determined to build bombs, advocates of sanctions say, an
easy target would be the ferry that travels to Niigata, about 160 miles
northwest of Tokyo, from Wonsan, North Korea, a 600-mile trip across the Sea of
Japan. Japanese parliamentarians are studying bills to ban from Japanese waters
ships without insurance and ships suspected of links to terrorist acts. North
Korea accounts for a large portion of the 20 uninsured tramp steamers that have
run aground in Japanese waters since 1989.

The ferry is insured and, on the surface, would seem to have faint connection to
terrorism. Passengers usually are elderly ethnic Korean residents returning to
Niigata from visits with families and trips to family burial grounds, or
students returning from field trips organized by high schools in Japan that are
affiliated with North Korea.

The ferry, like North Korea itself, is a minor footnote in the broader currents
of Northeast Asia. About 5,000 people take the overnight trip each year, roughly
the same number that fly between Japan and South Korea each morning.

Trade is similarly negligible. Last year the North Korean ship officially
carried about $25 million in goods -- largely food donations, cars, computers
and mechanical parts for North Korea.

On one trip in November, the Sankei Shimbun newspaper reported, the ship carried
a special cargo of fresh tropical fruit: oranges, persimmons, grapefruits, kiwis
and papayas. This was in addition to the more typical fare of old rice and dog
biscuits. The fruit, the paper reported, was destined for the country's leader,
Kim Jong Il, and party executives.

Before the recent nuclear crisis, Japan was concerned mostly about illicit cargo
and contacts. Defectors from North Korea have said that the ferry has been used
to take cash to North Korea and to transmit orders to the main pro-North Korean
group in Japan, Chosen Soren, the Association of Korean Residents in Japan.

"It is regrettable that we have learned by the testimony of former North Korean
spies that the ship is a spy ship," said Kiyoshi Tamura, a Niigata city
assemblyman. "It has become apparent that money and goods have been brought out
every time the ship comes to port."

Some of this history is documented in a new book, "Suspicion about Money
Transfers to North Korea," by Haturu Nomura. According to Mr. Nomura, huge
bundles of cash, hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth, would be transferred
from Chosen Soren to the North Korean government on the ferry.

"Every year, we received such orders before the birthday of Kim Il Sung and Kim
Jong Il for sure, and before big events in North Korea," a Chosen Soren
financial officer told Mr. Nomura.

An official with the Niigata chapter of Chosen Soren, Kim Jon Hie, denied the
allegations of illicit money transfers.

After the reports of money shipments came out in the 1990's, Japanese Custom
officials started to X-ray all cargo and baggage. So far, said Kikuko Tanaka, a
spokesman for the Tokyo Customs Office, which oversees Niigata in central Japan,
officials have not found any illegal money transfers.

It appears that the ferry's days are dwindling, sanctions notwithstanding. The
number of trips it has made has steadily decreased in recent years, falling to
21 last year from 27 in 1999.

Perhaps being shut down might be the best for all concerned. Two weeks ago, the
Hyundai business group of South Korea proposed to North Korea that the 9,672-ton
Mangyongbong-92 be docked as a semipermanent hotel at a pier near Mount Kumgang,
a tourist resort that Hyundai runs about 100 miles south of Wonsan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A group of North Koreans who live in Japan arrived in the port
of Niigata yesterday after a visit to their homeland. As tensions over North
Korea's nuclear program grow, the ferry service has drawn fresh scrutiny.
(Reuters) Map of Japan highlighting Niigata: About 5,000 people a year ride the
ferry from Niigata to Wonsan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (92%); FERRIES (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); MARINE PASSENGER TRANSPORT (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (88%); TERRORISM (87%);
FRUITS & VEGETABLES (85%); CONSERVATISM (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(77%); LIBERALISM (77%); FAMILY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); MARCH 2011 JAPAN
NUCLEAR DISASTER (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(72%); SCHOOL FIELD TRIPS (70%); GAMING (70%); FOOD CHARITIES (70%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (67%); HIGH SCHOOLS (63%); PET FOODS (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(60%) FERRIES;  JAPAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-NORTH KOREA;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
GAMBLING;  EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: KIM JONG IL (58%) BROOKE, JAMES

CITY: PYONGYANG, KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (94%); TOKYO, JAPAN
(90%)

STATE: PACIFIC OCEAN (79%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (98%); ASIA (94%);
NORTHERN ASIA (92%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: NORTH KOREA;  JAPAN;  PYONGYANG (NORTH KOREA);  NIGATA (JAPAN)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             437 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detained Citizens

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 91 words


To the Editor:

The question of "Detaining 'Enemy Combatants' " (editorial, Jan. 10) centers on
whether the fact of citizenship or one's behavior should determine the legal
venue for prosecuting Americans who fight on battlefields against their own
country.

Just as behavior determines whether the legal action is pursued in criminal or
civil court, federal or state, so, too, should the behavior be the determining
factor in proceedings against enemy combatants who also happen to be American
citizens.

ALAN KATZ
East Meadow, N.Y., Jan. 10, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TALIBAN (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
HIJACKING (86%); TERRORISM (86%); LITIGATION (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: KATZ, ALAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (74%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             445 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Is Said to Jail 2 Lawyers Who Reported Torture Charges

BYLINE:  By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, Jan. 21


Two lawyers have been imprisoned on charges of spreading lies about Iran's
Islamic Republic after they asserted that their clients had been tortured in
custody.

Muhammad Ali Dadkhah, a lawyer who defended members of the banned Freedom
Movement of Iran, was sent to prison for five months on Monday, one of his
friends said today. The arrest came shortly after he read a politically charged
poem about "hypocrisy" at a service marking the anniversary of the death of
Mehdi Bazargan, the first prime minister after Iran's 1979 revolution.

The other lawyer, Abdolfateh Soltani, who defended 15 members of a dissident
religious nationalist group charged with trying to overthrow Iran's Islamic
system, turned himself in today to begin a four-month prison sentence.

The lawyers were singled out by Iran's rigid, conservative judiciary after they
stated publicly that authorities had beaten some of their clients in order to
extract confessions from them.

The imprisonment of the lawyers reflects governmental sensitivity to accusations
of mistreatment and torture of political prisoners. Many of Iran's most senior
leaders, among them clerics, were tortured under the monarchy, and it is routine
here for officials to deny that torture is used as an instrument of policy in
prisons.

The move also underscores a broadening of a crackdown against political
activists perceived as enemies of the state. It follows the closure of several
newspapers in the last month and coincides with a wave of interrogations,
arrests and convictions of political reformers.

In August, Nasser Zarafshan, a lawyer representing families of three political
dissidents who were slain in 1998, was sentenced to five years and 50 lashes for
"distributing secret information." The killings were officially attributed to
"rogue" intelligence ministry agents.

Earlier this month, two lawyers representing students involved in uprisings in
1999 were cleared of charges stemming from their activities. Both served time
last year.

In another sign of the government's tight grip on society, Iran's Guardian
Council, which has the power to veto legislation, rejected a bill today that
would have eased a ban on foreign television stations beamed into the Islamic
republic via satellite dishes.

Last month, recognizing that a large percentage of television viewers own
illegal satellite dishes, Parliament passed the bill, which would have allowed
viewers access to "a limited number of foreign channels" that "conform to
Islamic and national values." Under to the bill, certain individuals, including
journalists and educators, would have been allowed unlimited satellite
television access.

But the 12-man Guardian Council ruled that the bill violated Islamic law as well
as the Constitution, state-run television announced. It also said that with such
a law in place, filtering "decadent and obscene programs" would be impossible.

Satellite dishes are produced locally and cheaply in Iran and easily hidden
under elaborate covers, in foliage or on balconies. The police periodically
conduct raids to confiscate them, but their use continues to grow.

The bill will now return to Parliament for reconsideration. If it is not
modified, it will be sent to the Expediency Council, an even higher overseeing
body that mediates disagreements between the legislature and the Guardian
Council.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (91%); LAWYERS (91%); RELIGION (91%); TORTURE (91%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (89%);
ARRESTS (89%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (87%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (87%);
LEGISLATION (85%); CONSERVATISM (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(75%); VETO (75%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (71%);
WRITERS (71%); ANNIVERSARIES (71%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (70%); JOURNALISM (69%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (65%) POLITICAL PRISONERS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE

PERSON: SCIOLINO, ELAINE

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); IRAN (79%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             448 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: China: U.S. Resident Put On Trial

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 70 words


A United States-based dissident, Wang Bingzhang, was tried in southern China on
charges of "organizing and leading a terrorist group" and espionage, the
official New China News Agency reported. The Free China Movement, a coalition of
pro-democracy organizations based in Washington, accused China's security forces
of kidnapping Mr. Wang in Vietnam last year and bringing him to the city of
Shenzhen to stand trial.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(85%); POLITICS (84%) KIDNAPPING;  TERRORISM;  ESPIONAGE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: FREE CHINA MOVEMENT; NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY

PERSON: WANG BINGZHANG

CITY: SHENZHEN, GUANGDONG, CHINA (88%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (94%); GUANGDONG, CHINA (88%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); VIET NAM (93%); ASIA (91%)

REGION: CHINA;  SHENZHEN (CHINA);  VIETNAM

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             455 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AMERICAN MUSLIMS;
F.B.I. Tells Offices to Count Local Muslims and Mosques

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


The F.B.I. is ordering field supervisors to count the number of mosques and
Muslims in their areas as part of the antiterrorism effort.

Civil rights advocates and Arab-American leaders denounced the survey as a form
of racial profiling. Bureau officials said, however, that the results would not
be used to establish quotas for investigations.

"Any suggestion that the number of mosques in a field division is being used to
set investigative goals for that division is wrong," an assistant director of
the bureau, Cassandra Chandler, said in a statement. "The survey, a small part
of the F.B.I.'s much larger re-engineering effort, looked at a wide range of
demographic and other measures, focused primarily on vulnerabilities, and
mosques in the past have been targeted for violence."

Ms. Chandler declined to elaborate on the statement. Bureau officials would not
say what other information field supervisors were directed to provide in an
internal six-page questionnaire issued this month. The officials also would not
say how the results would be used. The survey was first reported in Newsweek.

Ms. Chandler's explanation differs markedly from the description of the program
that a senior bureau official gave Congressional staff members last week in a
closed briefing. The official, Wilson Lowery Jr., executive assistant director
of the bureau, told the briefing that the bureau was collecting information on
mosques and Muslims in the 56 field offices, according to a senior Congressional
aide familiar with the presentation.

Mr. Lowery told Congressional officials that the information would be used to
help establish a yardstick for the number of terrorism investigations and
intelligence warrants that a field office could reasonably be expected to
produce, the Congressional aide said.

"If the numbers don't compute," the aide said, "that will trigger an automatic
inspection from headquarters to figure out why they aren't living up to that."

Some officials here have been frustrated by what they see as the failure of some
field offices to respond aggressively enough in chasing terrorism leads, and the
information would give them a firmer means to gauge progress, the aide said.

Congressional officials were bothered because the survey would apparently lump
all mosques in one category without distinguishing mosques that have reported
extremist ties, the aide said.

"We need to ask a lot more questions before we know whether we're really
bothered," the aide said. "On its face, it certainly sounds like the F.B.I. is
pressuring agents to use a profile. It's beyond eyebrow-raising. It seems like a
bloody waste of law enforcement resources, and it's pure profiling in its worst
form."

Civil rights advocates and Arab-American groups called on the bureau today to
revoke its directive.

"This is obviously an indication to F.B.I. field agents that they have to view
every mosque and every Muslim as a potential terrorist," said Ibrahim Hooper, a
spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, an advocacy group here.

Mr. Hooper said the F.B.I. should determine its investigative priorities based
on criminal standards of probable cause, not on the number of mosques or Muslims
in a particular area.

"This is really imposing a sense of siege on the Arab-American community," he
said.

The American Civil Liberties Union said the survey was "tailor-made for a witch
hunt" in encouraging agents to focus on mosques and Muslims. The A.C.L.U.
compared the order to the ethnic census information collected in World War II, a
precursor to the internment of Japanese-Americans.

Arab-American leaders estimate that the country has 2,000 mosques.

The Justice Department has made it easier for F.B.I. agents to visit mosques and
other places of worship since the Sept. 11 attacks to follow investigative
leads.

The bureau sought voluntary interviews last year with 5,000 Arab-Americans in
its antiterrorism effort, and agents are focusing on several thousand Iraqis in
the United States in voluntary interviews and secret surveillance as Washington
moves toward a possible war with Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sunday prayer at the Muslim Community Center in Silver Spring,
Md. F.B.I. field officers have been ordered to survey mosques in their areas.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); RACIAL PROFILING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUPS (77%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); INSPECTIONS (72%); RACE & RACISM (72%)
TERRORISM;  ARAB-AMERICANS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ISLAM;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

PERSON: LICHTBLAU, ERIC

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             463 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ;
Once a Site of Death, Now a Whirl of Fun

BYLINE:  By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: SULAIMANIYA, Iraq, Feb. 2


For a few moments, as the Ferris wheel turned and children dashed past, it was
almost possible to forget what this amusement park used to be.

"When I come here and see all these games and rides, I feel happy and get
excited," said Fazil Muhammad Hussein, a 12-year-old boy, offering a perfectly
normal statement, except he said it while standing not far from a former mass
grave.

This is Azady Park, a place that captures many of the dizzying contrasts of life
in northern Iraq.

For three decades, this plot of land near the city's center was a dispensary of
fear, surrounded by high concrete walls, brimming with guards. It was a
headquarters for Iraqi military and intelligence services, known as a place of
incarcerations, torture sessions and death.

It was from here, in 1963, that Kurds received one of their first tastes of the
Arab Baath Socialist Party's designs for the Kurdish region, when units from the
compound stormed into this city, rousting suspected dissidents from their sleep
and bringing them to interrogation centers inside. Many turned up later in
shallow common graves.

The walls are gone now. In what amounts to an astonishing act of replacement, a
place of horrors has become the city's version of Disneyland, as well as a
social club, a roller-skating rink, an open-air theater and a swimming pool.

It is a 500-acre testament to Kurdish resilience, as well as a case of
imaginative redevelopment in a region that has tried to separate itself from the
image of Saddam Hussein. Kurds speak of this park as a symbol of possibility for
all of Iraq, a sign of just how drastic change can be in territory wrested from
Baath rule.

" 'Azady' means freedom, and this name means that our generation is now free,"
said Hakim Qader H. Aziz, president of the municipal council.

There is no shortage of nightmarish locales in northern Iraq, a region that has
been outside Mr. Hussein's control since an uprising in 1991.

There is Barzan, where in 1983 Mr. Hussein's forces seized 8,000 men, none of
whom have ever been heard from again. There is Halabja, where in 1988 the Iraqi
Air Force dropped chemical weapons, killing an estimated 5,000 civilians and
wounding as many as 20,000 more, the worst of the 281 uses of Iraqi gas on Kurds
that have been locally documented.

There are huge swaths of silent landscape, minefields laid in the Iran-Iraq war.

Much work has been done to renew this land since Kurds began their
qausi-independence. Mines have been cleared, villages rebuilt, human remains
exhumed and then properly interred. Monuments abound.

But there is nothing quite like Azady Park, a place so boldly reconceived that
it defies the senses. For the admission cost of 1 dinar, at today's exchange
rate the equivalent of about 13 cents, visitors frolic where the Iraqi
government killed.

"It is one of the greatest things we have done, to change this place of crime
into a place of amusement, a playground for all of the people to use," said
Sirwan Salih Saeed, deputy director of the park. "The children of this city all
come here."

Work began here in 1997, and because Kurdish budgets are small it remains a work
in progress, with some sections still only bare soil, and more plans awaiting
financing.

There are 14 amusement rides now; 6 more are being designed. Some of the old
Iraqi Army buildings have not been torn down, and the small area of the park
where they remain has become a home for squatters and refugees. The local
government hopes to relocate them.

It is also still a place of considerable dread. Now and then, as when digging an
artificial lake or planting some of the 12,000 new trees, laborers stumble upon
more bones. The remains of 28 people were discovered in the late 1990's under a
spot where bushes have been arranged into an outdoor maze.

Still, people come, even in the winter, when attendance varies from a few
hundred to several thousand visitors each day. In the summer, sometimes 10,000
people a day pass through the gates, Mr. Saeed said.

As attendance has climbed, the park has taken on qualities of its own. For
example, Kurdish society is deeply conservative, and dating is restricted. Azady
Park has become a place where young couples elude their neighbors' gaze, riding
high on the Ferris wheel, clasping hands or stealing away to the bushes, where
they can be seen touching fingertips while sitting on a bench.

On a recent day, Namo Ghafur walked with Lezan Hamid, a young woman whose hair
was covered by a scarf. She looked at the ground while he called her "my
beloved."

"If you are having an attraction for someone, it is good to bring them here,
because it is a free place and away from everybody's eyes," Mr. Ghafur said.
"This is a place that is good for love."

The park also has a members-only social club, with a restaurant and dance floor,
where influential families gather for holidays and parties. On New Year's Eve,
the club was packed, and the dance floor shook as scores of people moved through
the room in a traditional Kurdish dance.

Smoking a thick cigar and greeting visitors with homemade salads and 12-year-old
Scotch, one member, Barzan Faraj, marveled at the revelry. "It is incredible
that we have this, when you remember what this place used to be," he said.

It is a memory that will not die.

After the first night of terror, in 1963, the Baath Party did not last long. It
was ousted in a countercoup months later. But the party reclaimed power in 1968,
and is still in Baghdad, the political embodiment of Mr. Hussein. This garrison
was used again to carry out attacks on Kurds, or as a place to jail and
interrogate them, from 1968 to 1991.

Nawroz Saeed, a local engineer, remembers the first night. He can name the
exhumed and recall details of their lives: this one was a physics teacher, that
one a captain of a local soccer team. He remembers one stylish dresser whose
decomposing remains were identified by a particularly handsome buckle on a belt
that held him together.

"It is in my mind, like a cinema, always repeating," he said.

He paused, then continued, "I was in my uncle's house on the morning they came
for him."

His uncle was Namiq Agha. Iraqi soldiers beat him in his night clothes and led
him away. Namiq Agha's wife, Najia Abdulrakhman, recalls his last words. She was
pregnant at the time, and had a daughter and a son. "He said, 'Take care of the
children -- look after them,' " she said.

The next winter, runoff from a rainstorm exposed a shallow mass grave just
outside the garrison's fence, not far from where the Ferris wheel now stands.
Namiq Agha was among the dead.

His second son, Yadgar Namiq Agha, was born two days later. He is 39 now, and
has two sons of his own. Last summer, almost four decades after the
disappearance of her husband, Najia Abdulrakhman took the grandsons to Azady
Park.

She sat and watched the two little boys, Namiq Agha's descendants, going from
ride to ride, as her mind went back and forth, between this new Sulaimaniya and
the old.

"It is a very nice and interesting place for people, and you know how children
are, always wanting to play," she said. "But I always remember that black day."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sana Sarwat, 9, left, and Dalya Saman, 5, on a ride at Azady
Park, above. The park was once a garrison where Kurds were tortured. At left,
the remains of Anwar Said Dartash, a teacher who was executed in 1963. (Chang W.
Lee/The New York Times) Map of Iraq highlighting Sulaimaniya: A part of
Sulaimaniya was once known as a site of fear and torture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (91%); TORTURE (90%); ROLLERBLADING &
ROLLERSKATING (78%); SPORTS & RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (78%); TRAVEL
HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (78%); CEMETERIES (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); CITY GOVERNMENT (70%); AIR FORCES (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); EXCHANGE
RATES (60%); POLITICAL PARTIES (53%) KURDS;  TORTURE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%) CHIVERS, C J

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  SULAIMANIYA (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             467 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Give Us a Chance to Build a Democratic Iraq

BYLINE:  By Barham A. Salih;  Barham A. Salih is co-prime minister of the
Kurdistan Regional Goverment in Iraq.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: SULAIMANIYA, Iraq


When Colin Powell appears at the United Nations today, he is expected to talk
about Iraq's efforts to build weapons of mass destruction and its ties with
terrorist organizations.

Those are excellent reasons for overthrowing Saddam Hussein. As we all know,
there are other powerful reasons, too -- most notably the desire of my people to
be free from repression and to plant the seeds of democracy in soil that has for
too long been given over to tyranny.

In my office in Sulaimaniya, in the part of Iraq already free from Saddam
Hussein's control, I meet almost every day with travelers from Baghdad and other
parts of Iraq. Without exception they tell me of the continued suffering
inflicted by the Iraqi regime, of the hope secretly nurtured by so many enslaved
Iraqis for a free life, for a country where they can speak without retribution.

Most of my Iraqi compatriots -- Shiite and Sunni Arab, Turkmen and Assyrian,
Muslim, Christian and Yazidi -- have been united by what they have endured under
the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein's Baath Party. They want the overthrow of a
regime that used chemical weapons against the Kurds and wasted a nation's
natural resources on wars rather than schools. They want democracy in Iraq.
These are goals worthy of the world's support.

Those who doubt the prospects of a liberated Iraq should examine the record of
Iraqi Kurdistan since 1991. Under our autonomous regional government, we have
used our share of oil revenues to invest not in chemical and biological weapons,
but in education and health. We have tripled both the number of schools and
doctors since 1991, and we have reduced infant mortality to its lowest level
ever in our region. We have a free and diverse news media, with hundreds of
newspapers, magazines and television stations. We respect the rights of
minorities.

These achievements should be celebrated as a model for the rest of Iraq. Indeed,
we Kurds are willing to give up our dreams of an independent Kurdistan in order
to bring our expertise in governing to a new democratic Iraq.

Sadly, what we Iraqi democrats are hearing from many in the West is that we
should not seek the world's help to be freed from tyranny; that the war is for
oil; and that the Arab and Muslim "street" will rise up against those who
liberate Iraq.

We have watched demonstrators in Washington and other cities chant, "No to war."
But the Baathist dictatorship has been waging war for decades. It has inflicted
hundreds of thousands of civilian casualties. Every day, Iraqis of all ethnic
and religious groups are tortured in horrible ways. The regime even now is
waging a brutal campaign of ethnic cleansing in the parts of Iraqi Kurdistan it
still controls.

Iraq has many dedicated apologists, including some who defend or deny the
Hussein regime's use of chemical weapons on Kurds. They ignore captured Iraqi
documents that tell of inhuman attacks on my people, among them an audiotape of
Saddam Hussein's cousin Ali Hassan al-Majid boasting of his plans to use
chemical weapons against the Kurds. We know from samples collected by Human
Rights Watch at the village of Birjinni and tested by the British defense
ministry that the regime used mustard gas and the nerve agent sarin against our
people.

Some of the protesters in the West say that this war is simply for oil. Iraqis
know that their mistreatment has too often been ignored because Iraqi oil was
more important to the world than Iraqi lives. It would be a wonderful turn if at
long last oil would become the vehicle of our liberation -- the oil will then be
a blessing and not the curse that it has been for so long.

Others say, "Justice for Palestine first." Why should justice for the
Palestinians, and for the Israelis as well, be a reason to postpone justice for
the Iraqis? If anything, this Iraqi dictatorship has made it all the more
difficult to bring an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict. A democratic Iraq will
foster peace and justice in the entire region.

We Iraqis hear much about the rage of the so-called Arab street. I know the
streets of Baghdad, and I know they will be filled with jubilant Iraqis once the
dictator is gone. Recall the joy of liberation in Rome and Paris in 1944, the
cheering crowds in Kosovo in 1999, the Afghans who danced in the streets in
2001. Wars of liberation created hope and opportunity in these places.

The only way for Iraqis to escape their nightmare is for the international
community to help us liberate Iraq and build a postwar democracy that is
peaceful, stable and based on the rule of law.

In their conference in London in December, the Iraqi opposition movements
endorsed a vision for a democratic, federal Iraq -- one in which my people, the
Kurds, would be an integral part. I ask the free people of the West to lend
their passion and energy to support our liberation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NATURAL
RESOURCES (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (70%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(69%); RELIGION (68%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (65%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (64%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (63%); POLITICS (60%); INFANT
MORTALITY (50%) KURDS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) SALIH, BARHAM (DR); HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             471 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: East Timor: U.N. Charges 32 In Attacks

BYLINE:  By Jane Perlez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 104 words


The United Nations indicted 32 people, including 15 Indonesian soldiers, on
charges they tortured and killed East Timorese civilians during the bloodshed at
the time of a referendum in 1999 on independence for the province. A prosecutor
with the United Nations Crimes Unit, Eric MacDonald, said it would be difficult
to bring those charged to trial. They are all believed to be in Indonesia, which
has refused to honor arrest warrants. An Indonesian court set up to prosecute
Indonesian military and police officers has acquitted 10 former army and police
officers on charges connected with the violence.
   Jane Perlez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARMIES
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); ARMED FORCES (88%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); ARREST WARRANTS (86%); ARRESTS (86%); REFERENDUMS (85%);
POLITICS (85%); ACQUITTAL (84%) TORTURE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; MACDONALD, ERIC

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             475 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

PLUS: BASEBALL;
McGwire Rejects Cardinals' Job Offer

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section D; Column 6; Sports Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 133 words


The former home run king Mark McGwire rejected the St. Louis Cardinals' offer to
be an instructor at spring training.

McGwire mostly has kept his distance from the team and baseball since he retired
after the 2001 season.

His only appearance in St. Louis last year was for a memorial service for the
longtime Cardinals broadcaster Jack Buck.


COURT REJECTS FORMER UMPIRE'S APPEAL: The United States Court of Appeals for the
Third Circuit in Philadelphia turned down a bid by the former umpire Eric Gregg,
who has weighed well over 300 pounds, to revive a lawsuit against baseball that
claimed he was fired because of a disability.

Gregg, who battled a weight problem throughout his 23 years as a National League
umpire, claimed he was discriminated against under the Pennsylvania Human Rights
Act.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BASEBALL (92%); SPORTS INSTRUCTION (90%); REFEREES & UMPIRES (90%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (88%); APPEALS COURTS (87%); EMPLOYMENT (86%);
DISCRIMINATION (85%); SUITS & CLAIMS (84%); LITIGATION (69%); DISMISSALS (66%);
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) BASEBALL

ORGANIZATION: ST LOUIS CARDINALS (94%) ST LOUIS CARDINALS

INDUSTRY:  SIC7941 PROFESSIONAL SPORTS CLUBS & PROMOTERS;

PERSON: MCGWIRE, MARK

CITY: PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%)

STATE: MISSOURI, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             480 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC LIVES;
Speaking for Terror Suspect, and for the Constitution

BYLINE:  By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 886 words


DONNA R. NEWMAN, a court-appointed lawyer, knew something big was up when she
showed up for a routine court date and a retinue of federal marshals refused to
let her carry a pen into the courtroom. She had, by the luck of the draw, just
become the lawyer for Jose Padilla, accused of planning to explode a radioactive
"dirty bomb" in the United States.

Since that moment last May, Ms. Newman, 55, a mother of two grown daughters and
a lawyer in private practice who more typically defends suspects in drug cases,
has been locked in a bitter dispute with the United States government. It is a
battle that could have broad ramifications for how the country deals with
terrorist threats. The outcome of the case could also, more important, define
what rights can be stripped away from citizens in the name of national security.

"If the government gets away with this, it can, with these rules, lock up any
American citizen as an enemy combatant simply based on secret evidence," she
said. "It can deny them access to a lawyer and hold them incommunicado
indefinitely. I never felt this kind of fear before, fear for our country, fear
for what is happening to our Constitution. People don't react because they
believe it won't touch them. But by the time it does touch them, it will be too
late."

Ms. Newman is an unlikely adversary for the federal lawyers she faces in the
tit-for-tat filings between her and the government. She began her career as a
speech therapist in public schools, went to law school when she was in her
mid-30's and did not stray far from home so she could raise her two girls. She
said she never protested in the 1960's because "I was too busy studying." And
she loves, especially after she has had a bad day, to hit the mall and look for
bargains. Her husband, Kenneth M. Newman, 57, who is in the printing industry,
added that she is also known for her apple pies at Thanksgiving.

"When I got to court and saw all the government lawyers at the other table and
just me at my table I knew I needed help," she said. "I asked for a co-counsel
and the court appointed Andrew G. Patel. We spend every waking moment writing
briefs and trying to understand military law. We turn to a lot of people for
help. There are experts from all over the country who have assisted us in this
case and never charged the public defender's office for their time."

She said the case has drawn support from lawyers in the American Bar Association
and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers as well as private
practitioners, academics and public defenders.

"We all know the importance of this case," she said. "Those who understand the
law recognize the impact upon our legal system in the event of an adverse
ruling."

She sat in a white chair in her living room in her home in New Jersey. She asked
that the location be kept confidential because of threats that have been made
against her. She wore a brown houndstooth outfit, a string of pearls and a cameo
brooch that once belonged to her mother, which she wears for good luck. But
underneath the delicate flights of her hands, the broad smile, the laugh that
filled the room and the slightly girlish voice that rose and fell with
enthusiasm was an unshakable resolve.

When asked what effect it would have on constitutional rights if she were to
lose the case, she gave a wan smile and said softly in her broad East Flatbush
accent, "I won't lose."

MS. NEWMAN, on her way to work last June, received a call on her cellphone from
the assistant United States attorney in the Southern District handling the case,
telling her that her client would no longer have access to a lawyer and that he
had been removed from his jail cell in New York and taken to a military brig.
President Bush, he said, had declared Mr. Padilla "an enemy combatant."

"I laughed," she said. "I told him my briefs were not that good. I couldn't
believe it. I thought it was a joke."

Mr. Padilla, without her knowledge, had been moved to a Navy brig in Charleston,
S.C., where he is now held without charge. He is being interrogated and has no
contact with the outside world. Ms. Newman said she writes to her client but was
told by the government that it could not guarantee the letters would be
delivered. When she filed the habeas petition seeking his release, the
government told her it was invalid because her client, whom she could not
contact, had not signed it.

"If someone in this country can disappear based on a suspicion," she said,
"without any real evidence, if someone can be held incommunicado and denied
access to a lawyer, what is to keep us from becoming like Argentina during the
military dictatorship?

"Mr. Padilla was arrested when he deplaned from a commercial airliner for which
he had a valid ticket," she said. "He was carrying a valid U.S. passport. He was
not carrying a weapon. There were no plans in his possession to carry out either
an attack or material to do so."

The struggle with the government titans invigorates her. It is what she thinks
the law is about, why she admires the Constitution and why she defines herself
"as a patriot."

"As a child I watched 'Perry Mason,' " she said. "I thought he was great. I
wanted to be like him. There were no lawyers in my family. My father was an
immigrant from Romania who never went to college. But here I am."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: DONNA R. NEWMAN

GRAPHIC: Photo: DONNA R. NEWMAN (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); PUBLIC
DEFENDERS (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%);
RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%); MARSHALS (78%); BOMBINGS (76%); DIRTY BOMBS (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
(66%); SPEECH THERAPY (64%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (60%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%); THANKSGIVING (60%); PRINTING INDUSTRY (50%) TERRORISM;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  PRISONERS
OF WAR;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  RADIATION

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

HEDGES, CHRIS; NEWMAN, DONNA R; PADILLA, JOSE (ABDULLAH AL-MUHAJIR)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             481 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 12, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: LAW ENFORCEMENT;
Rules Eased for Surveillance of New York Groups

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 750 words


A federal judge in Manhattan, citing what he called "fundamental changes in the
threats to public security," agreed to modify a longstanding court order that
had restricted the New York Police Department's ability to conduct surveillance
of political groups.

The police had argued that the restrictions were making it hard to look into
terrorism, because they required evidence of a crime to initiate an
investigation. That requirement is being relaxed, to allow greater flexibility
for the police. The original rules were imposed as part of a 1985 consent
decree, the Handschu agreement, which was named for the first listed plaintiff
in a 1971 lawsuit over harassment of political advocacy groups by the
department's so-called Red Squad.

But the judge, Charles S. Haight Jr. of Federal District Court, left in place a
three-member oversight board that can investigate specific complaints in which
people contend that police investigations into their political activities
violate their rights. "The Constitution's protections are unchanging," Judge
Haight wrote, "but the nature of public peril can change with dramatic speed, as
recent events show." The guidelines, he said, "addressed different perils in a
different time."

The judge said he had reached his decision that the police were entitled to a
change in the rules "mindful of the crucial importance of preserving both
individual freedoms and public safety, and balancing the legitimate demands of
those two goals."

City and police officials strongly praised the ruling, while lawyers for the
group that won the original restrictions said they were disappointed and wanted
to see how the city would implement the judge's ruling.

Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, echoing the judge's comments, said: "We
live in a different, more dangerous time than when the consent decree was
approved in 1985. This ruling removes restrictions from a bygone era, and will
allow us to more effectively carry out counterterrorism investigations."

Jethro M. Eisenstein, one of the lawyers for the plaintiffs in the long-running
case, called the decision "a major, major loss."

"What's wrong with this decision," Mr. Eisenstein said, "is that it eliminates a
process that became part of the culture of the Police Department. The city, in
its effort to get out from under Handschu, portrayed the rules as much more
onerous than they were."

The judge made clear that a central factor in his decision was the Police
Department's willingness late in the case to adopt a version of F.B.I.
surveillance guidelines issued last year by Attorney General John Ashcroft in
the aftermath of the terror attacks.

Judge Haight noted that the F.B.I.'s guidelines ran 24 pages, typed and
single-spaced, while the city's first proposal was just over two double-spaced
pages, "the most prominent verb being 'deleted.' "

He also cited an affidavit filed in the case last month by David Cohen, the
department's deputy commissioner for intelligence and a former senior official
of the C.I.A. "In my view," Mr. Cohen wrote, "the N.Y.P.D. would be able to
investigate terrorism under the attorney general's guidelines."

Mr. Cohen had provided the judge with a detailed affidavit laying out the
"changed circumstances" that warranted the changes. He asserted, for example,
that American mosques were largely radicalized, and had been used, along with
Islamic institutes, "to shield the work of terrorists from law enforcement
scrutiny by taking advantage of restrictions on the investigation of First
Amendment activity."

Judge Haight said he believed that the continuing existence of the oversight
panel, consisting of two senior police officials and a civilian appointed by the
mayor, would act as a deterrent to illegal police conduct.

But lawyers for the plaintiffs opposed modifying the original agreement, saying
the changes would be fundamental. Mr. Eisenstein cited, for example, one
original requirement that officers articulate in writing the basis for
investigating a person involved in political activity.

"What was so valuable about Handschu was the investigative discipline," Mr.
Eisenstein said. "The process of going through that day in and day out was
always, in our view, an incredibly important part."

Gail Donoghue, special assistant to the city's corporation counsel, said
officers were hampered by the requirements. "There were viable leads that we
felt we should have investigated that we could not," she said. "People in the
city should be very happy about this."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CONSENT DECREES & ORDERS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); HIJACKING (76%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); APPROVALS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(73%); POLITICS (72%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%)
TERRORISM;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
POLICE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  HIJACKING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS

PERSON: HAIGHT, CHARLES S JR (JUDGE); WEISER, BENJAMIN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             491 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lord Wilberforce, 95, Keeper Of an Antislavery Tradition

BYLINE:  By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 504 words


Richard Orme Wilberforce, a retired member of Britain's highest court and keeper
of his family's antislavery tradition, died on Saturday at a hospital in London.
He was 95.

He was a prominent judge in postwar Britain, known for handling both criminal
and civil matters with a keen intellect, clarity and patient civility. Knighted
in 1961, he was created a life peer and law lord three years later, when he
became Lord Wilberforce, Baron of the City and County of Kingston-upon-Hull.

Lord Wilberforce was a great-great-grandson of William Wilberforce (1759-1833),
an English statesman associated with William Pitt the Younger, the great British
prime minister. William Wilberforce was a religiously inspired antislavery
politician who helped pave the way for the Abolition of Slavery Act of 1833.

Three years ago his descendant, Lord Wilberforce, warned Parliament of a modern
kind of "bonded labor." This, he declared, had taken the place of slavery that
William Wilberforce had denounced in the House of Commons as early as the
1780's.

He said that whereas people may be freed from chattel servitude by breaking
their chains, modern bonded labor enmeshes them in a whole skein of complex
economic and political circumstances.

"You have to provide a system of good employment, schools for the children, and
some system of land reform so that people can earn a living," he told
Parliament. "Bonded labor certainly is servitude, and in many ways it is worse."

Richard Orme Wilberforce was raised in India, the son of a judge of the high
court in Lahore under the Raj. He graduated from Oxford University and was
called to the bar in 1932.

His career as a barrister was interrupted by six years in the army in World War
II. He served in Norway, France and Germany, earning the rank of brigadier and
decorations that included a United States Bronze Star. He ended the war in the
army's legal branch and was under secretary of the Control Office for Germany
and Austria in 1945-46, helping to repeal Nazi-era legislation and set up a new
legal framework.

He started his judicial career in 1961 as an appointed High Court, or Chancery,
judge. He was promoted directly to the House of Lords as a lord appeal in
ordinary. Historically the House of Lords served as Britain's court of final
resort but delegated that function to a committee of law lords, making it the
country's highest tribunal.

He contributed especially in the fields of international law, and administrative
and commercial law. He was also remembered for issuing the judicial report
ending the coal miners' strike that crippled Britain in the winter of 1971-72.

After he retired from the law committee in 1982, Lord Wilberforce advocated
human rights, legal reforms and a simpler legislative process. He also sought to
inspire the judiciary to become more aware of social needs and imperatives when
applying the law.

His survivors include his wife of 55 years, Yvette Marie Lenoan, daughter of a
French judge; a daughter, Anne Catherine Burn; and a son, Samuel Herbert.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: Richard Orme Wilberforce

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lord Wilberforce in the 1960's. (Camera Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY
(90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS (78%); GRANDCHILDREN (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LEGISLATION (76%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARMIES (71%); COMMERCIAL LAW
(71%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%);
WORLD WAR II (67%); MINES & MINING (60%); COAL MINING (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); KINGSTON UPON HULL, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); GERMANY (90%); INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
ENGLAND (79%); FRANCE (71%); AUSTRIA (56%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             494 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Everybody Has A Mother

SECTION: Section 6; Column 4; Magazine Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 33 words


Aicha el-Wafi's exclamation that "I am not Osama bin Laden's mother" was a
shocking demonstration of spontaneous denial: her son's alleged crime is, in
fact, also bin Laden's.

Rozanne Gold
Brooklyn

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (86%); HIJACKING (85%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%) MOUSSAOUI, ZACARIAS

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             495 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fortress America

BYLINE:  By Matthew Brzezinski;  Matthew Brzezinski, a contributing writer for
the magazine, last wrote about the detention of Hady Hassan Omar, a Muslim
immigrant.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 7788 words


In the last several weeks, as preparations for the war against Iraq have heated
up, it has begun to sink in that this will be a different conflict from what we
have seen before -- that there may, in fact, be two fronts, one far away on the
ground in the Middle East, the other right here at home. For the first time in
history, it seems plausible that an enemy might mount a sustained attack on the
United States, using weapons of terrorism. The term "soft targets," which refers
to everyday places like offices, shopping malls, restaurants and hotels, is now
casually dropped into conversation, the way military planners talk about
"collateral damage."

Earlier this month, the federal government raised the official terrorism alert
level and advised Americans to prepare a "disaster supply kit," including duct
tape to seal windows against airborne toxins. Members of Congress organized news
conferences to demand that passenger jets be outfitted with missile-avoidance
systems. In major public areas of cities, the police presence has been
especially conspicuous, with weapons ostentatiously displayed. Whatever the
details, the message was the same: war is on the way here.

The impossible questions begin with where, what and how, and end with what to do
about it. Sgt. George McClaskey, a Baltimore cop, spends his days thinking about
the answers, and one cold day recently, he took me out in an old police launch
to survey Baltimore harbor. He showed me some of the new security measures, like
the barriers at the approach to the harbor, which rose out of the water like
stakes in a moat. Cables were suspended between these reinforced pylons,
designed to slice into approaching high-speed craft and decapitate would-be
suicide bombers before they reached their mark. It looked fairly daunting.

Then McClaskey maneuvered the boat toward an unprotected stretch of Baltimore's
Inner Harbor. With the temperature dipping into the teens, the place was empty.
But when the weather is warm, up to a quarter of a million people congregate on
these piers and brightly painted promenades every weekend.

"If I wanted to create a big bang," McClaskey said, adopting the mind-set of a
suicide bomber, "I'd pack a small boat with explosives and crash it right
there." He pointed to a promenade. "It'd be a catastrophe," he declared. "It
would take 48 hours just for the tide to flush out the bodies from under the
boardwalk."

The port is lined with large oil terminals, storage tanks and petrochemical
facilities, incendiaries in need only of a lighted fuse. Even the Domino sugar
refinery, with its sticky-sweet flammable dust, poses a threat. "Most people
don't think about it," McClaskey said, "but that's a giant bomb."

The list of vulnerabilities is perilously long in Baltimore, as it is just about
everywhere in the United States. And every one of those potential targets can
set in motion an ever-broadening ripple effect. Should terrorists manage to blow
up an oil terminal in Baltimore, for instance, the nearby ventilation systems
for the I-95 tunnel would have to be shut. Shut down the tunnel, and the
Interstate highway must be closed. Close down a section of I-95, and traffic
along the entire Eastern Seaboard snarls to a halt.

"So how would you defend against frogmen blowing up half the harbor?" I asked
McClaskey.

The sergeant shrugged uneasily. "Honestly," he confessed, "I don't think it's
possible." Like most law enforcement officers in this country, McClaskey has
been trained to catch crooks, not to stop submerged suicide bombers. Imagining
doomsday possibilities is one thing; we've all become good at it these past 18
months. Coming up with counterterror solutions is another story, often beyond
the scope of our imaginations. But while that expertise may not yet exist in the
United States, it's out there, if you know where to look.

"Sonar," replied Rear Adm. Amiram Rafael, when I put the same question to him
6,000 miles away in Israel, perhaps the one place in the world where terrorism
is as much a part of daily life as commuter traffic. "It can distinguish between
humans and large fish by mapping movement patterns and speed." Rafael spent 28
years protecting Israel's coastline from terrorists and now consults for foreign
clients. "If the alarm sounds, rapid response units in fast boats are
dispatched," he said. "They're equipped with underwater concussion grenades."

"To stun the divers?" I asked.

"No," Rafael said, flashing a fatherly smile. "To kill them."

Until recently, the United States and countries like Israel occupied opposite
ends of the security spectrum: one a confident and carefree superpower,
seemingly untouchable, the other a tiny garrison state, surrounded by
fortifications and barbed wire, fighting for its survival. But the security gap
between the U.S. and places like Israel is narrowing. Subways, sewers, shopping
centers, food processing and water systems are all now seen as easy prey for
terrorists.

There is no clear consensus yet on how to go about protecting ourselves. The
federal government recently concluded a 16-month risk assessment, and last
month, the new Department of Homeland Security was officially born, with an
annual budget of $36 billion. Big money has already been allocated to shore up
certain perceived weaknesses, including the $5.8 billion spent hiring, training
and equipping federal airport screeners and the $3 billion allocated for
"bioterrorism preparedness." All that has been well publicized. Other measures,
like sophisticated radiation sensors and surveillance systems, have been
installed in some cities with less fanfare. Meanwhile, the F.B.I. is carrying
out labor-intensive tasks that would have seemed a ludicrous waste of time 18
months ago, like assembling dossiers on people who take scuba-diving courses.

This marks only the very beginning. A national conversation is starting about
what kind of country we want to live in and what balance we will tolerate
between public safety and private freedom. The decisions won't come all at once,
and we may be changing our minds a lot, depending on whether there are more
attacks here, what our government tells us and what we believe. Two weeks ago,
Congress decided to sharply curtail the activities of the Total Information
Awareness program, a Pentagon project led by Rear Adm. John Poindexter and
invested with power to electronically sift through the private affairs of
American citizens. For the time being, it was felt that the threat of having the
government look over our credit-card statements and medical records was more
dangerous than its promised benefits.

Congress didn't completely shut the door on the T.I.A., though. Agents can still
look into the lives of foreigners, and its functions could be expanded at any
time. We could, for instance, reach the point where we demand the installation
of systems, like the one along the Israeli coastline, to maim or kill intruders
in certain sensitive areas before they have a chance to explain who they are or
why they're there. We may come to think nothing of American citizens who act
suspiciously being held without bail or denied legal representation for
indeterminate periods or tried in courts whose proceedings are under seal. At
shopping malls and restaurants, we may prefer to encounter heavily armed guards
and be subjected to routine searches at the door. We may be willing to give up
the freedom and ease of movement that has defined American life, if we come to
believe our safety depends upon it.

For the better part of a generation now, Americans have gone to great lengths to
protect their homes -- living in gated communities, wiring their property with
sophisticated alarms, arming themselves with deadly weapons. Now imagine this
kind of intensity turned outward, into the public realm. As a culture, our
tolerance for fear is low, and our capacity to do something about it is
unrivaled. We could have the highest degree of public safety the world has ever
seen. But what would that country look like, and what will it be like to live in
it? Perhaps something like this.

Electronic Frisking Every Day on Your Commute

As a homebound commuter entering Washington's Foggy Bottom subway station swipes
his fare card through the turnstile reader, a computer in the bowels of the mass
transit authority takes note. A suspicious pattern of movements has triggered
the computer's curiosity.

The giveaway is a microchip in the new digital fare cards, derived from the
electronic ID cards many of us already use to enter our workplaces. It could be
in use throughout the U.S. within a couple of years. If embedded with the user's
driver's license or national ID number, it would allow transportation
authorities to keep tabs on who rides the subway, and on when and where they get
on and off.

The commuter steps through the turnstile and is scanned by the radiation portal.
These would be a natural extension of the hand-held detectors that the police
have started using in the New York subways. A cancer patient was actually
strip-searched in a New York subway station in 2002 after residue from radiation
treatments tripped the meters. But this doesn't happen to our fictitious
commuter. The meters barely flicker, registering less than one on a scale of one
to nine, the equivalent of a few microroentgens an hour, nowhere near the 3,800
readout that triggers evacuation sirens.

Imagine a battery of video cameras following the commuter's progress to the
platform, where he reads a newspaper, standing next to an old utility room that
contains gas masks. Cops in New York already have them as part of their
standard-issue gear, and a fully secure subway system would need them for
everybody, just as every ferryboat must have a life preserver for every
passenger. Sensors, which are already used in parts of the New York subway
system, would test the air around him for the presence of chemical agents like
sarin and mustard gases.

The commuter finishes reading his newspaper, but there is no place to throw it
away because all trash cans have been removed, as they were in London when the
I.R.A. used them to plant bombs. Cameras show the commuter boarding one of the
subway cars, which have been reconfigured to drop oxygen masks from the ceiling
in the event of a chemical attack, much like jetliners during decompression. The
added security measures have probably pushed fares up throughout the country,
maybe as much as 40 percent in some places.

The commuter -- now the surveillance subject -- gets off at the next stop. As he
rides the escalatorup, a camera positioned overhead zooms in for a close-up of
him. This image, which will be used to confirm his identity, travels through
fiber-optic cables to the Joint Operations Command Center at police
headquarters. There, a computer scans his facial features, breaks them down into
three-dimensional plots and compares them with a databank of criminal mug shots,
people on watch lists and anyone who has ever posed for a government-issue ID.
The facial-recognition program was originally developed at M.I.T. Used before
9/11 mainly by casinos to ferret out known cardsharps, the system has been tried
by airport and law enforcement authorities and costs $75,000 to $100,000 per
tower, as the camera stations are called.

"It can be used at A.T.M.'s, car-rental agencies, D.M.V. offices, border
crossings," says an executive of Viisage Technology, maker of the Face-Finder
recognition system. "These are the sorts of facilities the 19 hijackers used."

Almost instantly, the software verifies the subject's identity and forwards the
information to federal authorities. What they do with it depends on the powers
of the Total Information Awareness program or whatever its successors will be
known as. But let's say that Congress has granted the government authority to
note certain suspicious patterns, like when someone buys an airline ticket with
cash and leaves the return date open. And let's say the commuter did just that
-- his credit cards were maxed out, so he had no choice. And he didn't fill in a
return date because he wasn't sure when his next consulting assignment was going
to start, and he thought he might be able to extend his vacation a few days.

On top of that, let's say he was also indiscreet in an e-mail message, making a
crude joke to a client about a recent airline crash. Software programs that scan
for suspect words are not new. Corporations have long used them to automatically
block employee e-mail containing, for instance, multiple references to sex. The
National Security Agency's global spy satellites and supercomputers have for
years taken the search capability to the next level, processing the content of
up to two million calls and e-mail messages per hour around the world.

Turning the snooping technology on Americans would not be difficult, if
political circumstances made it seem necessary. Right now, there would be fierce
resistance to this, but the debate could swing radically to the other side if
the government showed that intercepting e-mail could deter terrorists from
communicating with one another. Already, says Barry Steinhardt, director of the
A.C.L.U. program on technology and liberty, authorities have been demanding
records from Internet providers and public libraries about what books people are
taking out and what Web sites they're looking at.

Once the commuter is on the government's radar screen, it would be hard for him
to get off -- as anyone who has ever found themselves on a mailing or
telemarketers' list can attest. It will be like when you refinance a mortgage --
suddenly every financial institution in America sends you a preapproved platinum
card. Once a computer detects a pattern, hidden or overt, your identity in the
digital world is fixed.

Technicians manning the Command Center probably wouldn't know why the subject is
on a surveillance list, or whether he should even be on it in the first place.
That would be classified, as most aspects of the government's counterterrorist
calculations are.

Nonetheless, they begin to monitor his movements. Cameras on K Street pick him
up as he exits the subway station and hails a waiting taxi. The cab's license
plate number, as a matter of routine procedure, is run through another software
program -- first used in Peru in the 1990's to detect vehicles that have been
stolen or registered to terrorist sympathizers, and most recently introduced in
central London to nab motorists who have not paid peak-hour traffic tariffs.
Technicians get another positive reading; the cabdriver is also on a watch list.
He is a Pakistani immigrant and has traveled back and forth to Karachi twice in
the last six months, once when his father died, the other to attend his
brother's wedding. These trips seem harmless, but the trackers are trained not
to make these sorts of distinctions.

So what they see is the possible beginning of a terrorist conspiracy -- one
slightly suspicious character has just crossed paths with another slightly
suspicious character, and that makes them seriously suspicious. At this moment,
the case is forwarded to the new National Counterintelligence Service, which
will pay very close attention to whatever both men do next.

The N.C.S. does not exist yet, but its creation is advocated by the likes of Lt.
Gen. William Odom, a former head of the National Security Agency. Whether
modeled after Britain's MI5, a domestic spy agency, or Israel's much more
proactive and unrestricted Shin Bet, the N.C.S. would most likely require a
budget similar to the F.B.I.'s $4.2 billion and nearly as much personnel as the
bureau's 11,400-strong special agent force, mostly for surveillance duties.

N.C.S. surveillance agents dispatched to tail the two subjects in the taxi would
have little difficulty following their quarry through Georgetown, up Wisconsin
Avenue and into Woodley Park. One tool at their disposal could be a nationwide
vehicle tracking system, adapted from the technology used by Singapore's Land
Transport Authority to regulate traffic and parking. The system works on the
same principle as the E-ZPass toll-road technology, in which scanners at
tollbooths read signals from transponders installed on the windshields of
passing vehicles to pay tolls automatically. In a future application, electronic
readers installed throughout major American metropolitan centers could pinpoint
the location of just about any vehicle equipped with mandatory transponders.
(American motorists would most likely each have to pay an extra $90 fee, similar
to what Singapore charges.)

When the commuter arrives home, N.C.S. agents arrange to put his house under
24-hour aerial surveillance. The same thing happens to the cabdriver when he
arrives home. The technology, discreet and effective, is already deployed in
Washington. Modified UH-60A Blackhawk helicopters, the kind U.S. Customs uses to
intercept drug runners, now patrol the skies over the capital to enforce no-fly
zones. The Pentagon deployed its ultrasophisticated RC-7 reconnaissance planes
during the sniper siege last fall. The surveillance craft, which have proved
their worth along the DMZ in North Korea and against cocaine barons in Colombia,
come loaded with long-range night-vision and infrared sensors that permit
operators to detect move-ment and snap photos of virtually anyone's backyard
from as far as 20 miles away.

A Government That Knows When You've Been Bad or Good

In the here and now, an aerial photo of my backyard is on file at the Joint
Operations Command Center in Washington, which, unlike the N.C.S., already
exists. The center looks like NASA, starting with the biometric palm-print
scanners on its reinforced doors.

The center has not singled me out for any special surveillance. My neighbors'
houses are all pictured, too, as are still shots and even three-dimensional
images of just about every building, landmark and lot in central D.C.

The technology isn't revolutionary. How many times a day is the average American
already on camera? There's one in the corner deli where I get my morning coffee
and bagel. Another one at the A.T.M. outside. Yet another one films traffic on
Connecticut Avenue when I drive my wife to work. The lobby of her office
building has several. So that's at least four, and it's only 9 a.m.

There are few legal restraints governing video surveillance. It is perfectly
legal for the government to track anyone, anywhere, using cameras except for
inside his own home, where a warrant is needed to use thermal imaging that can
see all the way into the basement. Backyards or rooftops, however, are fair
game.

There is a growing network of video cameras positioned throughout the capital
that feed into the Joint Operations Command Center, otherwise known as the JOCC,
which has been operational since 9/11. The experimental facility is shared by
several government agencies, including the Metropolitan Police Department, the
F.B.I., the Secret Service, the State Department and the Defense Intelligence
Agency. Agents from different law enforcement bodies man the JOCC's 36 computer
terminals, which are arrayed in long rows beneath wall-size projection screens,
like the Houston space center. The wall screens simultaneously display live
feeds, digital simulations, city maps with the locations of recently released
felons and gory crime scene footage.

"From here we can tap into schools, subways, landmarks and main streets," says
Chief Charles Ramsey of the D.C. Police, with evident pride. Theoretically, with
a few clicks of the mouse the system could also link up with thousands of
closed-circuit cameras in shopping malls, department stores and office
buildings, and is programmed to handle live feeds from up to six helicopters
simultaneously. Ramsey is careful to add that, for now, the majority of the
cameras are off-line most of the time, and that the police aren't using them to
look into elevators or to spy on individuals.

But they could if they wanted to. I ask for a demonstration of the system's
capabilities. A technician punches in a few keystrokes. An aerial photo of the
city shot earlier from a surveillance plane flashes on one of the big screens.
"Can you zoom in on Dupont Circle?" I ask. The screen flickers, and the
thoroughfare's round fountain comes into view. "Go up Connecticut Avenue." The
outline of the Hilton Hotel where President Reagan was shot materializes. "Up a
few more blocks, and toward Rock Creek Park," I instruct. "There, can you get
any closer?" The image blurs and focuses, and I can suddenly see the
air-conditioning unit on my roof, my garden furniture and the cypress hedge I
recently planted in my yard.

The fact that government officials can, from a remote location, snoop into the
backyards of most Washingtonians opens up a whole new level of information they
can find out about us almost effortlessly. They could keep track of when you
come and go from your house, discovering in the process that you work a second
job or that you are carrying on an extramarital affair. Under normal
circumstances, there's not much they could do with this information. And for the
time being, that is the way most Americans want it. But this is the kind of
issue that will come up over the next few years. How many extra tools will we be
willing to grant to the police and federal authorities? How much will we allow
our notions of privacy to narrow?

Because if domestic intelligence agents were able to find out secret details of
people's lives, they could get the cooperation of crucial witnesses who might
otherwise be inclined to keep quiet. There is more than a whiff of McCarthyism
to all this, but perhaps we will be afraid enough to endure it.

The JOCC is also studying the effect of large-scale bombs in Washington. A
three-dimensional map of all downtown buildings allows technicians to simulate
bomb blasts and debris projections. They can also tap into the weather bureau
for real-time data on wind speeds and directions to determine which parts of the
city would have to be evacuated first in the event of a radiological or
biochemical plume. Programmers are now working on an underground map of the
capital that would show water and gas distribution and power grids.

Efforts are under way to establish facilities similar to the JOCC in big urban
centers like Los Angeles, Chicago, Atlanta and New York. One benefit of the
JOCC's is that they are relatively cheap to set up, particularly since most
major cities already have surveillance equipment positioned in places like
tunnels and bridges. Each command center would likely cost around $7 million to
build, with an additional $15,000 charge for every camera installed.

There is also talk of connecting all the facilities together so that officials
in different parts of the country could coordinate response efforts to
terrorism. "Attacks will likely occur in different cities simultaneously," Chief
Ramsey says. And as for those civil libertarians uneasy with the notion of
blanket national surveillance, Ramsey just shrugs. "We can't pretend we live in
the 19th century. We have to take advantage of technology."

The Mall Guard Who Carries a Machine Gun

Imagine a wintry scene: snowdrifts and dirty slush and a long line of people
muffled against the cold. This is a line to get into the mall, and it is moving
frustratingly slowly. What's the holdup? There is no new blockbuster movie
opening that day, or any of those "everything must go" clearance sales that
might justify standing outside freezing for 20 minutes. Customers are simply
waiting to clear security.

Shopping in an environment of total terrorist preparedness promises to be a
vastly different experience from anything ever imagined in America. But for
millions of people who live in terror-prone places like Israel or the
Philippines, tight security at shopping malls has long been a fact of life. "I
was shocked when I first came to the States and could go into any shopping plaza
without going through security," says Aviv Tene, a 33-year-old Haifa attorney.
"It seemed so strange, and risky."

It took me just under eight minutes to clear the security checkpoint outside the
Dizengoff Center in downtown Tel Aviv. But that was on a rainy weekday morning
before the food courts and multiplex theater had opened.

The future shopping experience will start at the parking-lot entrance. Booths
manned by guards will control access to and from lots to prevent terrorists from
emulating the Washington sniper and using parking lots as shooting galleries.
Cars entering underground garages will have their trunks searched for
explosives, as is the practice in Manila. It has also become common outside New
York City hotels. This will guard against car or truck bombs of the type that
blew up beneath the World Trade Center in 1993.

No one will be able to drive closer than a hundred yards to mall entrances.
Concrete Jerseybarriers will stop anyone from crashing a vehicle into the
buildings -- a favored terrorist tactic for American targets overseas -- or into
the crowds of customers lining up. Screening will follow the Israeli model:
metal barricades will funnel shoppers through checkpoints at all doors. They
will be frisked, and both they and their bags will be searched and run through
metal detectors. Security would be tightest in winter, says a former senior
F.B.I. agent, because AK-47's and grenade belts are easily concealed beneath
heavy coats.

What won't be concealed, of course, are the weapons carried by the police at the
mall. Major shopping areas will not be patrolled by the docile, paid-by-the-hour
guards to whom we're accustomed, but -- like airports and New York City tourist
attractions -- by uniformed cops and soldiers with rifles.

What will it be like to encounter such firearms on a regular basis? I lived for
years in Moscow, and after a short time, I rarely noticed the guns. In fact, I
tended to feel more uncomfortable when armed guards were not around; Israelis
traveling in the United States occasionally say the same thing. But despite the
powerful presence of guns in popular culture, few Americans have had much
contact with the kind of heavy weapons that are now becoming a common sight on
city streets. Such prominent displays are meant to convey the notion that the
government is doing something to ward off terrorists, but they can have the
reverse effect too, of constantly reminding us of imminent danger.

Even more mundane procedures might have the same effect -- for example, being
asked to produce a national identification card every time you go into a store,
much the same way clubgoers have to prove they are of age. The idea of a
national identity card, once widely viewed as un-American, is gaining ground in
Washington, where some are advocating standardizing driver's licenses throughout
the country as a first step in that direction. Though perhaps reminiscent of Big
Brother, these cards are not uncommon in the rest of the world, even in Western
Europe. In Singapore, the police frequently ask people to produce their papers;
it becomes so routine that people cease being bothered by it. How long would it
take Americans to become similarly inured?

The new ID's, which are advocated by computer industry leaders like Larry
Ellison of Oracle, could resemble the digital smart cards that Chinese
authorities plan to introduce in Hong Kong by the end of the year. These contain
computer chips with room to store biographical, financial and medical histories,
and tamper-proof algorithms of the cardholder's thumbprint that can be verified
by hand-held optical readers. Based on the $394 million Hong Kong has budgeted
for smart cards for its 6.8 million residents, a similar program in the U.S.
could run as high as $16 billion.

Among other things, a national identity card program would make it much harder
for people without proper ID to move around and therefore much easier for police
and domestic-intelligence agents to track them down. And once found, such people
might discover they don't quite have the rights they thought they had. Even now,
for instance, U.S. citizens can be declared "enemy combatants" and be detained
without counsel. Within a few years, America's counterterrorist agencies could
have the kind of sweeping powers of arrest and interrogation that have developed
in places like Israel, the Philippines and even France, where the constant
threat of terrorism enabled governments to do virtually whatever it takes to
prevent terrorism. "As long as you worry too much about making false arrests and
don't start taking greater risks," says Offer Einav, a 15-year Shin Bet veteran
who now runs a security consulting firm, "you are never going to beat
terrorism."

In years past, the U.S. has had to rely on other governments to take these
risks. For example, the mastermind of the 1993 W.T.C. bombing, Ramzi Yousef, was
caught only after Philippine investigators used what official intelligence
documents delicately refer to as "tactical interrogation" to elicit a confession
from an accomplice arrested in Manila. In U.S. court testimony, the accomplice,
Abdul Hakim Murad, later testified that he was beaten to within an inch of his
life.

In Israel, it is touted that 90 percent of suicide bombers are caught before
they get near their targets, a record achieved partly because the Shin Bet can
do almost anything it deems necessary to save lives. "They do things we would
not be comfortable with in this country," says former Assistant F.B.I. Director
Steve Pomerantz, who, along with a growing number of U.S. officials, has
traveled to Israel recently for antiterror training seminars.

But the U.S. is moving in the Israeli direction. The U.S.A. Patriot Act, rushed
into law six weeks after 9/11, has given government agencies wide latitude to
invoke the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and get around judicial
restraints on search, seizure and surveillance of American citizens. FISA,
originally intended to hunt international spies, permits the authorities to
wiretap virtually at will and break into people's homes to plant bugs or copy
documents. Last year, surveillance requests by the federal government under FISA
outnumbered for the first time in U.S. history all of those under domestic law.

New legislative proposals by the Justice Department now seek to take the Patriot
Act's antiterror powers several steps further, including the right to strip
terror suspects of their U.S. citizenship. Under the new bill -- titled the
Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003 -- the government would not be
required to disclose the identity of anyone detained in connection with a terror
investigation, and the names of those arrested, be they Americans or foreign
nationals, would be exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, according to the
Center for Public Integrity, a rights group in Washington, which has obtained a
draft of the bill. An American citizen suspected of being part of a terrorist
conspiracy could be held by investigators without anyone being notified. He
could simply disappear.

The Face-to-Face Interrogation on Your Vacation

Some aspects of life would, in superficial ways, seem easier, depending on who
you are and what sort of specialized ID you carry. Boarding an international
flight, for example, might not require a passport for frequent fliers. At
Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam, "trusted" travelers -- those who have submitted
to background checks -- are issued a smart card encoded with the pattern of
their iris. When they want to pass through security, a scanner checks their eyes
and verifies their identities, and they are off. The whole process takes 20
seconds, according to Dutch officials. At Ben-Gurion in Israel, the same basic
function is carried out by electronic palm readers.

"We start building dossiers the moment someone buys a ticket," says Einav, the
Shin Bet veteran who also once served as head of El Al security. "We have quite
a bit of information on our frequent fliers. So we know they are not a security
risk."

The technology frees up security personnel to focus their efforts on everybody
else, who, on my recent trip to Jerusalem, included me. As a holder of a
Canadian passport (a favorite of forgers) that has visa stamps from a number of
high-risk countries ending in "stan," I was subjected to a 40-minute
interrogation. My clothes and belongings were swabbed for explosives residue.
Taken to a separate room, I was questioned about every detail of my stay in
Israel, often twice to make certain my story stayed consistent. Whom did you
meet? Where did you meet? What was the address? Do you have the business cards
of the people you met? Can we see them? What did you discuss? Can we see your
notes? Do you have any maps with you? Did you take any photographs while you
were in Israel? Are you sure? Did you rent a car? Where did you drive to? Do you
have a copy of your hotel bill? Why do you have a visa to Pakistan? Why do you
live in Washington? Can we see your D.C. driver's license? Where did you live
before Washington? Why did you live in Moscow? Are you always this nervous?

A Russian speaker was produced to verify that I spoke the language. By the time
I was finally cleared, I almost missed my flight. "Sorry for the delay,"
apologized the young security officer. "Don't take it personally."

El Al is a tiny airline that has a fleet of just 30 planes and flies to a small
handful of destinations. It is also heavily subsidized by the government. This
is what has made El Al and Ben-Gurion safe from terrorists for more than 30
years.

Getting the American airline system up to this level would require a great deal
more than reinforced cockpit doors and the armed air marshals now aboard
domestic and international flights. It would require changing everything,
including the cost and frequency of flights. Nothing could be simpler, right
now, than flying from New York to Pittsburgh -- every day, there are at least a
dozen direct flights available from the city's three airports and countless more
connecting flights. Bought a week or two in advance, these tickets can be as
cheap as $150 round-trip.

Making U.S. airlines as security-conscious as El Al would put the U.S. back
where the rest of the world is -- maybe a flight or two a day from New York to
Pittsburgh, at much higher costs, and no assurance whatsoever you can get on the
plane you want. Flights would take longer, and landings might be a little more
interesting, because pilots would have to stay away from densely populated
areas, where a plane downed by a shoulder-launched Stinger missile could do
terrible damage.

Kayaking in the Wrong Place Is a Federal Crime

In a state of full readiness, American cities would be a patchwork of places you
couldn't go near. At first, most people wouldn't even notice when no-sail zones
were instituted around all 50 major industrial ports in the country. Maybe they
would find out when they went to a local marina where they occasionally rent a
small outboard to go water-skiing and found that it had been closed and
relocated. Or maybe they went kayaking up near the Indian Point nuclear plant on
the Hudson and spent an afternoon talking to the Coast Guard after they got a
little too close.

There may be a lot of places private boats will be unable to go, like anywhere
near a shipping channel used by oil and gas freighters. Infrared and video
optronic systems that can detect small boats, and even inflatable rubber craft,
may be deployed to enforce the no-sail zones. "We invented it after terrorists
rode a freighter to within 10 miles of Tel Aviv," says Rafael, the former
Israeli rear admiral, "and used inflatable boats to attack beachfront hotels."

Each optronic installation costs $2 million, and four or five of the units would
be needed to protect the approach to any major harbor, Rafael says. The system
would thus cost around $500 million.

"I'm always amazed at how lightly defended your industry is compared to most
other countries," says Hezy Ribak, another Israeli intelligence expert, who runs
a security consulting firm. "In Israel, we treat security at our industrial
facilities the way we do borders. The stakes," he adds, "are just as high,
higher if you consider the damage terrorists can do if they infiltrate a nuclear
power plant or blow up a gas reservoir."

The P-Glilot natural gas reservoir near Tel Aviv is a good example of what
security experts like Ribak have in mind for the U.S. From a distance, P-Glilot
doesn't seem all that different than similar installations in New Jersey, Ohio
or Texas. The massive storage tanks are even painted with quaint butterflies and
birds. But just off the highway, watchtowers dot the landscape. If you drive
closer, the complex takes on the feel of a military garrison, with high walls
and electric fences bristling with sensors and cameras, and notices posted in
Hebrew, English and Arabic warning: "No Photography." Pull off the road and park
by the perimeter fence for a mere 15 seconds, and a metallic voice sounds from
an unseen loudspeaker, calling out your license plate number and telling you to
move on.

"Security," Einav says, "is about layers, creating buffer zones." On the ground,
that means changing the way industrial sites are guarded. Security precautions
in the U.S. are concentrated around the core of the targets -- be they reactors,
pumping stations or chemical plants -- rather than the perimeter. "Security at
the main buildings might stop environmental protesters or the lone crazy, but it
doesn't help in the case of a truck loaded with explosives, because the
terrorists have already reached their objective," Ribak says. "Why give yourself
so little room? There should be as big a buffer as possible between the first
line of defense -- the perimeter of the property -- and the target, to give
yourself early warning."

Perimeters, Ribak says, will need to be equipped with vibration sensors; thermal
and infrared cameras; buried magnetic detection devices that can distinguish
between humans, animals and vehicles; and several rows of old-fashioned razor
coil to delay intruders, giving guards time to respond to alarms.

In the U.S., where many industrial facilities are concentrated in dense urban
areas, such security measures would necessitate the rerouting of highways and
possibly the relocation of neighborhoods that are just too close. In New York
City, power plants sit right in the middle of residential neighborhoods, like
the one at 14th Street and Avenue D in the East Village. It is across the street
from Stuyvesant Town and a public housing project, home to tens of thousands of
people. Israeli security officials shake their heads in astonishment at such
"crazy" U.S. practices, but then again who ever thought that putting an airport
next to the Pentagon was a security risk?

Securing dense, mixed-use urban neighborhoods could not only complicate housing
markets and commuting patterns, which are typically a disaster in most cities
already, but could also come at tremendous expense. Consider the Donald C. Cook
nuclear power plant in Berrien County, Mich. It has two Westinghouse reactors
and sits on a relatively cramped 650-acre plot. Just to provide a three-mile
buffer around the plant would run $76 million, according to U.S.D.A. statistics
on the average price per acre of land in Michigan. For the Indian Point plant in
Westchester, the cost would be exponentially higher. Add to that the $3.5
billion to $7 billion estimated by a recent Princeton University study to
safeguard spent fuel pools from air attack, the roughly $3.5 million price tag
of new perimeter sensors and the $160 million that Raytheon charges for a
Patriot missile battery capable of knocking out airborne threats, and multiply
the total by the 103 nuclear power stations in the country.

Now factor in the 276,000 natural gas wells in the U.S., the 1.5 million miles
of unprotected pipelines, the 161 oil refineries, 2,000 oil storage facilities
and 10,400 hydro, coal and gas-fired power generating stations, and you get a
sense of the costs involved.

Every Day Is Super Bowl Sunday

But you probably won't be thinking about any of that when you go out to dinner
or to the movies or to a ball game. By then, it could all be second nature. The
restaurant attendant will go through your purse and wave a metal-detector wand
over your jacket, as they do in Tel Aviv. The valet parker will pop open your
trunk and look through it before dropping your car off at an underground garage,
just as in Manila.

If you take the family to a Dodgers game, you'll be able to tell your kids how,
back in the day, they used to have blimps and small planes trailing ad banners
over stadiums. The flight restrictions, started at Super Bowl XXXVII in 2002,
would not permit any planes within seven miles of any significant sporting
events. Fans would have to park at least five miles from the stadium and board
shuttle buses to gates. Spectators would be funneled through airport-style metal
detectors and watched over by a network of 50 cameras installed throughout the
stadium. Air quality would be monitored for pathogens by the type of portable
detectors brought in by the Army at last year's Olympics.

Even people with no interest in sports who live in high-rises near stadiums
would know whenever game day came round. "Tall buildings near stadiums are also
a risk," says Col. Mena Bacharach, a former Israeli secret-service agent who is
one of the lead security consultants for the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.
"They would have to be swept for snipers or R.P.G.'s." R.P.G.'s? Those are
rocket-propelled grenades, another term that could become an American
colloquialism.

It's still too early to tell what all this would mean to ticket prices, but, in
a sign of the changing times, the security allocation alone for last month's
Super Bowl was $9 million -- the equivalent of $134 for every one of the 67,000
fans in attendance.

Of course, public awareness programs could help to significantly cut down
counterterror costs. In Israel, televised public service announcements similar
to antidrug commercials in the U.S. warn viewers to be on the lookout for signs
of suspicious activity. The messages are even taught to schoolchildren, along
with other important survival tips, like how to assemble gas masks. "I was out
with my 7-year-old granddaughter the other day," recalls Joel Feldschuh, a
former Israeli brigadier general and president of El Al. "And she sees a bag on
the street and starts shouting: 'Granddaddy, granddaddy, look. Quickly call a
policeman. It could be left by terrorists.' "

What Is Your Security Worth to You?

It is commonly held that a country as big and confident in its freedoms as the
United States could never fully protect itself against terrorists. The means
available to them are too vast, the potentially deadly targets too plentiful.
And there is a strong conviction in many quarters that there is a limit to which
Americans will let their daily patterns be disturbed for security precautions.
Discussing the possibility that we might all need to be equipped with our own
gas masks, as Israelis are, Sergeant McClaskey of Baltimore assured me it would
never happen. "If it ever reaches the point where we all need gas masks,"
McClaskey said, shaking his head with disgust, "then we have lost the war on
terror because we are living in fear."

What does it really mean, however, to "lose the war on terror"? It's as
ephemeral a concept as "winning the war on terror." In what sense will it ever
be possible to declare an end of any kind?

One thing that makes the decisions of how to protect ourselves so difficult is
that the terrorism we face is fundamentally different from what other
governments have faced in the past. The Israelis live in tight quarters with an
enemy they know well and can readily lay their eyes on. Terror attacks on
European countries have always come from colonies or nearby provinces that have
generally had specific grievances and demands. Americans don't know exactly who
our enemies are or where they are coming from. Two of the recent thwarted
terrorists, Richard Reid and Zacarias Moussaoui, were in fact Europeans.

The United States also lacks the national identity that binds Israel and most
European countries and helps make the psychic wounds of terrorism heal faster.
In Israel, hours after a bombing, the streets are crowded again -- people are
determined to keep going. Immediately after 9/11, that's how many Americans
felt, too, but it's not at all clear how long this kind of spirit will endure.

Nor is it clear how we will absorb the cost. An adviser to President Bush
estimates that as much as $100 billion will have to be spent annually on
domestic security over the next 10 years, if you factor in all the overtime
accrued by police departments every time there is a heightened alert. There are
many who believe, as General Odom does, that the money is "insignificant." "At
the height of the cold war we used to spend 7.2 percent of G.D.P. on defense and
intelligence," he says. "We spend less than half that now."

Outside of defense and some of the entitlement programs, however, domestic
security will dwarf every other kind of federal spending: education, roads,
subsidized housing, environmental protection. More than that, the decisions we
make about how to protect ourselves -- the measures we demand, the ones we
resist -- will take over our political discourse and define our ideas about
government in the years to come.

One significant argument against the creation of an American security state, a
United States that resembles Israel, is that even there, in a society rigorously
organized around security, the safety of its citizens is far from guaranteed.
But what keeps Israelis going about their daily lives -- and what might help
Americans do the same despite the fear of violence here -- is the
conspicuousness of the response and the minor sacrifices that have to be made
every day. The more often we have to have our bags searched, the better we might
feel. Sitting in the kind of traffic jam that would have normally frayed our
nerves might seem almost comforting if it's because all the cars in front of us
are being checked for bombs. We may demand more daily inconveniences, more
routine abrogations of our rights. These decisions are not only going to change
how we go about our days; they're also going to change our notion of what it
means to be an American. How far do we want to go?

"Security is a balancing act," says Einav, the former El Al security chief. "And
there are always trade-offs. Give me the resources, and I can guarantee your
safety. The question is, What are you willing to pay or put up with to stay
safe?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Jason Fulford; Illustrations by Nicholas Blechman)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); DISASTER PLANNING
(78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (76%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(75%); WEATHER (74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (71%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (70%); RESTAURANTS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); PETROCHEMICALS (62%); SUGAR
MFG (60%); OIL & GAS STORAGE FACILITIES (60%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT (55%);
RETAILERS (55%); PETROCHEMICAL MFG (50%) TERRORISM;  SECURITY AND WARNING
SYSTEMS;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
PRIVACY;  RECORDINGS (VIDEO);  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%) HOMELAND SECURITY
DEPARTMENT

PERSON: BRZEZINSKI, MATTHEW

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (91%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             500 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Invoking Peace to Justify War

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 98 words


To the Editor:

President Bush offers little actual hope that a war in Iraq will aid peace in
the Middle East (front page, Feb. 27).

The important question is whether the war would motivate Israel to give up its
occupation. All indications are that Israel is taking advantage of the world's
distraction to solidify its control over the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem.

What could embolden Israel more than an American president who turns a blind eye
to Israeli human rights abuses and pursues a war that only the United States and
Israel truly want?

YUSUF WASEEM
Chicago, Feb. 27, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
TERRORISM (86%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (85%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); WASEEM, YUSUF

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (91%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: IRAQ;  ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  JERUSALEM;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             501 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISSENT;
Labor, Breaking Tradition, Criticizes War Preparations

BYLINE:  By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Fla., Feb. 27


After backing administrations in the Korean, Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars, the
labor movement departed today from tradition and criticized President Bush's
approach to a conflict with Iraq.

At its winter meeting, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council unanimously approved
a resolution urging Mr. Bush to embrace a broad multilateral approach to Iraq
and criticizing the administration for dividing the world and insulting
America's allies.

"The president has not fulfilled his responsibility to make a compelling and
coherent explanation to the American people and the world as to the need for
military action against Iraq at this time," the council, which represents 65
unions, said. "America has always been a peace-loving nation, slow to take up
arms, and resolute in pursuit of diplomatic resolution to crises. This
administration's actions are sadly eroding that reputation."

That language is a sharp contrast to organized labor's stance in the Vietnam
War, when the federation, under its president, George Meany, strongly supported
the war effort.

Several unions, as well as central labor councils in many cities, have approved
resolutions denouncing the policy of pre-emptive strikes and threats to attack
Iraq even without explicit United Nations approval.

Within labor, differences go beyond nuance. Some unions, most notably the
American Federation of Teachers, are more willing to accept a unilateral
approach. A few liberal unions appear dead set against war.

The unions are unanimous in denouncing President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. The
resolution called Mr. Hussein "a demagogue and a despot with an appalling human
rights record" who "rules the Iraqi people through torture, murder and fear."

The federation said it supported efforts to disarm Iraq but added, "This is best
achieved in concert with a broad international coalition of allies and with the
sanction of the United Nations."

The federation faulted the administration for its diplomacy and failure to build
a consensus, noting that there is far less unity in the United States and with
allies than there was after the Sept. 11 attacks.

"Now, just a year and a half later, we have squandered much of that good will,
managed to insult many of our strong allies and divided the world at a time when
it should speak as one," the resolution said.

"We're saying that war should be an absolutely last resort, and in the strongest
terms we're urging the administration to go through the U.N.," said the
federation's international affairs director, Barbara Shailor. "We can't go
around insulting our allies. In a world filled with terrorism, we need all the
friends we can get."

Ms. Shailor said unions would overwhelmingly back a war if the Security Council
gave a green light.

The federation's international affairs committee drafted the resolution and
invited two Clinton administration figures, Samuel R. Berger, national security
adviser, and Dennis B. Ross, special Mideast envoy, to give detailed briefings
on Iraq.

Union leaders gave several reasons for departing from the strong support in past
wars. In the cold war, most union leaders were fervently anti-Communist, a major
reason that labor backed the Vietnam War. Members often conducted
counterdemonstrations at antiwar rallies.

With labor clashing with Mr. Bush over many issues, several leaders said they
felt less inhibited about criticizing his foreign policy, even over an issue as
serious as war.

Most unions backed President George Bush in the gulf war, although some leaders,
echoing many Democratic lawmakers, urged him to wait longer before attacking.
The president of the federation, Lane Kirkland, said, "The American labor
movement stands in full support of our country" to "bring this conflict to an
early and decisive conclusion."

Several leaders said the increased power and role of women and minorities in
labor might have also made the movement more averse to war.

The United Farm Workers, citing the teachings of its founder, Cesar Chavez,
said, "President Bush has not offered convincing evidence to the American people
that war is needed, because Iraq poses an imminent threat to the country. Such a
use of U.S. military force would require thousands of young men and women, many
of them people of color, to fight overseas."

In its resolution, the teachers' union said that military action "will only have
the support of the American people if they believe that such action is only a
last resort." The union added that it "recognizes that the U.S. may at times
have to act unilaterally in defense of its national security."

Several unions said the administration was pushing for a war for political gain
and to distract the public from economic troubles. The Union of Needletrades,
Industrial and Textile Employees, or Unite, approved a resolution saying, "This
war is a cynical attempt to distract attention away from the real concerns of
American citizens -- a faltering economy, declining education budgets, state and
local fiscal crises, increasing unemployment."

The union president, Bruce Raynor, said:

"If our policy is to topple horrible regimes, I'm not sure if Saddam's in the
top five. North Korea seems like a worse regime, and Myanmar may be even more
repressive toward its people."

Many unions sought to make clear they supported American troops, regardless of
the stand on war.

The Cleveland Central Labor Council, representing 100,000 workers, approved a
resolution saying, "If our nation goes to war, absent demonstrably legitimate
concerns about weapons of mass destruction, we will continue to express our
opposition to that war, while finding meaningful ways to support our troops."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LABOR UNIONS (91%); DESERT STORM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); VIETNAM
WAR (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); TERRORISM (87%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); DISARMAMENT (77%); APPROVALS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(75%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (74%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (70%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (70%); TEACHER UNIONS (69%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (67%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (64%); TORTURE (64%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
ORGANIZED LABOR;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AFL-CIO (84%); UNITED NATIONS (55%); AMERICAN FEDERATION OF
TEACHERS (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (78%) GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); GULF STATES (73%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             502 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 28, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PRIVACY CONCERNS;
Canadian and Dutch Officials Warn of Security's Side Effects

BYLINE:  By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


Privacy officials from Canada and the Netherlands complained today that the
American campaign to crack down on terrorism was needlessly infringing on the
privacy of their citizens.

Peter J. Hustinx, president of the Data Protection Authority of the Netherlands,
said the United States Customs Service had insisted on access to a wide variety
of passenger information, not merely names and passport numbers, but credit card
information, telephone contacts and even meal preferences, for flights to the
United States, even though release of that information violated laws in Europe.

Airlines were required to provide the information under legislation enacted
after the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.

Mr. Hustinx said the European Union had recently agreed to American demands for
the information, starting March 5. He said the Union had assured airlines they
would not be prosecuted, but had directed them to inform their passengers that
the information was being provided to the American government. The European
Union has said it was satisfied with safeguards Washington promised for the
information.

George Radwanski, privacy commissioner of Canada, said his government was
proposing a biometric national identity card, explaining that the United States
would require it for crossing the border. He too complained about the breadth of
the demand for passenger information -- "basically everything the airline knows
about you."

Mr. Hustinx and Mr. Radwanski spoke today at a meeting on the International
Association of Privacy Professionals. Mr. Hustinx said that Europe had given in
to avoid fines and denials of landing rights for its airlines. The United States
imposed the requirements unilaterally, he said.

Mr. Radwanski spoke of American pressures in an interview and in his annual
report filed last month. At the meeting today he spoke more generally, saying
today's terrorists sought to attack the nature of American and Western society.
"Our freedoms and values, very much including privacy, are precisely the target.
Far from making us safer, every ill-conceived reduction of those freedoms --
every needless encroachment on privacy -- would be a victory for terrorism."

He warned that antiterrorist efforts should be carefully directed and limited in
scope. He said "we must guard against the tendency of governments to create new
data bases of privacy-invasive information on justified, exceptional grounds of
enhancing security, and then seek to use that information for a whole range of
other law enforcement or governmental purposes, simply because it's there and
available."

The United States Customs Service issued a statement today saying it uses the
data "strictly for border security purposes, including use in threat analysis to
identify and interdict potential terrorists and other threats to national and
public security."

The Customs statement said the data enabled agents "to focus their resources on
the highest risk passengers, thereby facilitating and safeguarding bona fide
travelers."

The spokeswoman declined to comment specifically on the complaints by Mr.
Hustinx and Mr. Radwanski about the breadth of information it sought. She would
not say when it wanted data that included credit card or meal preference
information. The statement said the "requested information in the Passenger Name
Record includes but is not limited to the P.N.R. locator code, reservation date,
ticket information, form of payment itinerary informationand P.N.R. history."

Mr. Radwanski said there were more than 30 items in the record, including not
only the items cited by Customs but also all contact phone numbers, dietary
preferences, health needs such as wheelchairs, frequent-flier information and
how much luggage a traveler had.

Mr. Radwanski's complaint about the biometric national identity card -- which
the Congress has forbidden this United States government from developing for
American citizens -- was summarized in his annual report to Canada's Parliament
last month.

He said that "government officials have repeatedly told me privately that
pressure from the United States government is a strong motivating factor" behind
the identity card proposal. He said such a card would be "absolutely useless as
an antiterrorist measure" and would push Canada "toward becoming the kind of
society where the police can stop anyone on the streets and demand 'Your papers,
please.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (91%); AIRLINES (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (90%); DATA SECURITY (90%); DATA PROTECTION LAWS (90%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (89%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
EUROPEAN UNION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%);
INTERVIEWS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); BIOMETRICS (71%); CREDIT CARDS (71%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (65%) TERRORISM;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  PRIVACY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: US CUSTOMS & BORDER PROTECTION (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%) CUSTOMS
SERVICE (US)

PERSON: CLYMER, ADAM

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); EUROPE (94%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%)

REGION: CANADA;  NETHERLANDS

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             504 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: TERROR LINKS;
U.S. Lists 3 Chechen Groups As Terrorist and Freezes Assets

BYLINE:  By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 305 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


The United States designated three rebel groups in Chechnya today as "terrorist
organizations" linked to Al Qaeda and imposed a freeze on their American assets.
The groups were described as having been involved in the seizure of a Moscow
theater last October in which 129 people died.

The administration's action, announced by the State Department, was in response
to a longstanding request from Russia and reflected support for President
Vladimir V. Putin at a time when the United States is seeking Russian backing
for a possible war against Iraq.

Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the groups on the list
also had ties to the Taliban leaders ousted in Afghanistan. Russia has for many
months asserted such a link existed as it has sought a global endorsement of its
campaign against Chechen rebels.

The action brought praise from Russian officials. "Russia welcomes the decision
of the State Department," the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, said in
Beijing.

The State Department identified the groups as Riyadus-Salikhin Reconnaissance
and Sabotage Battalion of Chechen Martyrs, the Special Purpose Islamic Regiment
and the Islamic International Brigade.

Mr. Boucher said today that in making the designation, the United States was not
changing its position that "the broader conflict in Chechnya cannot be resolved
militarily, and requires a political solution." He also called on Russia to
"establish meaningful accountability for human rights violations by its armed
forces in Chechnya."

He advised all Chechen leaders to "renounce terrorist acts and to cut any ties
they may have to these terrorist groups and all who are affiliated with them."

The action today requires banks to freeze any assets the groups may have in the
United States, but it is not known whether they have any assets.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
TALIBAN (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); IRAQ WAR
(73%); POLITICS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); RELIGION (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (54%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (68%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (79%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             509 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serbs Told to Pay $2 Million for Srebrenica Massacre

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 7


A panel of Bosnian and international judges ordered Bosnia's Serb Republic today
to pay more than $2 million in compensation for the massacre of 7,500 Muslims at
Srebrenica in 1995.

The money will be spent to build a memorial at the graveyard where families of
the victims plan to bury their relatives' remains when they are finally
identified. The first funerals will be held at the site, just outside
Srebrenica, at the end of this month -- almost eight years after the massacre,
the worst atrocity in Europe since World War II.

So far, 582 corpses have been released from a nearby morgue, where thousands of
body parts lie stacked in bags awaiting identification. Although families gather
at the memorial site every July 11 on the anniversary of the massacre, there
have been no burials, largely because of a shortage of money for the cemetery
and the fact that so many victims remain unaccounted for.

In its ruling, which settled a lawsuit filed by 49 families of victims, the
Human Rights Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina also ordered the Bosnian Serb
government to provide more information about the location of mass graves where
hundreds of missing victims are presumed buried.

The court said that "in the light of exceptionally high levels of trauma caused
in part by the lack of information," about those listed as missing, the failure
of Serbian authorities to disclose more was "particularly egregious."

The two Serbs on the panel, which also includes two Croats and two Muslims,
along with eight foreign judges, voted against the ruling. In a report released
last year, the Bosnian Serb government denied that a massacre had taken place,
stating that only 1,500 people had been killed and that the majority had been
combat troops.

The prospects that the money will be paid are not immediately clear, but the
government is under pressure to comply with international demands concerning war
crimes. Relatives of the dead said they hoped that today's decision would put
Serbian officials under greater pressure. The money was less important, they
said.

"No money in the world could make me feel better," said Mevlida Sulejmanovic,
one of the plaintiffs. "Unfortunately, I have survived, and I am now forced to
live without my loved ones."

Ms. Sulejmanovic lost her husband, two sons and three brothers when Serbian
forces separated the men of Srebrenica from their families and killed them.
Dutch United Nations peacekeepers, who had been assigned to protect them, failed
to intervene.

Another woman, Hata Ahmetovic, who lost three sons and her husband, said the
ruling would "at least help the efforts to bury those identified."

But it is unlikely to help officials identify more victims. The cost of building
the memorial alone is likely to eat up most of this compensation payment.

A DNA identification program for all unidentified victims of the war, set up 14
months ago by the International Commission on Missing Persons, badly needs
money, too, but it is unlikely to get any. Since its inception, the project has
identified more than 1,500 of the 30,000 people unaccounted for.

Gordon Bacon, the project's director, urged international officials to remember
that in the simplest cases, a positive DNA match can cost just $100.

"We want to go faster, but we don't have the money," he said. "Every little bit
we get is going to lead to another identification at this stage, and it's a
shame to have such a wonderful system in place without being able to use it to
the full."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); LITIGATION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); DAMAGES (78%); CEMETERIES (77%); RELIGION (77%);
ANNIVERSARIES (77%); FUNERAL INDUSTRY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); POWS
& MIAS (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (73%); WORLD WAR II
(70%); DNA (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
CROATIA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             512 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Torture, Tough or Lite;
If a Terror Suspect Won't Talk, Should He Be Made To?

BYLINE:  By PETER MAASS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: KUWAIT


THE Philippine police knew they had an unusual case when they arrested Abdul
Hakim Murad on Jan. 6, 1995. After Mr. Murad accidentally set a small fire in
his Manila apartment, the police reportedly found gallons of sulfuric acid and
nitric acid, as well as beakers, filters, funnels and fuses. A week before Pope
John Paul II was to visit Manila, they had uncovered a bomb-making factory.

In many countries, terrorism suspects like Mr. Murad rarely receive the local
equivalent of the Miranda rights; instead, they are tortured. Perhaps the
authorities are trying to get sensitive information, perhaps they are trying to
dispense extra-legal punishment. The methods vary, from gentler tactics,
occasionally referred to as "torture lite," like sleep deprivation, to hard
torture, like the administration of electric shocks. If a prisoner happens to
die, this can be explained away as a suicide or "a sharp drop in blood
pressure," as the Egyptian authorities have described the demise of prisoners
who were brutalized to death.

Mr. Murad, a Pakistani, was not a talker. Although a computer in his apartment
contained information about his plans, he resisted requests to give details of
what he was doing. His interrogators reportedly beat him so badly that most of
his ribs were broken; they extinguished cigarettes on his genitals; they made
him sit on ice cubes; they forced water down his throat so that he nearly
drowned.

This went on for several weeks. In the end, he provided names, dates and places
behind a Qaeda plan to blow up 11 commercial airliners and fly another one into
the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency. He also confessed to a plot
to assassinate the pope.

Mr. Murad's case has been used, in some quarters, to justify torture. Without
violent pressure, terrorists might never talk, and then their plans will proceed
and civilians will die. This thinking is receiving renewed attention after the
arrest, in Pakistan, of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, Al Qaeda's chief of operations
and the operational mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks.

After his capture last week, Mr. Mohammed was handed to the United States and
taken out of Pakistan, though it is not known where he is being held or how he
is being interrogated. United States officials have said that Mr. Mohammed, or
any other terrorist suspect, would not be tortured. But if he prefers not to
talk, should he be made to?

The easy answer, in these times of war and fear, is yes. But relieving a suspect
of his fingernails is not always the best way to get him to talk, and if he does
talk, he may not tell the truth. A suspect who wants to avoid the unkindness of
having his teeth extracted with a set of dirty pliers may say whatever he thinks
his torturers want to hear.

Beyond that, many terrorism experts believe that in the long run torture is a
losing strategy. Pain and humiliation will turn some innocent suspects into real
terrorists and turn real terrorists into more-determined monsters.

James Ron, a professor of conflict studies at McGill University in Canada, is
the author of a lengthy report on torture in Israel. He met with Israeli
officials and soldiers, as well as Palestinian detainees who said their
interrogators made it known that they had detailed information about terrorist
groups. Mr. Ron believes this intelligence was gathered largely by the use of
physical and economic coercion, but at a significant and counterproductive cost.

"Most studies show that torture is hugely degrading and humiliating, in addition
to being painful," Mr. Ron said. "Some people get destroyed in the process and
curl up in a ball and go away, but some people fight back. If you're doing this
to just 10 people it's perhaps not a security threat, but if it's the F.B.I. and
all its allies across the world, then it's a big deal. A large chunk of the
people who are being interrogated aren't militants, they just might know someone
who is. If they weren't committed anti-Americans now, they would be after this
process."

Another reason brute force may not work well is simple: many terrorists have
been through it before. No small number of Al Qaeda members have done jail time
in Middle Eastern countries that practice torture. And most terrorists are
steeped in cultures of deception; they know how to divulge bad information in a
manner that might seem convincing.

In fact, in its apparent success, Mr. Murad's interrogation shows torture's
limitations. Mr. Murad may have nearly died, but he didn't crack until a new
team of interrogators told him falsely that they were from the Mossad and would
be taking him to Israel. Mr. Murad, who feared Jews as much as he hated them,
quickly spilled the beans.

Thus, the real lesson. Prospects for gaining useful information are enhanced
when interrogators apply psychological pressure, which includes lies, false
promises and threats. "It is not the violence that is the core solution but the
psychological techniques," said a prominent terrorism expert. "You've got to
engage in this psychological game. Not just pain but wearing him down physically
and spiritually."

For example, Mr. Mohammed's two sons, 7 and 9, are reported to be in custody in
Pakistan; threats against them, serious or not, might be far more persuasive
than threats against Mr. Mohammed himself.

Although it may be less offensive to our moral sensitivities, "torture lite" may
be no less illegal than its harder cousin. The United Nations Convention Against
Torture, which the United States ratified in 1994, defines torture as "any act
by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person
information or a confession."

But what qualifies as severe pain or suffering? A hood over the head? Putting a
suspect in an uncomfortable position for a long time?

It depends on whom you ask. After it was reported in December that prisoners in
American custody in Afghanistan were exposed to "stress and duress"
interrogation techniques, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, Kenneth
Roth, sent a letter to President Bush. "Torture is never permissible against
anyone, whether in times of peace or of war," Mr. Roth wrote.

His letter also noted that news reports have said the United States is handing
over some suspects to countries like Egypt and Jordan, where torture is routine
and brutal.

Human rights advocates are not the only ones disturbed by this strategy. "Such a
practice of vicarious torture is imbued with an obvious hypocrisy that prevents
the sending state -- such as the United States -- from having clean hands," said
an article in the summer edition of Parameters, a respected quarterly published
by the United States Army War College. "Moreover, obtaining human intelligence
from foreign governments is fraught with its own downside risk: such
intelligence, filtered through a foreign government, may contain information
tainted by that governments biases or hidden policy objectives."

THE White House has not officially said whether it hands over terrorist suspects
to other countries for questioning, nor does it detail the techniques used by
American interrogators, though it says all international laws are followed. In a
sign of unease, the Pentagon now refers to its interrogators as "human
intelligence collectors."

The line between legitimate interrogation and outlawed torture is ill defined,
and the reluctance of governments to disclose what they are doing intensifies
this murkiness. It is nearly impossible to know whether, in a fetid basement
cell in Cairo or Amman or Islamabad or Kabul, a suspected terrorist is having
his limbs broken to safeguard against terrorism. And it is just as hard to know
whether such deeds, if they are occurring, will enhance long-term national
security or fuel a desire for retribution against America.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Wesley Bedrosian)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); AL-QAEDA (76%); HIJACKING (76%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); MIRANDA RULE (71%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); PASSENGER & CARGO
AIRCRAFT (69%); COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (69%); ASSASSINATION
(65%); AIRLINES (64%) TERRORISM;  TORTURE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: MAASS, PETER; MOHAMMED, KHALID SHAIKH

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             515 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Afghanistan: Planting A Flag In Cyberspace

BYLINE:  By Amy Waldman (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 93 words


The government obtained control of the ".af" domain for Afghan Web sites and
e-mail addresses.

The first sites registered under the new domain belong to the Ministry of
Communications and the local site of the United Nations Development Program,
which provided legal and technical support for the complex application process
required for Afghanistan to regain control of its Internet country code. The
Taliban government, ousted by American and allied forces after the Sept. 11
attacks, prohibited private use of the Internet in 2001.   Amy Waldman (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ELECTRONIC MAIL

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (84%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM; TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: WALDMAN, AMY

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The New Airport Profiling

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 467 words


Having successfully fielded thousands of newly minted federal agents to screen
air travelers and their luggage, the Transportation Security Administration is
now turning to a far more controversial endeavor. The agency is developing a
sophisticated screening system designed to identify travelers who may pose a
terrorist threat.

It is a worthy goal -- one ordered up by Congress -- but the creation of a
highly intrusive federal surveillance program raises serious privacy and due
process concerns, which the government needs to address in a forthright manner.

The notion of electronic profiling is not new. Using such criteria as whether a
passenger paid cash for a ticket, a rudimentary system designed in the
mid-1990's helped airlines flag passengers deserving heightened scrutiny. What
that usually meant was that their checked luggage was carefully inspected. Some
of the Sept. 11 hijackers were reported to have been picked out by that system,
but it did little good since they did not check any bags.

The new profiling system is a quantum leap. In addition to evaluating certain
travel-related behavior and looking for passenger names on watch lists, the new
system will give the transportation agency access to numerous public and private
databases the moment a passenger books a flight. Exactly which ones has not yet
been determined, but they may include the records of Department of Motor Vehicle
offices, banks and credit-rating agencies.

After the program is in place, which could be as early as the end of this year,
the Transportation Security Administration will assign each passenger a risk
level: green, yellow or red. Travelers will not be informed of their
designations, which will be encrypted onto their boarding passes. The T.S.A.
says it is mindful of the obvious privacy concerns raised by such a system,
though it points out that it will not be amassing new databases, but rather
mining ones already used routinely to profile consumers. The agency says it is
not interested in knowing whether you bounced a check five years ago, or whether
you have paid your parking tickets, but in authenticating your identity.

Privacy principles are not necessarily sacrosanct, but this plan runs the risk
of overreaching. For one thing, it could quickly lead to mistaken actions based
on inaccurate information.

More worrisome is the possibility that this system could grow into a runaway
vacuum cleaner, sweeping up all manner of data that can then be misused by the
government. Congress recently put the brakes on the Pentagon's Total Information
Awareness project, a dangerously uncontrolled program that was designed to track
the activities of millions of Americans. Lawmakers must ensure that the
transportation agency's profiling system does not become an all-purpose
equivalent.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); AIRPORTS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); AVIATION SECURITY (90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); AIRLINES (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (78%); BAGGAGE
HANDLING (78%); HIJACKING (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CREDIT BUREAUS (50%)
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  EDITORIALS;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  AIRPORTS;
COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  TERRORISM;  PRIVACY;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (93%) TRANSPORTATION
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             521 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY;
U.S. NAMES IRAQIS WHO WOULD FACE WAR CRIMES TRIAL

BYLINE:  By ELISABETH BUMILLER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


For the first time, the Bush administration has identified nine senior Iraqi
officials, including Saddam Hussein and his two sons, who would be tried for war
crimes or crimes against humanity after an American-led attack on Iraq, a senior
American official said.

The list of names -- compiled, but not published, by American intelligence
agencies -- includes members of Mr. Hussein's inner circle who sit atop a
hierarchy of 2,000 members of the Iraqi elite.

Administration officials said they had planned to send the list of people to
Baghdad with a delegation from the Arab League in hopes of persuading the men to
leave the country with Mr. Hussein as way to avoid a war. But that trip, planned
for Friday, was called off.

If the people on this list were to leave and there was a new leadership willing
to disarm and "open up" Iraq, a senior official said, then it could avoid war.

But the chances of that appeared ever dimmer today as Mr. Bush prepared at Camp
David for an emergency summit meeting on Sunday in the Azores with Prime
Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar of Spain.

Around the world, including in Washington and in other American cities,
protesters assembled to demonstrate against an impending war.  Page 15.  In his
national radio address this morning, however, Mr. Bush said bluntly that "there
is little reason to hope that Saddam Hussein will disarm" without the use of
force.

Late today, France, Russia and Germany, which have led the opposition to a war
in Iraq, issued a joint declaration calling for a meeting of foreign ministers
at the Security Council on Tuesday to "approve a list of prioritized disarmament
tasks and to decide on a implementation timetable which is both demanding and
realistic." Their statement contained no specific proposal.

A new meeting, following an already scheduled report Tuesday by one of the chief
United Nations weapons inspectors, Hans Blix, would revive talks that stalled
last week after France and Russia rejected a British list of demands on Iraq,
and the United States rejected a proposal by Chile for a disarmament timetable.

In Iraq, in a development that could complicate American war plans, the Foreign
Ministry said that a top aide to Mr. Hussein had invited the chief weapons
inspectors, Mr. Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, to visit Baghdad "as quickly as
possible" to discuss disarmament. United Nations officials said the two men
would consult with the Security Council on Monday on whether to accept the
invitation.

In his radio address, Mr. Bush reminded his listeners that it was the 15th
"bitter anniversary" of Mr. Hussein's chemical weapons attack on the Iraqi
Kurdish village of Halabja. The attack, Mr. Bush said, "provided a glimpse of
the crimes Saddam Hussein is willing to commit, and the kind of threat he now
presents to the entire world."

Using some of his most graphic language yet in describing Mr. Hussein's Iraq,
Mr. Bush added: "We know from human rights groups that dissidents in Iraq are
tortured, imprisoned and sometimes just disappear. Their hands, feet and tongues
are cut off, their eyes are gouged out, and female relatives are raped in their
presence."

Mr. Bush, seeming to prepare the nation for war, said that if force was required
to disarm Mr. Hussein, "the American people can know that our armed forces have
been given every tool and every resource to achieve victory."

The president then turned his remarks to the Iraqis, and said that "the people
of Iraq can know that every effort will be made to spare innocent life, and to
help Iraq recover from three decades of totalitarian rule."

In Kuwait, as troops in the teeming desert base of Camp Virginia waited for
orders to invade Iraq, the commander of the Army's V Corps said that the United
States would not seek specifically to kill Mr. Hussein. In an interview Friday,
the commander, Lt. Gen. William S. Wallace, said that the United States military
instead planned to destroy the infrastructure and government controlled by Mr.
Hussein to open the way for a representative government.

Mr. Hussein's fate was secondary, General Wallace said, although he expected
fighting to be concentrated in and around Baghdad. The Pentagon has long said
that as a military commander, Mr. Hussein would be a legitimate target, as would
anyone in an Iraqi command post.

The White House has said that if there is a war, Mr. Hussein will not be allowed
to stay in power.

"The regime is the target, not one individual," General Wallace said.

"Saddam is representative of that government, and eliminating him or making him
a target is not necessary for the toppling of the regime. I don't care what
happens to him, as long as what is left in his aftermath is a foundation for a
new Iraqi state."

Likehis remarks, the list of officials released today continued a running
psychological campaign against the Iraqi elite. President Bush and his senior
advisers have repeatedly warned Mr. Hussein's loyalists that they have a choice
between exile or prosecution.

In addition to Mr. Hussein and his two sons, Uday and Qusay, the
administration's list for prosecution included Ali Hassan al-Hamid, who was the
governor of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait in 1990, and Muhammad Hamza al-Zubaidi, who
the administration says was responsible for atrocities against the Shiites in
southern Iraq in early 1991. There are about a dozen people on the list in all,
a senior official said. But he said that for now the United States would only
publicly name nine.

"This is the group that we would expect to depart if there's a departure or that
we'd expect to apprehend if there's a use of force," a senior administration
official said. "They are wanted for the crimes of the regime."

Other Iraqi officials on the list included Aziz Salih Numan, the second governor
of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait; Izzat Ibrahim, the deputy commander in chief of the
Iraqi military, who is close to Mr. Hussein; Abid Hamid al-Tikriti, the
presidential secretary who is considered Mr. Hussein's alter ego; and Hani Abd
al-Latif Tilfah, the director of the special security organization that the
administration said is in charge of hiding Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

The administration said that Mr. Hussein's son Uday was responsible for ordering
torture, rape and looting of dissident communities within Iraq and that his son
Qusay oversees the special security organization and the elite Republican Guard.

Mr. Bush spent his day making what the White House said were diplomatic calls to
prepare for the Azores meeting, which the administration has billed as a final
chance to bring a deeply divided United Nations together on an ultimatum that
Mr. Hussein disarm. The United States, Britain and Spain offered a draft
Security Council resolution that would give Mr. Hussein a deadline of Monday to
disarm or face an attack, but so far the only other nation on the 15-member
Security Council to openly support it has been Bulgaria.

This morning, Mr. Bush spoke for at least the fifth time this week to his
closest ally, Mr. Blair. He also spoke to Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of
Italy, who supports the administration on Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (89%); ARMS CONTROL
& DISARMAMENT (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
IRAQ WAR (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); ANNIVERSARIES (73%); FOREIGN POLICY
(72%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (65%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  IRAQ-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES,
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (59%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (57%)
;UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL (UN)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%); MOHAMED ELBARADEI (78%); TONY BLAIR (65%)
BUMILLER, ELISABETH; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); HUSSEIN,
UDAY; HUSSEIN, QUSAY; BLAIR, TONY (PRIME MIN); AZNAR, JOSE MARIA (PRIME MIN);
BLIX, HANS; ELBARADEI, MOHAMED (DIR GEN); WALLACE, WILLIAM S (LT GEN)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); FRANCE (91%);
SPAIN (87%); GERMANY (79%); PORTUGAL (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  GREAT BRITAIN;  SPAIN;  FRANCE;  RUSSIA;  GERMANY;  BAGHDAD
(IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             528 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: South Africa: A Plot To Kill Mandela?

BYLINE:  By Ginger Thompson (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 130 words


A group of white right-wing South Africans who face many charges of terrorism
and treason were accused yesterday of plotting to assassinate former President
Nelson Mandela. Paul Fick, a prosecutor, told reporters that 23 Afrikaner
members of an organization called Boeremag had planned to blow up Mr.

Mandela's car in October. In recent days, the police reported that Boeremag was
still intent on violently overthrowing South Africa's black-led government. The
group was blamed last year for planting several bombs, including nine in the
black township of Soweto, which killed one person and prompted fears of a mass
racial backlash. A lawyer for 13 of the accused told reporters that his clients'
human rights had been "grossly violated" by the police.   Ginger Thompson (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSASSINATION (92%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
TREASON (90%); BOMBINGS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); LAWYERS (86%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICS (72%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  ASSASSINATIONS AND
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  FRINGE GROUPS AND MOVEMENTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: BOEREMAG (SOUTH AFRICAN FRINGE GROUP)

PERSON: NELSON MANDELA (92%) THOMPSON, GINGER; MANDELA, NELSON; FRIK, PAUL

COUNTRY: SOUTH AFRICA (96%); AFRICA (88%)

REGION: SOUTH AFRICA;  SOWETO (SOUTH AFRICA)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             533 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Kabul Journal;
The Afghan Elvis 'Lives' 24 Years After His Death

BYLINE:   By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 964 words

DATELINE: KABUL, March 15


The Afghan Elvis lives.

Much like the real Elvis, Ahmad Zahir, Afghanistan's most beloved pop musician,
has long been dead -- 24 years this June.

But also like the real Elvis, to whom, with his black hair, sideburns and
wide-collared shirts, he bore passing resemblance, his popularity has endured,
his legend magnified.

The other day, four men sat by his grave, ruminating on his life and music. "Any
time I have free, I come here," said Abdul Nassar, a 31-year-old pilot. "I love
his songs."

Graceland it wasn't, however. To start, the gravestone and the simple cement
monument that once stood over it had been blasted to pieces. Not long after the
Taliban seized Kabul in 1996, they reportedly took a tank to the grave after
rocket-propelled grenades failed to do the trick.

No surprise: the Taliban hated music; for many Afghans, Ahmad Zahir embodied it.
Before anyone else and, Afghans say, better than anyone since, he married
Western music with Afghan melodies and poems. He drove women wild. He gave
packed concerts. He liked to drink.

Eight Afghans have formed a committee to try to restore the grave. Through years
of struggle and exile, they said, the singer was their touchstone. Seyar Zafar,
a 35-year-old government official, said that he lived abroad for 15 years, and
every time he visited another expatriate Afghan family, Ahmad Zahir was crooning
in the background.

"He's still alive in the heart of many Afghans," Mr. Zafar said.

Even now, he and friends listen to Mr. Zahir's 22 albums and ponder their
meanings. The singer set great Persian poets like Rumi, Hafiz, Maulana Jami; the
Afghan poet Khalilullah Khalili; and traditional folkloric songs, to music. He
sang of love, pain and God. Never formally trained as a musician, he played the
accordion, the piano, the organ, and the guitar and he absorbed the Western
music spilling from radios in the 1960's and 70's. Some songs sound,
instrumentally at least, vaguely like the Beatles or surf music.

He recalls a freer prewar Afghanistan when girls could rush the stage to grab
his half-drunk soda, when women named a popular dress fabric "Hair of Ahmad
Zahir."

He also reflects an Afghanistan that was far less ethnically polarized than it
is today. An ethnic Pashtun who sang mostly in Dari, he won fans in all ethnic
groups.

"At that time there was not such a question -- we were Afghans," said Shah
Muhammad, a Kabul bookseller who regularly sold books, Shakespeare among them,
to Mr. Zahir.

Mr. Zahir's older sister, who goes by the name Zahira Zahir, left the country in
1975 and has since acquired some fame of her own. She runs a beauty shop in the
former Watergate Hotel and cuts President Bush's hair. He calls her Z.

She did not know anyone was trying to restore her brother's grave but was
pleased to hear it, she said in a phone interview. She has been engaged in her
own restoration project: raising funds, $200,000 so far, to rebuild her high
school in Kabul. She recently held a fund-raiser attended by Mr. Bush's father
-- she cut his hair, too, when he was president -- and mother.

She still misses her brother, who was already a huge star when she left
Afghanistan. Their father was well known himself -- the country's prime
minister, briefly, and a speaker of the house. But once he drove into a crowd
and found every man and woman shouting, "There goes Ahmad Zahir's father."

"I've been working for this country my whole life," she recalled him saying with
a laugh, "and now I'm known as Ahmad Zahir's father."

His son earned money easily but gave freely and is beloved for that here, too.

"He loved poor people," said Razaq Mamoun, 39, an editor at Radio Liberty, who
is among those seeking to restore his grave.

Mr. Mamoun and Mr. Zafar recounted one legend. The singer was heading out of
Kabul for a picnic with friends when they passed a beggar. Mr. Zahir gave him
all the food, and the party turned back.

In his compassion for the poor "he was a Sufi-style Muslim, a knight-style
hero," Mr. Muhammad said.

His family learned the depth of his charity after his death, his sister said. A
nomad told how he had rescued her son from illness, then provided her family
with food. A pharmacist told of the singer giving him proceeds from concerts to
pay for medicines for the poor.

Mr. Zahir died in 1979 on his 33rd birthday. He was ostensibly killed in a car
accident, but no one here believes there was anything accidental about it. Some
say he was murdered by the family of his first wife in revenge for her death;
after an unhappy marriage, he had been accused of her murder and briefly jailed.

Others say he refused to sing at the wedding of the Afghan Communist prime
minister's daughter and paid with his life. Mr. Muhammad subscribed to this
version but added the perhaps crucial detail that Mr. Zahir had chosen a song
that displeased the Communists by suggesting that Afghanistan was living in
slavery.

Zahira Zahir said the truth was simple and sordid. He was too independent for
the Communists. They lured him out of Kabul, then shot him in the head.

Fearing popular unrest, they ordered her father to sign a false document saying
his son had been killed in a car accident. Her father died two years later, a
broken man. "They killed him and destroyed my father," she said.

Schools in Kabul closed for his funeral. By the thousands, men, women, boys and
girls poured into the streets to follow his coffin.

Six months later, the Soviets invaded.

Men and women alike trekked to his grave until the Taliban arrived. Now, with
the Taliban departed, the men, at least, come again.

The spot sits on a slope with a view of a lake and snow-kissed mountains. The
committee working to restore the site took its name from a line in one of his
songs: "My grave is lying unknown along the way."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 3, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on March 20 about Ahmad Zahir, a performer known as the
Afghan Elvis, referred incorrectly to a rumor surrounding his death in a car
wreck 24 years ago -- that it was no accident but was set up by the family of
his wife, who blamed him for her death. The rumor involved his second wife; the
first one is still living. (A letter newly received by the writer from a reader
in Afghanistan pointed out the error.)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Grave of Ahmad Zahir in Sha-Shahid, Afghanistan. The monument
was destroyed during Taliban rule.; CD's recorded by Ahmad Zahir, whose style,
black hair, sideburns and wide-collared shirts gave him a passing resemblance to
Elvis Presley, are best sellers throughout Afghanistan. A shopkeeper in Kabul
carries a wide selection of them. (Photographs by Hiromi Yasui for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSIC (92%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); ARTISTS &
PERFORMERS (89%); MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (89%); POP & ROCK (89%); WRITERS (87%);
KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS (78%); FOLKLORE (76%); POETRY (72%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS
(71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%); BOOKSTORES (62%); ETHNICITY (60%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(60%); POLITICS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) MUSIC;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

COMPANY: WATERGATE HOTEL (50%)

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) WALDMAN, AMY; ZAHIR, AHMAD (D 1979); ZAHIR, ZAHIRA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             535 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Sri Lanka: Suspected Rebels Sink Boat

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 62 words


Suspected Tamil Tiger rebels sank a Chinese trawler, killing 18 crew members,
military officials said. The pre-dawn attack on the boat, apparently mistaken
for a Sri Lankan navy vessel, came as negotiators for the government and the
rebels wrapped up a sixth round of peace talks in Japan aimed at resolving their
19-year civil war. The rebel group denied involvement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
NAVAL VESSELS (90%); NAVIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%);
PEACE PROCESS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (93%) LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%); JAPAN (92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: SRI LANKA;  CHINA

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             537 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Much Freedom Is Too Much?

BYLINE:  By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1367 words


Steven Brill, the writer and entrepreneur, has a small suite of offices in
Rockefeller Center, and it takes a little negotiation with the security guards
on the ground floor to get up to see him. A picture ID, some scribbling on a log
that has been photocopied so many times the lines have blurred, a phone call,
the usual.

That security, however symbolic and ineffective, is a reaction to the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks, and Mr. Brill's new book, "After: How America Confronted the
September 12 Era" published by Simon & Schuster, means to take stock of which
reactions make sense, which do not, what else ought to be done and at what cost
to privacy and liberty. In the book, he calls for a "a recalibration between
freedomand security."

He told a visitor that after the first suicide bombing in New York, which he
said is inevitable, people will look back with nostalgia on the rudimentary
security now guarding major buildings.

"You'll be standing on the sidewalk, and they'll be going through your bags," he
said. "It will be a different country."

Mr. Brill drank a can of Tab early in the morning in his messy, worked-in
office. He was flanked by a rack of magazines. He founded two of them, The
American Lawyer, which transformed the legal industry, and Brill's Content, a
mass-market journalism review. He sold the first and shut the second.

His other great creation, Court TV, now sold, is not obviously memorialized, but
it, too, is a looming presence.

Mr. Brill said it came up indirectly in conversations with Attorney General John
Ashcroft about where and how accused terrorists should be detained or tried.

"He said several times to me that he doesn't want to turn this into O. J.-TV,"
Mr. Brill said, referring to Court TV's coverage of the O. J. Simpson murder
trial. "Which made me feel really good."

In "After," Mr. Brill says that the department's lawyers were not particularly
diligent in allowing people detained by the Immigration and Naturalization
Service to obtain lawyers. "Let's not make it so they can get Johnnie Cochran on
the phone," a government lawyer said in a meeting weeks after the attacks.

Mr. Brill never stopped reporting and writing over the years, even as he built
and disbanded small media empires. His early pieces appeared in New York and
Esquire; his book on the Teamsters was a best seller; he wrote for The American
Lawyer throughout his ownership; and he kicked off Brill's Content with a bang,
with an article centered on an interview with Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater
independent counsel.

Just after Sept. 11, Mr. Brill was hunting around for the next thing, and that
thing did not seem to be a business deal.

"When 9/11 happened," he said, "it was no longer a matter of money. I had an
intense curiosity about this story."

The resulting book, which chronicles the nation's reactions to the attacks from
the perspectives of a score of people affected by them in various ways, is
ambitiously and sometimes frustratingly panoramic. Parts of it are familiar;
others, esoteric.

But Mr. Brill has done detailed fresh reporting and much hard thinking about how
the nation should rebalance its commitments to liberty and security.

He said his conclusions at times sometimes surprised him. He has been, he said,
a First Amendment absolutist and a longtime supporter and sometime member of the
American Civil Liberties Union.

"The terms of the debate have changed," he said. "It's not as though people had
new arguments. It's as though someone has taken an eyedropper and changed the
color of the background."

Now, he says, he supports risk profiling and a national identification card.

Before Sept. 11, he said, if anyone had told him the government wanted to
establish a system for people to have identification cards and to screen
citizens to make sure they were trustworthy, he would have said that it sounded
like some Iron Curtain country scheme. "But today I believe strongly that we
need for the government to help the private sector establish such cards," he
said, "so that people who want to have them could apply to a private company
that would be strictly regulated by the government."

His views on government searches and surveillance have changed, too. "Prior to
Sept. 11, I hated the idea of any kind of shortcuts around the Fourth
Amendmentfor anyone," he said. "Now I think Ashcroft was right that we need to
expand the idea of special national security searches and surveillance to
include more than just foreign agents."

He added that these government powers should be subject to time limits, court
supervision and Congressional oversight.

The book depicts debates within the A.C.L.U. soon after the Sept. 11 attacks, in
which some members continued to object to the use of metal detectors at airports
on constitutional grounds.

"A lot of their arguments are intellectually bankrupt," Mr. Brill now says of
the A.C.L.U., even as he notes his admiration for its executive director,
Anthony Romero, and the difficult job he has in satisfying the group's many
constituencies.

Mr. Brill obtained unusual access to many of the leading figures in the
government, and Tom Ridge in particular receives a thoroughly sympathetic
portrayal. But Mr. Brill said there was no necessary link between access and
favorable treatment.

"I got as much access at the Justice Department as I did as the Department of
Homeland Security," he said. "I got as much access at the I.N.S. as I wanted.
That place is so pathetic, so terrible, that it gives the lie to the theory that
the more access you give, the more sympathetic your hearing."

Mr. Brill said that the case of Jose Padilla, an American arrested at the
airport in Chicago and accused of planning to set off a so-called "dirty" bomb,
is the best case in which to question the government's tactics and principles.
Mr. Padilla has been designated an enemy combatant by President Bush, and the
government says he may be held incommunicado, without charges or a trial,
indefinitely.

A federal judge in New York has ordered that Mr. Padilla be allowed to consult
with a lawyer, a ruling to which the government has vehemently objected.

"It's unadorned of any mitigation from the government perspective," Mr. Brill
said of the Padilla case.

More broadly, he said: "I've never heard the administration or anyone else
present an intelligent, coherent and digestible structure for why Timothy
McVeigh is not an enemy combatant. How is a member of the Ku Klux Klan who does
a bombing of a black school not an enemy combatant? But Padilla is an enemy
combatant and Timothy McVeigh is not an enemy combatant. Someone needs to draw a
map for us of this spectrum of who is an enemy combatant."

The subject engaged him, and he returned to it.

"Richard Reid," he said, picking another example. "Is there ever a better case
for any enemy combatant? He's trying to light a bomb on an airplane." But Mr.
Ashcroft wanted to keep the case, he continued, so that Justice Department
prosecutors could claim victory in the federal courts.

Mr. Brill does not doubt Mr. Ashcroft's sincerity.

"I don't think this is John Mitchell trying to drum John Lennon out of the
country because he doesn't like his politics," he said.

But he does have doubts about Mr. Ashcroft's subtlety and acumen.

"Ashcroft himself wasn't, as he put it, into the legal arcana," Mr. Brill said.
"I don't think he likes the legal process. I don't think he likes lawyers."

At the heart of Mr. Brill's conclusions is what he knows about the database
profiling that is routine in the marketing world but in some cases not lawful
for government agencies. That sort of profiling he calls both acceptable and
sensible.

"Are we a freer country if they search everyone or anyone who is not a citizen
or has committed a felony?" he asked. "Part of recalibration is using a
combination of technology and common sense. We as citizens are freer ifwe change
the way we think about liberty. We should deal with people differently based on
their risk profiles."

"The fundamental issue," he continued, "is that a country that treasures privacy
and the ability to tell the government to leave me alone is a society that
allows people to be let alone and live among us and commit suicidal terrorist
acts."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: AFTER: HOW AMERICA CONFRONTED THE SEPTEMBER 12 ERA (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Steven Brill, the publisher, has written a book on new,
post-9/11 security needs. (James Estrin/The New York Times)(pg. D7); The new
business-as-usual? Police officers became a visible presence in New York subways
in the weeks after the World Trade Center attack. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York
Times)(pg. D9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (89%); LITERATURE (78%); JOURNALISM
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); HIJACKING (76%); BOMBINGS (71%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (64%); IMMIGRATION (60%);
MURDER (56%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  PRIVACY

COMPANY: SIMON & SCHUSTER INC (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (57%)

PERSON: LIPTAK, ADAM; BRILL, STEVEN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             550 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Struggle for Gay Rights

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 132 words


To the Editor:

"The Rights of Gay Americans" (editorial, March 27) tells the story of Thomas
McLaughlin, a 14-year-old who has been harassed by his school because he is gay.

My heart goes out to him. Although much progress has been made in the struggle
for gay rights since 1959, when, in my final semester of college, I was expelled
because of a gay relationship with another student, the fight for dignity and
equal protection under the law continues.

My wish is that the young Mr. McLaughlin suffer none of the confusion and
self-loathing I experienced then.

That the fear, irrationality and ignorance of those dark ages should still be
manifest in the laws of Texas and elsewhere is a continuing travesty in our
so-called free and equal society.

PETER COFFEEN
Norfolk, Conn., March 27, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EQUAL PROTECTION (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%) HOMOSEXUALITY;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: COFFEEN, PETER

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

REGION: TEXAS

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             553 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 2, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: China: Dissatisfaction Over Rights Report

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 54 words


The government expressed "strong dissatisfaction" over a State Department report
that accused it of serious human rights abuses and said Washington was meddling.
A Chinese Foreign Ministry official said, "We would like to use the opportunity
to ask the United States not to interfere in other people's internal affairs."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); ASIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             557 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Beyond Iraq;
Paramilitaries on the March

BYLINE:  By SANIL DASGUPTA;  Sunil Dasgupta, a research associate at the
Brookings Institution, has just completed a study of global paramilitary forces.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 913 words


PARAMILITARY forces are linked to some of the deadliest crimes of recent
history. The ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and Kosovo was largely carried out by
Serb paramilitary forces, not the regular military. Hutu militias, known as the
Interahamwe, were responsible for the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. In Indonesia,
West Timorese paramilitaries and government-organized youth squads ledthe "dirty
wars" against the separatists of East Timor.

In the first two weeks of the war in Iraq, Iraqi paramilitary fighters, not
Republican Guards or other formal military units, were responsible for most of
the coalition casualties in combat.

These groups, the Saddam Fedayeen and Baath Party militias, like paramilitary
forces everywhere, operate outside the regular military structures and serve to
provide internal security for the regime that allowed their formation.

While Pentagon officials dismiss paramilitaries as a nuisance and a perversion
of the rules of war, paramilitary forces are increasing the world over and will
continue to pose challenges to American interests.

In 2002, from one-third to one-half of the total military manpower in China,
Russia and India -- the largest non-Western military powers in the world -- was
in paramilitary organizations. A report on the internal use of force by the East
West Center, a research organization, found that, from 1975 to 1996, the ratio
of government troops to the population rose 29 percent in Thailand, 42 percent
in Burma, 63 percent in China, 64 percent in Pakistan and 71 percent in India.

Though paramilitaries are smaller than regular armies, their rapid growth and
rising status make them more important than the sum of their numbers. The
countries with the largest paramilitaries -- including China, India, Russia,
Pakistan, Indonesia, North Korea and Algeria -- have doubled and tripled their
relative importance (as a percentage of total military strength) in the last 30
years.

Paramilitaries, which grew out of the security and economic conditions in the
developing world, were in many cases intended to be parallel military forces
outside the military or police command to protect regimes from internal threats
like separatist rebellions. They include constabulary forces, like the People's
Armed Police of China, a large, uniformed group developed as the first line of
defense against civil unrest like that in Tiananmen Square in 1989. In some
cases, paramilitaries are fighting the government, as in Colombia, where the
United Self-Defense Forces emerged as local militias to guard farmers against
leftist guerrillas but now control much of the drug trade.

Unlike regular militaries, which are built by training diverse recruits to work
together, paramilitaries are drawn from politically reliable groups, creating
ethnically or tribally based units. For example, the Saddam Fedayeen drew
primarily on Sunnis from central Iraq.

The most dangerous type of paramilitary organization is the security
intelligence agency, in which power is concentrated in few hands. Death squads,
for example, are usually located within a country's security intelligence
agencies. In Egypt, the General Intelligence Agency conducted a brutal campaign
against Islamists in that country, eventually forcing many of them to move to
Sudan and Afghanistan.

Since their primary function is internal security, paramilitaries are adaptable.
The fedayeen in Iraq, for example, have discarded uniforms, hidden among the
civilian population, attacked the rear or ambushed coalition troops, sometimes
luring them with white flags of surrender. As dispersed forces, the fedayeen
could survive long after the lines of Iraqi military command have been
disrupted.

Though many paramilitary forces resemble guerrilla warriors, they are more
potent than guerrillas because of their access to the state's resources. This
also links their fate directly to the regime's. The independence of East Timor,
for example, was most forcefully resisted by paramilitaries in the former
Indonesian province.

Under dictatorships, paramilitaries are often so identified with the
government's oppressive actions that the chances of clemency under a new
government are likely limited. This can often undermine plans of a peaceful
change.

In Brazil, for example, attempts to democratize in 1981 were undermined by the
actions of the security intelligence agency, which had controlled many members
of death squads in the 1970's. By contrast, South Africa, under the leadership
of the African National Congress, agreed not to prosecute members of the
apartheid regime's "dirty warriors" to ensure a peaceful transfer of power.

The ruthless effectiveness, tactical agility and continued survival of
paramilitaries contrast with the weak militaries in many developing nations.

The effectiveness of paramilitaries also comes from the changed world in which
wars are waged. New constraints on some shaky regimes -- like human rights
requirements -- have driven the use of force underground.

In Iraq, the fedayeen and other paramilitary troops will eventually be defeated,
but not without cost. If they inflict enough casualties and cause enough
trouble, the Americans in charge of occupying Iraq might be lured into
establishing truces with defecting elements of the regime. In Afghanistan, the
effort to reduce fighting through local truces with warlords is one obstacle to
stabilizing the country.

Clearly, disarming paramilitary forces is as much a political task as a military
one.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The fedayeen, shrouded for death,marched in Baghdad last month.
(Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (97%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); IRAQ WAR (77%); NEWS BRIEFS
(74%); GENOCIDE (73%); POPULATION GROWTH (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (72%); LAW OF WAR (72%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (65%); ECONOMIC NEWS (62%);
RIOTS (61%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: EAST-WEST CENTER (55%)

PERSON: DASGUPTA, SANIL

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); CHINA (94%); INDONESIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);
INDIA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (93%); RWANDA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); TIMOR-LESTE (92%);
SERBIA (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); COLOMBIA (79%);
EGYPT (79%); THAILAND (74%)

REGION: IRAQ;  CHINA;  INDIA;  ALGERIA;  NORTH KOREA;  INDONESIA;  PAKISTAN;
RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             558 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Philosopher of Islamic Terror

SECTION: Section 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 144 words


Berman says the Qaeda terrorists speak insanely of deep things (the sacred, the
spiritual), so the antiterrorists had better speak sanely of equally deep
things. What nonsense! We have no obligation to speak of "deep things," and any
debate we may have with the Islamists will be about freedom, law and human
rights, not something that would legitimize terrorism, religious intolerance and
the virtual enslavement of women.

We Americans have a perfect right to be philosophically shallow, materialistic,
antireligious and amoral, as long as we obey the law and respect the rights of
others. When religious fanatics and terrorists (whether here or abroad) threaten
to limit or deny our rights and freedoms, we will fight in the courts and we
will fight on the battlefields -- to the death, if necessary, to protect these
rights.

Michael J. Gorman
Whitestone, N.Y.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); RELIGION (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (88%); COUNTERTERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%) ISLAM;
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GORMAN, MICHAEL J; QUTB, SAYYID

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             566 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 9, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Reporter Killed in Iraq Was Known For Tenacity

BYLINE:  By ANDREW JACOBS

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 733 words


Despite the obvious perils of cycling in Manhattan, Julio A. Parrado knew there
was no better means of navigating the traffic-choked city than on a beat-up
three-speeder.

During the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center and the transportation
paralysis that followed, Mr. Parrado used it to zip between ground zero and his
Greenwich Village apartment, where day after day he typed out vivid accounts for
El Mundo, the Spanish-language newspaper that employed him. Ambitious,
adventurous and endlessly curious, Mr. Parrado, friends say, was perfectly
suited to the frantic pace of his adopted home.

That sense of adventure, and a strong belief in the role of journalists during
wartime, led Mr. Parrado to Iraq, where he was killed on Monday by a rocket that
struck an Army encampment outside Baghdad. Pentagon officials say the
surface-to-air missile, which killed three other people, including a German
journalist, was fired by Iraqi forces. Mr. Parrado, who had been embedded with
the Third Infantry Division, was 32.

In Spain, where his father is a well-known politician and a peace advocate, Mr.
Parrado's death has added more fuel to that country's widespread and strident
opposition to the war. In New York, the loss has simply left a mournful hole in
the vast circle of friends that Mr. Parrado had collected during his seven years
in the city.

"There's just this huge emptiness, there's no sense to it," said Idoya Noain, a
New York-based correspondent for El Periodico, another Spanish-language
newspaper.

Last night, dozens of his friends -- publicists, writers, bankers and human
rights advocates -- gathered at the apartment of a downstairs neighbor to
remember Mr. Parrado, an opera-loving, bar-hopping bon vivant who painted his
kitchen a fluorescent green and always faced bad news with a bemused grin.

Ms. Noain recalled the day last year when his bicycle wheel was stolen. A few
hours later, after he bought a replacement, the wheel was stolen again. "He just
laughed about it," she said. "Laughing was like a passion to him."

Mr. Parrado was also passionate about New York, and his zeal for the city's
political and economic life was reflected in his dispatches for El Mundo. In an
Internet posting to El Mundo readers, Mr. Parrado likened his arrival in New
York to a pilgrimage to Mecca. "To come here is almost a religious act," he
wrote. "You learn tolerance and respect."

Carlos Fresneda, 40, a colleague and friend, said Mr. Parrado thrived in New
York, although he missed the city of his birth, Cordoba, where his mother is a
deputy mayor. His father, Julio Anguita, is the former head of Spain's main
leftist party. In the months after the terrorist attack, Mr. Parrado seemed to
cross some invisible threshold, both personally and professionally, Mr. Fresneda
said. "He was like my little brother and I watched him evolve," he said.

When the Pentagon announced its policy of allowing reporters to travel with
military units, Mr. Parrado volunteered. Although friends and co-workers said he
was opposed to an American-led invasion of Iraq, Mr. Parrado thought he should
bear witness to the realties of war. He spent a week training at a Marine base
in Virginia, but when he learned that his newspaper had been passed over for a
slot, Mr. Parrado traveled to Washington, talked his way into the Pentagon and
managed to wangle a spot for himself and a colleague from a competing Spanish
daily.

With just two days before his departure, he scurried around New York trying to
find protective equipment. He bragged to friends that he had bought the last
Kevlar helmet in town, but he was unable to find a top-notch set of body armor.
For that reason, Mr. Parrado decided he would try to stay away from any
frontline action.

In Iraq, he spent most of his time with an Army medical unit. His accounts, all
of them published on El Mundo's front page, were unvarnished portrayals of
combat mayhem or the heroism of American medics trying to save Iraqi lives.

Ana Bueno, an editor for El Mundo's online edition, said she spoke to Mr.
Parrado three times the day of his death. American forces were making a foray
into one of Saddam Hussein's Baghdad palaces, but Mr. Parrado, she said, had
decided to remain at the Army encampment several miles outside the city.

"He thought it would be safer to stay back," she said. "But I guess you never
know in a war. You can find death everywhere."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Friends and co-workers met in Greenwich Village yesterday to
remember Julio A. Parrado, left, a reporter who was killed in Iraq this week
while covering the war for El Mundo, a Spanish-language newspaper. (Shannon
Stapleton for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (87%); CITY LIFE (78%);
CYCLING (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (76%); ARMIES (75%);
NEWS REPORTING (75%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (74%); RELIGION (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (60%) UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM;
NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: EL MUNDO (MADRID NEWSPAPER)

PERSON: JACOBS, ANDREW; PARRADO, JULIO ANGUITA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SPAIN (79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             567 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: NEWS ANALYSIS;
A High Point in 2 Decades of U.S. Might

BYLINE:  By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


The collapse of government authority in Baghdad, dramatized by the toppling of a
colossal statue of President Saddam Hussein, constitutes the high-water mark for
a new American determination to use the nation's military might to project its
power around the world.

The resurgence began in 1981 with the Reagan administration, which took office
with the humiliation of the Iranian hostage crisis looming large in the national
psyche. That had come to symbolize President Jimmy Carter's less robust approach
to foreign affairs, and Ronald Reagan campaigned against him on promises to
rebuild the military and pursue aggressive policies.

Since then, American troops have gone into full-fledged military action on four
continents, using increasingly sophisticated weapons and a wide variety of
tactics, usually but not invariably achieving their immediate goals in short
order.

American intervention has not been automatic; Washington did nothing much to
halt the slaughter in Rwanda and Burundi, for example. It has often been late,
as in trying to stay out of Bosnia until 1995.

It has occasionally come to grief, as in Somalia in 1993. More often, though, it
has succeeded, as in Grenada (1983), Panama (1989) and Kuwait (1991).

The norm, under three Republican presidents as well as a Democrat, has become
markedly active.

But projecting strength is not the same as making friends or enhancing national
security.

The standing of the United States has perhaps never been lower among Islamic
nations and nations with restive Islamic minorities than it is today. American
esteem has also fallen across much of Europe.

The Iraqi war itself, American alliances with Arabgovernments considered corrupt
or tyrannical by their own people, strong American backing for Israel and
perceived American indifference to the Palestinian cause have all combined to
tarnish the American image, most importantly in the Middle East.

Triumph in Iraq, if the whole nation goes the way of Basra and Baghdad, would
mark the second important American victory in a row, after Afghanistan. But
success there, like that in the first gulf war, was incomplete; the terrorist
leader Osama bin Laden apparently remains at large, either in Afghanistan or
elsewhere, as did Mr. Hussein after the powerful allied advance in the first
gulf war was halted shy of the Iraqi heartland.

No one knows Mr. Hussein's current whereabouts, and allied forces have found no
conclusive evidence of chemical or biological weapons.

It may well be that sweeping, unqualified victory is a thing of the past, except
in minuscule conflicts, like the one in Grenada. Not since Alfred Eisenstadt
documented the end of World War II with his iconic shot of a sailor locking a
nurse in extravagant embrace in Times Square has the United States enjoyed a
similar catharsis.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld suggested today that victory in Iraq had
the potential to reshape "the future of the region," bringing democracy to
countries that have never known it. That would no doubt diminish the prospects
of another terrorist attack like those of Sept. 11, 2001, which has always been
an underlying if seldom spoken motive for this war.

On the other hand, a hardening of Islamic and Arab resentment into hatred could
foster rather than retard terrorism. Much will depend on how Iraq's future
unfolds and whether, as Lord Owen, the former British foreign secretary, argued
recently, this spring's events lead to "a real rearranging of the diplomatic
furniture in the Middle East" and progress on a Palestinian state.

The equation will also be affected by what Washington does next. Hawks in the
Bush administration have suggested that a change of government in Syria should
be next on the agenda, and James Woolsey, a former director of central
intelligence, said last week that the fighting in Iraq was merely the first
episode of World War IV (the cold war having been World War III).

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria said last week, "We will not wait to be the
next coalition target."

Victory in Iraq would no doubt embolden those who favor attacks on other
countries that they suspect of aiding terrorists. But Mr. Bush, facing a
campaign next year with the job of nation-building in Iraq incomplete, may be
loath to ride the tiger too far, lest he get lost in the jungle.

Today's riveting spectacle in one of Baghdad's principal squares, witnessed on
television around the world, no doubt including Damascus, was interpreted in
different ways in different places. Here in the United States, the statue's fall
was seen as conclusive evidence, in Mr. Rumsfeld's words, that "the mood in the
country is, in fact, tipping," with Iraqis finally feeling free to show their
hatred of Mr. Hussein.

Many Americans drew a parallel to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse
of communist states.

On Arabic-language television channels, however, commentators made much of the
fact that it was not Iraqis but American marines, using a cable attached to a
tank-recovery vehicle, who actually brought down the big statue. Hoping not to
send a politically clumsy signal, the marines quickly stowed the American flag
they unfurled at first and replaced it with an old Iraqi flag.

The central question, often posed,has still not been fully answered: How will
most Iraqis see the American troops in their midst -- the troops who, at least
for a while, will have to maintain order, arrest looters and prevent revenge
killings? Will they be considered liberators or intruders?

Some of the Iraqis in the streets today were jubilant. Some dragged the head of
the shattered statue through the streets, which provided pictures that must have
gratified the White House. (Photographs of Mr. Hussein himself, strung up by the
heels like the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini in the final months of World
War II, would have been even more welcome.)

But other Iraqis expressed doubts about how they would fare under the allies.
However much they disliked Mr. Hussein's government, however grateful they may
be for its apparent demise, many Iraqis resent America's Middle East policies as
much as other Muslims do.

The danger remains that Baghdad or the entire country could fall into "a
downward spiral of violence," as Joseph C. Wilson 4th, who was deputy chief of
mission in Iraq in the days immediately before the first gulf war, warned this
morning on CNN.

Somehow -- through the distribution of aid, through a hundred wise decisions and
a thousand generous gestures -- the United States must change minds in the
months ahead. The most experienced hands in Washington are betting that it will
be a harder job, and a longer one, than the military campaign now near an end.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); DESERT STORM (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
RELIGION (86%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (77%);
WORLD WAR II (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); TERRORISM
(76%); ETHICS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); POLITICS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); HOSTAGE TAKING (71%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (70%);
AL-QAEDA (69%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (66%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;
BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ISLAM;  PALESTINIANS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  ETHICS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (55%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (55%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); JIMMY CARTER (58%); OSAMA BIN
LADEN (50%) APPLE, R W JR; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPE (92%); RWANDA
(79%); BURUNDI (79%); SOMALIA (79%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  BAGHDAD (IRAQ);  MIDDLE EAST;  ISRAEL;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             582 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 16, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Russia: Writer-Turned-Radical-Chic-Politician Sentenced

BYLINE:  By Michael Wines (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 100 words


A regional court in Saratov sentenced Eduard Limonov, a onetime Soviet dissident
poet who came to lead Russia's ultra-nationalist National Bolshevik Party, to
four years in prison on charges of buying weapons in 2001 to establish an armed
group and conduct a terrorist attack.

The court dropped accusations of a plot to overthrow the Russian government. Mr.
Limonov was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1974 and briefly became a literary
star in New York before moving to Paris and, in 1994, back to Moscow. His trial
has been a cause celebre among Russian writers and artists.   Michael Wines
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); WRITERS (90%); POLITICS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
COUPS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (85%); TERRORISM (84%)
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  TERRORISM;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: WINES, MICHAEL; LIMONOV, EDUARD

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES (78%)

REGION: RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             592 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2003 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: BRUTALITY;
Iraqis Confront Memories in a Place of Torture

BYLINE:   By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1259 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 20


Mr. al-Masawi, a 43-year-old jeweler, came back to the place of his torture.

He drove into the parking lot of Al Hakemiya, an Iraqi interrogation center in
the capital here, stepped from his car and ran his hands along its walls. He
went to the room where his arms had been nearly wrenched from their sockets. To
the place where he had been hung from the ceiling. To the basement where his
body had jolted and jumped to currents of electricity.

"Here it is," Mr. Masawi said, standing before a small darkened room with a
heavy metal door. "My cell. No. 36."

Mr. Masawi, who declined to give his first name, is one among thousands of
Iraqis who suffered the most medieval punishments at the hands of Saddam
Hussein's henchmen, and Al Hakemiya is but one of the many places where the
suffering took place.

Across the country, the collapse of the Hussein government and the unmasking of
intelligence service centers like Al Hakemiya is bringing out scores of people
like Mr. Masawi, who have returned in freedom to the places of their captivity.
They are engaging in a great national catharsis, confronting the black heart of
Mr. Hussein's rule and proclaiming its depravity for everyone to see.

The spectacle is both ghoulish and affirming, men reliving the moments of their
degradation and quieting storms within themselves.

"They did humiliating things to me," said Mr. Masawi after viewing his cell
during the visit on Saturday. "I needed to come and see the place."

By all accounts, Al Hakemiya was a way station, a place where suspects were
worked over and squeezed for information, and sometimes for cash, and then moved
to more permanent quarters. Mr. Masawi, for instance, spent five months here
after being arrested on what he says were trumped-up smuggling charges. He was
then shipped off to another Baghdad prison, where he spent five years before
being released last fall.

Yet for all the grim business that was conducted here, Al Hakemiya exudes an
aura of bureaucracy. From the outside, it is squat and brown, indistinguishable
from the buildings nearby. Inside, its individual offices seem as benign as
those of an insurance adjuster.

One must look closer. Scattered about the floor is official stationery that says
Iraqi Intelligence Service with its signature logo, a large, black-winged eagle.
In one room, there is a small photograph of an unhappy-looking man, with a white
beard and striped shirt, and a large placard bearing his prisoner number: 792.

Upstairs, accessible by a back stairway only, are about 100 individual cells,
dark and windowless, stinking of urine. In one sits a plate of half-eaten food,
biscuits and rice, still resting on a green plastic tray. At the end of a
hallway lies a pile of bindings and blindfolds.

An elevator, the only one in the place, leads to the basement and more cells.
There are shackles in one room, long cables in another. On another floor there
is a small operating room, where some former prisoners said doctors harvested
the organs of those who did not survive.

Finally, out back, stand three portable morgues, metal buildings the size of
tool sheds, with freezer units attached. Inside one are six aluminum trays, each
the length of a body.

In the looted chaos of the building, with desks overturned and windows smashed,
it seemed impossible to piece together a history here. What clarity remained was
provided by the memories.

Mr. Masawi's seemed a typical case, a convoluted tale that mixed extortion and
brutality, with much unexplained. Mr. Masawi spoke in a jittery voice, like many
of those who visited here, and gave a simple explanation for declining to
provide his first name.

"I have enemies," he said.

In the summer of 1997, Mr. Masawi said, he was arrested for illegally shipping
gold out of the country. It was a false charge, he said, based on an accusation
made by an old rival.

On the night of his arrest, Mr. Masawi said, he was brought here, blindfolded
and then repeatedly beaten. He spent three months in solitary confinement, in a
room, he said, that was painted red. Men on the other side of his blindfold
interrogated him about his business practices, tortured him with electricity and
asked him to sign a confession.

"I did not see their faces, but I will never forget the sound of their voices,"
he said.

Until the end, there had been no accusation of political activity; indeed, given
the charge, Mr. Masawi wondered why he had been brought to an intelligence
center at all. When he refused to sign the confession, he said, things began to
change.

"They told me that if I did not confess to smuggling, then they would accuse me
of organizing an antigovernment group," he said. "That charge would be more
severe. So I signed."

Mr. Masawi, like many of the former prisoners who have returned here, talked
little about his moments of most excruciating pain.

But others spoke through their expressions. One man put his hands behind his
back and lifted them upward -- hung from the ceiling, he suggested, in an
especially painful way. Another man took his fingers, meant to stand for
electrical wires, and placed them on his genitals.

"Being here gives me a doomed feeling," Mr. Masawi said.

At one point along the way, Mr. Masawi said, his predicament took another
unexpected turn. His interrogators asked him for money.

"They told me if I paid them a bribe, they would let me go," he said.

Mr. Maswai's claim was echoed many times by other returnees here, and by some of
the documents left behind. The picture that emerged of the intelligence service
here was of a kind of sadistic shakedown operation, where agents took prisoners
to satisfy their masters but extracted money to satisfy themselves.

Other men returning here said the interrogators had gone even further, demanding
sex with female relatives when no money could be paid. In most cases, the
prisoners said, bribes were paid, women were offered, but the prisoner remained
in jail.

"My family paid them everything we had, $25,000, and still they did not release
me," Mr. Masawi said.

Documents left behind suggest that the interrogation center was a money-making
enterprise. One stack of documents, for instance, included receipts for Iraqi
dinars received from a man named Majed Jawad. One of them read, "Receipt of
amounts collected for the government." Another document detailed the stocks
issued in the name of an Iraqi petroleum company owned by the same man.

Mr. Masawi said he finally left prison for good last October, during an amnesty
declared by Mr. Hussein. Mr. Masawi returned not only to look at Al Hakemiya as
a free man, but also as one seeking revenge. He said he had a good idea of the
identity of the person who made the accusation to the police, but he wanted to
sift through the files to make sure. So far, he said, he had found nothing.

Others returning here came looking for answers of another sort. One man, a
veterinarian named Ahmed Jabbar, came seeking information that might reveal the
fate of seven of his cousins, all disappeared.

"One of them is Hassan, on my mother's side," Dr. Jabbar said. "One of them is
Jaffar."

Another man, who called himself Abu Abbas, came looking for the man who tortured
him.

"When I see him, I'll know what do so with him," he said.

So strong is the pull of Al Hakemiya that it has drawn not only the jailed back
to its corridors, but also the jailers.

Standing amid the ransacked ruins of the place, Imad Muhammad, a prison guard
supervisor in the 1990's, approached a visitor and offered his help.

"Would you like to see where the prisoners were tortured?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 22, 2003



CORRECTION: A picture caption yesterday about Iraqis who revisited a place where
torture was carried out under Saddam Hussein reversed the references to two
photos. It was the one below that showed former inmates walking into the site;
the one above showed a former inmate identifed as Mr. Masawi.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Above, former inmates revisited Al Hakemiya, an interrogation
center in Baghdad. The building has been looted, and its floors are littered
with official intelligence service papers. Mr. al-Masawi, bottom, another former
inmate, also explored the building. He said he was held for five months at the
center after being arrested on what he said were trumped-up theft charges.
(Photographs by James Hill for The New York Times)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); CORRECTIONS (85%); PARKING
SPACES & FACILITIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%);
SMUGGLING (76%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (74%); POLITICS (74%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (72%); ARRESTS (63%); TERRORISM (59%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL
AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  TERRORISM;  PRISONS AND PRISONERS;  TORTURE;  AL HAKEMIYA
(BAGHDAD);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICAL PRISONERS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); FILKINS, DEXTER

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             593 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Cracks Down on Mobsters and War-Crime Suspects

BYLINE:  By PETER S. GREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, April 18


Almost every day, the evening news here shows Serbian officials announcing more
arrests of gangsters and criminals, with the police confiscating arms and
counterfeit cash, and often arresting a complicitous policeman or two.

A month after Serbia's 50-year-old reformist prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, was
assassinated, the government is attacking the crime gangs and accused war
criminals who held this country of 7.5 million people in their thrall, worked
hand in glove with the police and secret services and were the backbone of
Slobodan Milosevic's murderous decade of dictatorship.

Under a state of emergency imposed since the assassination of Mr. Djindjic on
March 12, the police have questioned more than 7,000 people, and more than 2,000
suspected members of what Serbs like to call the mafia are now in prisons.

Milorad Lukovic, who is believed to lead the Zemun crime clan and is suspected
of ordering the assassination of Mr. Djindjic, is on the run. Dusan Spasojevic
and Mile Lukovic, two other suspected Zemun clan leaders, were killed by the
police in a shootout last month.

The dragnet has also swept up some of the most notorious figures from the
Milosevic era, including top army and security officials and others accused of
war crimes.

"Every state has its mafia," Justice Minister Vladan Batic said in an interview,
"but we had the problem in Serbia that the mafia wanted to have its own state."

Dismantling the mafia state will not be easy. Mr. Lukovic, better known as
Legija, was not only the head of Belgrade's most powerful crime group, he was
also a former leader of the Red Berets, which began life as a paramilitary band
that carried out ethnic cleansing and murder for Mr. Milosevic, and became an
official special forces unit. The Red Berets' deputy chief, Zvezdan Jovanovic,
who was arrested two weeks after the killing, has confessed to shooting Mr.
Djindjic.

The new prime minister, Zoran Zivkovic, recently asked his cabinet why some
ministers had been seen in the company of known mobsters. And earlier this week,
the police arrested two close allies of Vojislav Kostunica, Mr. Milosevic's
successor and Yugoslavia's first democratically elected president, accusing them
of links to Mr. Djindjic's killers.

Critics say that focusing on organized crime distracts the public from Serbia's
real problem -- the continued impunity of those accused of war crimes. Not a
single senior official of the Milosevic era has been tried in Serbia for war
crimes, and most observers say that Mr. Djindjic was killed not because he
wanted to crack down on mobsters, but because he was ready to send more war
crimes suspects to face trial at the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia in The Hague.

"Zoran Djindjic was not killed by organized criminals, but by war criminals,"
said Veran Matic, the editor in chief of B 92, an independent radio station in
Belgrade. The problem, he said, was that after the violent protests that ousted
Mr. Milosevic and confirmed Mr. Kostunica's election on Oct. 5, 2000, the war
crimes suspects were spared and the authorities let their longtime civilian
criminal activities continue.

Mr. Kostunica and Mr. Djindjic both apparently worked with the Red Berets and
other war crimes suspects to oust Mr. Milosevic and avoid a potential civil war.

Mr. Kostunica, who kept Milosevic allies in place after taking power, blamed
what he called "the Hague factor" for Mr. Djindjic's death.

"Different sorts of promises might have been given to these people who were
expected to be indicted than the promises made to The Hague itself," Mr.
Kostunica said in an interview.

Critics of the government -- and even some of its supporters -- also worry that
the current crackdown is becoming a political vendetta, focusing on Mr.
Kostunica, who was Mr. Djindjic's strongest political rival and who fell out
with him over cooperation with The Hague. Mr. Djindjic's advisers say that today
Mr. Kostunica's brand of patriotism is more an apology for war crimes.

The government has pledged to lift the state of emergency by Friday, but has
also moved to toughen some crime-fighting laws. Parliament has passed a package
of laws to lengthen prison terms and let the police keep mob suspects in custody
for 60 days without pressing charges.

"Arresting 7,000 people can't simply be in connection with the killing of the
prime minister and the so-called Zemun clan," said Natasa Kandic, a human rights
lawyer. "I support the struggle against criminals, but it must be based on the
law."

The real problem, though, will be persuading Serbs to face up to the war crimes
committed in their name. So far, the government has painted the deportations of
war crimes suspects as a necessary evil. Mr. Milosevic, for instance, was sent
to The Hague by Mr. Djindjic only when American officials threatened to withhold
$30 million in aid.

"All those people who were indicted," said Toma Fila, a lawyer who once
represented Mr. Milosevic, "the people here think they were betrayed and sold
out."

"Unless people here understand that it is necessary and normal," for war
criminals to face justice, he added, "nothing will be solved."



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ORGANIZED CRIME (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ARRESTS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%);
ARMIES (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); SHOOTINGS (76%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); COUNTERFEITING (73%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (72%); POLITICS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); ARMED FORCES (66%); MURDER (58%); GANGS (58%) CRIME AND
CRIMINALS;  ORGANIZED CRIME;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ASSASSINATIONS AND
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS

PERSON: GREEN, PETER S; DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (50%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             608 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A U.S. Accord With Terrorists

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 100 words


To the Editor:

According to "Americans Arrest Would-Be Leader of Iraq's Capital" (front page,
April 28), the Bush administration "hopes to end up with a pro-American
government in Baghdad." Such hopes, if put into action (and Muhammad Mohsen
Zobeidi's arrest suggests such action), surely prove disingenuous the
administration's insistence that the Iraqis be allowed to elect their own
government democratically, since, by definition, a democratic election must
allow for the possibility that the Iraqis could also elect a neutral or even an
anti-American government.

FRED NOLLAN
Seattle, April 29, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); TERRORISM (86%); POLITICS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
ELECTIONS

PERSON: NOLLAN, FRED; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); ZOBEIDI, MUHAMMAD MOHSEN

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: IRAQ;  BAGHDAD (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             609 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: REVENGE;
Iraqi Says He Stalks and Kills Baath Party Men, With Toll at 12

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: NASIRIYA, Iraq, April 28


"Things have improved," the man said, now that Saddam Hussein is finally gone.
"I can sleep at night now.

"But I continue to kill people," he added. "I want to reach the number 20. Then
I will feel good that I have completed my duty. Twenty will feel good. But if I
kill more it will be even better."

The man, a tall, hard former Iraqi Army officer, did not seem happy talking like
this. But he did so on a recent day, in a hot room with many one-word answers
and a restrained sort of candor.

It was as a favor to an older brother to tell one story of revenge in a country
with perhaps hundreds of thousands of unsettled scores and a certain helpless
kind of rage left from Mr. Hussein's rule.

Several years ago, the man claims, he began assassinating members of Mr.
Hussein's ruling Baath Party in this city where he lives, and in nearby Shattra
in southern Iraq. It was, he said, a persistent and near-solitary vengeance in a
bloody exchange for the death of his oldest brother, an army major, executed in
1990.

He said he had killed seven men, starting with a local chief of the Baath Party,
by the time the United States military came this month.

Then Mr. Hussein fell. In nine days after that, the man claims, he killed
another five officials with prominent local positions in Mr. Hussein's Baath
Party, always on his own and always with the same gun.

He is not yet finished, he said.

"With the Americans in control, it's much easier for me," he said, slowly
fingering a strand of worry beads. "I feel safe now doing it because the
Americans will not hold you accountable for it."

"Of course," he said, "their presence is an opportunity. The more chaos there
is, the more opportunities there are."

His reluctance to go into detail made it impossible to verify his story in any
depth. Local authorities have registered several shootings and killings, but say
they have no proof that any of them was a revenge killing. After the fighting
between Iraqi and American troops, it is not clear that five bodies in two towns
would create any particular stir.

His brief account of the first man he said he killed, however, did square with
that of a family member of the slain man, with a crucial difference: the man
said the murder happened five years later than it actually did, in 1996 -- a
difference his brother said later was due to his fear of talking, for the first
time, about his killing spree.

The anger left over from Mr. Hussein's decades of killing and torturing his
subjects is aimed from the top to the bottom, from the president and his two
sons down to local Baath Party minions, a powerful minority that often harassed
and informed on their neighbors as part of Iraq's machine of control.

The dynamic is on full display at a house in Baghdad where relatives of executed
political prisoners burrow through page after page of documents for clues to
their loved ones' fates.

"We need to know who informed on him," said Muhammad Jassim Muhammad, who was 9
years old when his father, Jassim Muhammad Ibrahim, disappeared in 1981. The
family was told in 1986 that he had been executed. "I will kill him. Because of
this person I was deprived for so many years of my father."

Many Baath Party members have fled their homes, and senior officials are in
hiding, a fact that the man here, in his late 30's, said may slow his plans for
revenge.

The man lives with his mother and others in their large Shiite family, part of
an influential tribe that stretches from the Iraqi south across the borders to
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.

An older brother, also a former army officer, came to visit for the first time
since the war ended -- and their mother beat at her chest and pulled out strands
of her white hair, partly dyed orange, in happiness that this older son was
safe.

"God bless America," the mother said, kissing the tips of her fingers. "I would
give my soul to the Americans!"

She apparently knows nothing of her younger son's personal quest for revenge,
but told a story of how he had been hounded for years by local members of the
Baath Party trying to enlist him into a local militia in defense of Mr. Hussein.

They regularly burst into the house, she said, even checking closets in case he
was hiding there.

At one point, she recalled, he was arrested and taken to prison. After 24 hours
of keeping vigil, she said, she was able to buy his freedom.

"Saddam did so many things," she said. "Look what he did to me. My hair turned
white. One of my sons was taken away and I don't know where he is."

Her two sons, who never told their mother what really happened to her oldest
son, asked her and the children to leave the room.

Their older brother, they said once she was gone, was a major in the Iraqi
military, a Shiite in a Sunni-dominated officers' corps who had fought in major
battles in the war between Iran and Iraq in the 1980's and was wounded three
times.

In 1990, they said, he and other Shiite officers refused to participate in Mr.
Hussein's plans to invade Kuwait.

The brothers did not find out for two weeks in late 1990 that their sibling,
then 42, had been executed along with other Shiite officers who refused command
in Kuwait. His body, the men said today, was returned 20 days later with a
single bullet hole between his eyes.

Then the other two brothers, also officers at the time, were dismissed from the
military.

"Hatred leads to everything," the younger brother said.

And it congealed into a solid plan, when the two men schemed to assassinate
Safeeh Ajrash, the head of the local Baath Party in the town of Shattra, killed
in April 1996. They watched him for two days. When he was crossing a bridge at
night, the younger brother shot him dead from perhaps five feet away.

"I felt it was the right thing to do," the younger man said. "I felt relief. I
felt good."

Then, with what he said was meticulous planning, he killed six others here and
in Shattra. He said he did not consider it murder. He said all the men were
Baath Party members, who had personally "hurt" his family, using their
positions.

He said he would never kill women or children. Shiite beliefs, he said, allow
revenge, almost demand it. Plus, he said, he considered killing members of an
oppressive government "some sort of resistance."

Starting April 12, after the United States military had arrived, he said he
began killing more quickly. He would not provide details, but said his rules
were the same: he kills only men, members of the Baath Party who harassed his
family. One of them, he said, had barged into his house once.

"Now there is a lot of chaos," he said. "Before there was a system. I used to
need a better plan. It took five or six days. Now everything is easier."

He said he did not believe he had slipped up in any way that would allow him to
be caught, or that he would be charged with war crimes.

"Not at all," he said. "What war trials? They are all dead."

His brother said: "Saddam Hussein killed all the Iraqis. Even the ones who are
alive are now dead."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A former Iraqi Army officer said he was killing Baath Party
officials to avenge a brother's execution. (Alan Chin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); ASSASSINATION (88%); TORTURE
(87%); SHOOTINGS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); TERRORISM
(72%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(61%); POLITICS (60%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICAL PRISONERS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  TORTURE;  TERRORISM

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) FISHER, IAN; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: IRAQ;  NASIRIYA (IRAQ);  SHATTRA (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             615 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: INTELLIGENCE GATHERING;
Broad Domestic Role Asked For C.I.A. and the Pentagon

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU and JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


The Bush administration and leading Senate Republicans sought today to give the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon far-reaching new powers to demand
personal and financial records on people in the United States as part of foreign
intelligence and terrorism operations, officials said.

The proposal, which was beaten back, would have given the C.I.A. and the
military the authority to issue administrative subpoenas -- known as "national
security letters" -- requiring Internet providers, credit card companies,
libraries and a range of other organizations to produce materials like phone
records, bank transactions and e-mail logs. That authority now rests largely
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the subpoenas do not require court
approval.

The surprise proposal was tucked into a broader intelligence authorization bill
now pending before Congress. It set off fierce debate today in a closed-door
meeting of the Senate Intelligence Committee, officials said. Democrats on the
panel said they were stunned by the proposal because it appeared to expand
significantly the role of the C.I.A. and the Pentagon in conducting domestic
operations, despite a long history of tight restrictions, officials said.

After raising objections, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California and other
Democrats succeeded in getting the provision pulled from the authorization bill,
at least temporarily, Congressional officials said.

In a closed vote, the committee passed the bill unanimously without the
proposal. But Senator Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the
intelligence committee, indicated to panel members that he wanted to hold
further hearings on the idea, officials said.

There was some disagreement over exactly how the provision originated. Several
Senate aides active in the debate said that Senator Roberts had included it in
the authorization bill. But a senior Congressional official said the Bush
administration had initiated the proposal and that Senator Roberts had not
objected.

A C.I.A. official said the provision had come from the Bush administration,
after the White House's Office of Management and Budget signed off on it.

The official said that Congressional leaders had asked the Bush administration
whether there were any additional powers needed to help combat terrorism. The
administration responded with the proposal to give the C.I.A. and military the
power to use the national security letters, the official said. Another
Congressional official said the move came at the urging of the C.I.A. The White
House had no comment last night.

Because the F.B.I. now has primary responsibility for domestic intelligence
operations, the C.I.A. and the military must currently go to the F.B.I. to
request that it issue a national security letter to get access to financial and
electronic records.

The Bush administration believes that giving the C.I.A. and the military direct
authority to demand the records would cut down on the lag time in the process
and give those organizations more flexibility to combat terrorism, according to
the senior Congressional official.

Administration officials played down the significance of the proposal,
maintaining that it would not give the C.I.A. or the military access to any
information that they cannot already get through the F.B.I.

But Democrats and civil liberties advocates said they were alarmed by the idea
that the C.I.A. and the military could begin prying into Americans' personal and
financial records.

They said that while the F.B.I. was subject to guidelines controlling what
agents are allowed to do in the course of an investigation, the C.I.A. and the
military appeared to have much freer reign. The F.B.I. also faces additional
scrutiny if it tries to use such records in court, butofficials said the
proposal could give the C.I.A. and the military the power to gather such
material without ever being subject to judicial oversight.

Timothy Edgar, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union,
called the proposal "dangerous and un-American."

Mr. Edgar said that "even in the most frigid periods of the Cold War, we never
gave the C.I.A. such sweeping and secret policing powers over American
citizens."

A Congressional Democratic aide said the measure appeared to go well beyond even
hotly debated antiterrorism measures that the Justice Department has been
considering in past months. "This is a very odd and very far-reaching idea that
came out of nowhere," said the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "It
raises a whole series of questions about what the C.I.A.'s mission has really
become."

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the C.I.A. and the military have assumed greater
authority overseas over what were once law enforcement terrorism investigations,
and the traditional lines between domestic and overseas operations have become
increasingly blurred. A new terrorism center, led by the C.I.A., started
operation today in an effort to better coordinate the activities of different
federal agencies. Civil liberties groups said they were worried it would give
the C.I.A. authority to conduct domestic operations.

The proposal to allow the C.I.A. and the Pentagon authority to demand domestic
records comes at a time when both Democrats and Republicans have voiced growing
concerns about the government's expanded powers to fight terrorism.

New figures released today also showed that the Justice Department is relying
with increasing frequency on secret warrants that allow the officials to go to a
secret court to get approval for surveillance and bugging warrants in terrorism
and espionage investigations without notifying the target.

Attorney General John Ashcroft said in an annual report that the Justice
Department used secret warrants a record 1,228 times last year, -- an increase
of more than 30 percent over the year before. The court that governs the
warrants did not turn down any of the Justice Department's applications,
officials said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (93%); SUBPOENAS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); ESPIONAGE (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%);
APPROVALS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); BUDGETS (77%); PENDING LEGISLATION
(74%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); PAYMENT CARDS & SERVICES (70%);
CREDIT CARDS (70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  PRIVACY;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(57%) CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

PERSON: PAT ROBERTS (78%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (58%) LICHTBLAU, ERIC; RISEN, JAMES;
BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

STATE: KANSAS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             620 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2003 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: DETAINEES;
A Drifter's Oddysey From the Outback to Guantanamo

BYLINE:   By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1330 words

DATELINE: ADELAIDE, Australia


David Hicks took the wanderer's road from the Adelaide suburbs to his capture
with the Taliban in Afghanistan. Now his home is a prison cell at the American
naval base in Guantanamo, Cuba. He is going nowhere, yet he remains a man
adrift.

Mr. Hicks, a 27-year-old high-school dropout, former ranch hand and convert to
Islam, was seized by Northern Alliance forces in Kandahar as the fighting wound
down in December 2001. Here in Australia, he has been depicted as the local
version of John Walker Lindh, popularly known as the American Talib.

But the United States no longer wants Mr. Hicks: seeking to winnow detainees
from its campaign against terrorism, the Bush administration has asked the
Australian government to take custody of him and prosecute him, Australian
officials say. Australia, though, does not especially want him either: senior
police and intelligence officials say there is no evidence that he violated
Australian law. Even so, the government has not pressed the United States for
his release, Australian and American officials say.

All of which leaves Mr. Hicks in the limbo of Guantanamo, with no rights of due
process, charged with nothing, yet with no particular prospect of release. The
American and Australian governments have said publicly that he will remain at
Guantanamo until the war on terrorism is ended, whenever that may be.

His parents -- his father, Terry, a printer, and stepmother, Beverley, who
cleans houses -- say they know little of his situation. From newspaper reports,
they say, they learned that he had undergone surgery -- for what, they do not
know. They try to communicate through letters, but these have been returned
unopened, stamped "Return to Sender."

In one sense, Mr. Hicks's case represents the quandary that the roughly 660 men
detained at Guantanamo pose for the Bush administration. Although 22 were
recently released and a handful of others may soon face military tribunals as
members of the Qaeda terrorist network, the status of those in the vast middle
remains unresolved, which has led lawyers and human-rights advocates to argue
that they are being held in violation of international law.

Mr. Hicks, though, is also a special, and especially thorny, case -- a citizen
of one of the United States' closest allies. While American officials would not
discuss his case and any possible allegations against him in detail, they appear
wary of being seen as treating Mr. Hicks with greater leniency than Mr. Lindh,
who was sentenced to 20 years in prison after pleading guilty in an American
civilian court to aiding the Taliban.

Australian police and intelligence officials explain that they cannot prosecute
Mr. Hicks because it was not a crime for him to fight with the Taliban, which
was the government of Afghanistan at the time.

Still, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Chris Kenny, rejected criticism that the
government was not doing enough for Mr. Hicks and said officials were satisfied
that he was being treated humanely. Australian officials stress that Mr. Hicks
was involved with dangerous people -- first an Islamic guerrilla organization in
the disputed territory of Kashmir and then the Taliban. "We believe it's
appropriate that Mr. Hicks be detained while the war on terrorism continues,"
Mr. Kenny said.

Although Australian investigators have interrogated Mr. Hicks at Guantanamo, and
Australian diplomats have sat in on those sessions, Australia has not had
official consular access to Mr. Hicks, Australian officials said.

Mr. Hicks has hardly become a cause celebre here. Still, a small support group
-- Fair Go for David -- has been formed, and there is a feeling in some quarters
that the government has essentially abandoned him. In a recent editorial, The
Sydney Morning Herald said the government had been too willing "to accommodate
American claims."

Mr. Hicks's parents say that nothing in his background suggests any antipathy
toward Americans or why he would join the Taliban. He was, they say, a rebel
searching for a cause. "He was a typical boy who couldn't settle down," his
stepmother said. "He was always searching for something, but God knows what."
The Hickses talked about their son for several hours the other day in their
modest home in Salisbury Park, a working-class suburb of Adelaide. They cannot
afford a lawyer, but the chairman of the South Australian Council for Civil
Liberties, Stephen Kenny, is representing their son without charge.

David Hicks fell in with the wrong crowd as a teenager, they said, and began
drinking, using drugs and skipping school. At 14, he was expelled. He held
various jobs, including skinning kangaroos at a meat- packing factory, and
though he was only 5 feet 5 inches tall and weighed less than 115 pounds, he
played Australian Rules Football, a sport rougher than rugby.

He headed to the Outback, working on cattle ranches. For weeks at a time, he
would be alone with his horse and a bedroll, an experience that may have steeled
him for isolation at Guantanamo, his father said. He met an aboriginal woman,
and they had a boy and girl before Mr. Hicks was 20.

After five years, the couple separated, and Mr. Hicks hit the road again.
Answering an advertisement for horse trainers, he went to Japan. When he broke
his foot, he returned home. The time away had cured him of his drug habits. "He
was clear-eyed," his father said.

Mr. Hicks went back to Japan, and one day he telephoned his parents and said he
was joining something he called the K.L.A.

"I thought it was an airline," his father said.

Mr. Hicks explained that it was the Kosovo Liberation Army. It was late 1998,
and Slobodan Milosevic was intensifying his attacks on ethnic Albanians in
Kosovo. "He said he felt sorry for the people and the way they were being
treated," Mr. Hicks's father wrote in a sworn statement he gave to Australian
authorities.

He told his parents that he had learned about the war in the Balkans from
Japanese television and had found out how to join the Kosovo guerrillas through
the Internet. He had two weeks of military training and was sent into war. By
then, NATO had intervened on behalf of Kosovo.

When he returned home to Australia, he attended Bible study classes at the
Assemblies of God church but "wasn't comfortable with it," his stepmother said.
Having made friends with Muslim Albanians in Kosovo, he turned to Islam.

In November 1999, he left for Pakistan. He had two goals, his father said -- to
learn more about the Koran and to travel the Silk Road.

"I'm finally doing what I wanted," he wrote in a letter home. "I'm going along
the Silk Road on horseback."

He said he had joined the Pakistani Army, and was going on patrols along the
border with Kashmir, the war-torn territory claimed by both India and Pakistan.
Australian officials have said he was part of Lashkar-e-Taiba, an Islamic
guerrilla organization fighting against Indian rule in Kashmir.

But the two accounts are not contradictory: the guerrilla organization was
secretly financed and trained by the Pakistan intelligence and military to fight
in Kashmir, American officials have said. Kashmiri fighters trained at Qaeda
camps in Afghanistan, and that may be how Mr. Hicks ended up with the Taliban.

Two weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, Mr. Hicks's parents said, they
received a call from their son. He said he had been on border patrol on
horseback in Afghanistan.

"I asked, 'What do you think of that terrible incident in the United States?' "
his father said. "He said, 'What incident?' " Mr. Hicks, his father said, knew
nothing of what had happened. Several weeks later, he was captured by Northern
Alliance forces and sent to Guantanamo.

"Don't get us wrong, he wasn't an angel," his stepmother said.

Still, she and his father do not think Mr. Hicks has done anything to justify
detention in Guantanamo; or if he has, they say, he should be charged.

"If after 16 months, if they still can't lay a charge on him, then shouldn't
they let him go?" his father asked.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 8, 2003



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about David Hicks,
an Australian captured in Afghanistan and now being held at the American
military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, referred imprecisely to his parents'
communication with him. They said in an interview that their recent letters had
been returned unopened and stamped "Return to Sender" -- not that they had
gotten back all their letters sent since his imprisonment in late 2001.

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Hicks, an Australian who was captured in 2001 with Taliban
forces, remains in detention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); NAVIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); SENTENCING (78%); LITIGATION (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); DUE PROCESS (72%); SCHOOL DROP OUTS (71%); LAWYERS
(69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (66%); RELIGION (56%); SURGERY & TRANSPLANTATION (51%);
STEPPARENTS (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA)

PERSON: HICKS, DAVID (AUSTRALIAN TALIBAN); BONNER, RAYMOND

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%); ADELAIDE, AUSTRALIA (91%)

STATE: SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AUSTRALIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AUSTRALIA (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  AUSTRALIA

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             622 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Silencing of Gideon's Trumpet

SECTION: Section 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 94 words


Anthony Lewis seems the epitome of a New Age liberal who ignores the reality of
our highly dangerous world (April 20). In an ideal world, there would be no
Islamic militants whose sole purpose in life is to kill as many Americans as
they can. Lewis should recognize that our world changed forever on Sept. 11,
2001, and that even Jefferson, Adams and Franklin would have recognized that the
first obligation of a free nation is to defend itself from those who would
gladly die in flames to provoke mass destruction of American innocents.

Marc Mogil
Great Neck, N.Y.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERALISM (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TERRORISM
(85%); RELIGION (85%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: LEWIS, ANTHONY; MOGIL, MARC

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             631 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Spain: Election Ban On Radical Basque Parties

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 113 words


Spain's highest court barred nearly 1,500 Basque nationalists from running in
municipal elections this month, calling them camouflaged members of the outlawed
radical nationalist Batasuna Party.

After 16 hours of deliberation, a six-member panel at the Constitutional Court
voted 5 to 1 to uphold most of an earlier ban ordered by the Supreme Court. That
court struck down 241 lists of candidates in three Basque provinces and
neighboring Navarra, totaling about 1,500 politicians. The Constitutional Court
approved just 16 of those lists. The Supreme Court said that separatists had
formed a party, Autodeterminaziorako Bilgunea, to skirt its March verdict
outlawing Batasuna.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUPREME COURTS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
BASQUE HOMELAND & FREEDOM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); POLITICS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); CITIES (85%); CITY GOVERNMENT (85%); TERRORISM (59%);
APPROVALS (52%) DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  BASQUES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
ELECTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (91%)

STATE: NAVARRE, SPAIN (92%); BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN (92%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); EUROPE (91%)

REGION: SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             639 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Struggle

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 385 words


These are appreciation days for the coalition of the willing, as President Bush
welcomes a parade of foreign leaders who supported his war in Iraq. Colombia's
president, Alvaro Uribe, who has supplanted Vicente Fox of Mexico as Mr. Bush's
favorite Latin American leader, recently took his turn.

Besieged by a fierce internal conflict, Colombia is the third-largest recipient
of American aid. Washington is right to help, but not unconditionally.

The flow of American military assistance must be curtailed or interrupted, as
Congress has rightly insisted, if that country's own rule of law and democracy
are subverted in the process of waging its war. The danger now is that the Bush
administration, in its zeal to reward loyal allies and step up the war on
terrorism on all fronts, may be tempted to disregard its legal responsibility to
monitor Colombia's human rights record closely and to withhold some aid if
patterns of abuse emerge.

Mr. Uribe, a conservative elected last year with a mandate to intensify the war
against powerful left-wing guerrilla groups and right-wing paramilitaries that
live off the drug trade, is a committed democrat with some imaginative social
and economic policies. Yet his government has sought due-process shortcuts, and
there are signs of continued collusion between some military commanders and
right-wing paramilitary groups that have committed some of the worst atrocities.

Firmly insisting that our aid comes with strings attached gives Washington the
leverage to help Colombians protect their democracy. It also helps Mr. Uribe
rein in his own military.

The horror of Colombia's conflict was driven home days after Mr. Uribe was feted
in Washington when the FARC, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, killed
10 hostages, including a former defense minister, during a botched rescue
attempt. Founded as a Marxist movement, the FARC is a criminal enterprise that
relies on kidnapping ransoms and huge drug-trade revenue to make up for its lack
of legitimacy or support.

The Colombian Army often appears outgunned by the well-financed FARC. Mr.
Uribe's democratic mandate is to alter that balance of forces to a point where a
political resolution to the conflict can be viable. Yet the endeavor will prove
pointless if it is not conducted within the rule of law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); NARCOTERRORISM (88%); ARMIES (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (76%);
DUE PROCESS (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); PUBLIC
POLICY (75%); TERRORISM (74%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (74%); HOSTAGE TAKING
(74%); LIBERALISM (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (71%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); ECONOMIC NEWS (51%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (89%); VICENTE FOX QUESADA (73%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); IRAQ (92%);
MEXICO (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             645 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Guantanamo Scandal

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 400 words


For a year and a half, the United States has held hundreds of people captured
during the war in Afghanistan as prisoners in Guantanamo Bay without access to
family, lawyers or any semblance of due process. Another small group was shipped
home recently, and there are reports that military trials for some prisoners may
start soon. But that does not alter the fact that the detentions insult some of
our most cherished ideals and harm our national interest.

Last month, Secretary of State Colin Powell advised Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld that he was encountering growing complaints from the countries whose
nationals are among the prisoners. The cynical response by Mr. Rumsfeld -- that
the problem is the slowness of the many intelligence agencies that need to
interrogate prisoners -- only makes things worse.

The extraordinary attacks of Sept. 11 clearly demanded extraordinary measures.
All reports, moreover, indicate that the prisoners have not been physically
mistreated. But America vowed after Sept. 11 that the terrorists would not be
allowed to drag us down to their level. Meanwhile, the Department of Defense has
held more than 600 male prisoners, some as young as 13 -- and of 42 different
nationalities, including citizens of our closest allies -- in a concentration
camp. They have been declared "unlawful combatants" in order to deny them the
protection of the Geneva Convention. They have been incarcerated at a naval base
in Cuba, over which Cuba has no control, to put them beyond the reach of the
law. The military set no limit on their detention, and it declared that if they
were brought to trial, the proceedings would be before special military
tribunals, which can act in secret, and their only appeal would be to the
president -- who stripped them of their rights in the first place.

No doubt some of the prisoners are members or leaders of Al Qaeda. Some may have
been in the Taliban; some may have done terrible things. Many were probably just
caught up in the tribal chaos of Afghanistan. Whoever they are, their treatment
should be a demonstration of America's commitment to justice, not the blot on
its honor that Guantanamo has become. The Guantanamo prisoners need immediate
access to their governments, families and lawyers and deserve some tribunal in
which to contest their confinement. They deserve real, open justice without
further delays or excuses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); DUE PROCESS (89%);
MILITARY COURTS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%);
NAVIES (78%); LAWYERS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (75%); AL-QAEDA (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;  EDITORIALS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP);
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             653 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS;
JUSTICE DEPT. LISTS USE OF NEW POWER TO FIGHT TERROR

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


In the most detailed public accounting of how it had used its expanded powers to
fight terrorism, the Justice Department released information today showing that
federal agents had conducted hundreds of bugging and surveillance operations and
visited numerous libraries and mosques using new law enforcement tools.

In one of the more striking examples of their new powers, Justice Department
officials said they were now reviewing some 4,500 intelligence files in
terrorist cases to determine whether criminal charges should be brought. Such a
mingling of intelligence and criminal investigations was largely banned under
internal Justice Department procedures that were in place before the terrorist
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

A 60-page report to members of Congress was intended to answer concerns from
lawmakers who say the department has kept them in the dark about its
counterterrorism operations and has not done enough to safeguard civil liberties
in its pursuit of terrorists.

The report provided dozens of pieces of previously undisclosed data on a variety
of activities including the use of hundreds of secret search warrants and the
fact that some 50 people had been detained without charges as material
witnesses.

The department portrayed its use of its new powers as judicious and restrained,
but officials are still refusing to divulge certain data publicly because they
said it would compromise classified areas. Civil liberties advocates said the
vagueness in these areas buttressed their concerns about how the department's
powers were being used.

The numbers the department provided on several of the most hotly debated issues
appeared relatively low. For instance, the department said agents from "fewer
than 10" F.B.I. field offices had visited mosques as part of their
investigations, a new power granted to agents last year by Attorney General John
Ashcroft.

And agents have contacted about 50 libraries nationwide in the course of
terrorism investigations, often at the invitation of librarians who saw
something suspicious, said Viet Dinh, an assistant attorney general who briefed
members of the House Judiciary Committee on the findings at a hearing today.

Librarians, concerned about the government's ability to pry into the public's
reading habits, have said they believe libraries have been contacted much more
frequently.

Justice Department officials maintained that the relatively small numbers in
some critical intelligence areas showed that agents were using their new powers
sparingly.

"We've had so much erroneous hysteria out there about our counter-terrorism
authority and how it's used," said a spokeswoman for the department, Barbara
Comstock. "What this demonstrates is that these tools have been very carefully
targeted, and when we do use them, it's because there are valid reasons that
often involve life and death."

In the 1970's, in response to public outrage over abuses by the F.B.I. and
C.I.A. in monitoring legitimate political dissent, tight new restrictions were
placed on federal agents.

But after the Sept. 11 attacks, the federal authorities complained that the
restrictions had gone too far, and several major overhauls -- most notably
antiterrorism legislation known as the Patriot Act and new guidelines instituted
last year by Mr. Ashcroft -- significantly loosened those restrictions.

The report analyzed the new tools made available to the federal government under
the Patriot Act, and found that the department had made widespread use of
surveillance and eavesdropping tools to track suspected terrorists.

In the first year after the attacks, for instance, Mr. Ashcroft approved 113
emergency authorizations for secret foreign intelligence warrants for electronic
or physical surveillance, compared with fewer than 50 in the previous 23 years.

In addition, according to the report, the Justice Department sought 248 times to
delay having to notify the target of an investigation that a warrant had been
executed. The department said it was never turned down by a court in its
requests to delay the notification, and the delays sometimes amounted to 90 days
or more.

The department said the delays were necessary to avoid endangering sources and
informants, jeopardizing undercover operations, or preventing the destruction of
evidence.

The department also divulged for the first time that the number of material
witnesses held in terrorism investigations as of January was "fewer than 50."
Officials said they could not provide the exact number for security reasons.

The department has stepped up its detentions of material witnesses as a tactic
in terrorism investigations.

While some high-profile detentions have become known publicly, most have been
kept secret and the federal authorities have refused to say how many people they
have detained using this method.

The department's report said that about 90 percent of the material witnesses
were held for 90 days or less, 80 percent were held for 60 days or less, and
about half were held for 30 days or less.

The department maintained that its expanded powers had given it greater speed
and flexibility in responding to terrorist threats.

In the case of the anthrax attacks in the fall of 2001, for instance, the
department said a provision of the law allowing a court to issue a search
warrant in another jurisdiction allowed a Washington judge to issue a warrant
for Florida.

That "saved investigators from wasting valuable time on petitioning another
judge in another district for that authority," the department said.

Provisions of the act were also put to use in tracing Internet communications
during the investigation into the murder of the Wall Street Journal reporter
Daniel Pearl, as well as in investigating kidnappings, a school bomb scare and
other breaking investigations in the United States, the department said.

Lawmakers at today's hearing of a House Judiciary subcommittee said they agreed
that the continuing terrorist threat required more inventive responses from law
enforcement. But Republicans and Democrats alike said they shared concerns about
civil liberties implications for ordinary Americans.

"As we move forward in the process of providing the strong measures that are
necessary to combat terrorism, we must also keep in mind the importance of
protecting civil liberties Americans hold dear," said Representative Steve
Chabot, Republican of Ohio, who presided at the meeting.

The new data from the department did little to mollify some Congressional
critics who accused the department of withholding information critical to an
assessment of its performance on terrorism.

"I would hope that the administration would be more responsive to Congressional
requests for specific, rather than general, information," said Representative
Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York. " 'We can't tell you,' or, in effect,
'it's none of your business' are not adequate or acceptable answers."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Viet Dinh, right, an assistant attorney general, spoke yesterday
with two staff members, Nathan A. Sales, left, and Adam H. Charnes. (Doug
Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (94%); RELIGION (91%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LIBRARIANS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SEARCH WARRANTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); WIRETAPPING (77%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (77%); WITNESSES (76%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%) TERRORISM;  PRIVACY;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  SEARCH AND SEIZURE;  INTELLIGENCE SERVICES;
LIBRARIES AND LIBRARIANS;  MOSQUES;  ISLAM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(59%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

PERSON: ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); DINH, VIET (ASST ATTY GEN); LICHTBLAU, ERIC

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: UNITED STATES;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             655 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Remember Afghanistan?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 159 words


To the Editor:

"A Job Half-Done in Afghanistan" (editorial, May 15) is on target.

The Bush administration has shortchanged Afghanistan. Reconstruction financing
is inadequate.

In the absence of full-scale expansion of international peacekeeping forces
within and beyond Kabul, security is deteriorating.

Women and girls are the first victims: warlords in some areas are placing
Taliban-like restrictions on women, and more than a dozen girls' schools have
suffered violent attacks by fundamentalists.

Last year, Congress passed the Afghan Freedom Support Act authorizing increased
reconstruction financing and peace troop expansion. President Bush signed it
into law. But where is the financing and where are the peace troops?

Without action, the Afghan people will lose perhaps their only chance for peace,
democracy and human rights, and terrorists will continue to thrive.

ELEANOR SMEAL
Pres., Feminist Majority Foundation
Arlington, Va., May 16, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WOMEN
(87%); HIJACKING (87%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%) AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM;  WOMEN

ORGANIZATION: FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION (83%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP);
FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%) SMEAL, ELEANOR

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (74%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  KABUL (AFGHANISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             660 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Democrats' Complaint

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 112 words


To the Editor:

Re "Democrats Say Bush Is Weak on Terrorism" (front page, May 18):

Listening to Democratic presidential hopefuls castigate President Bush for
perceived failures in the fight against terrorism, I am struck by an apparent
contradiction.

Democrats complain that the president has not cracked down forcefully enough on
Al Qaeda, yet gripe about the administration's lack of concern for civil
liberties in its pursuit of combating this organization.

While those who aspire to unseat the president complain about his
counterterrorism policies, it is hard to believe that they would have any more
success protecting Americans.

SHALOM SOKOLOW
New York, May 18, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (88%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (88%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
AL-QAEDA (86%); COUNTERTERRORISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2004;  ELECTION ISSUES;  TERRORISM;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%) SOKOLOW, SHALOM; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             664 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 28, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: RIYADH;
A Saudi Editor Who Offended Clerics Is Ousted From His Post

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, May 27


In the first sign that it has already wearied of the public debate over the
possible roots of extremist thought in Saudi Arabia, the government ordered the
removal today of the the editor in chief of Al Watan, the daily newspaper which
had been most outspoken on the subject.

The editor, Jamal A. Khashoggi, one of the country's leading experts on
political Islam, declined to comment on his firing. There was also no government
announcement, but an official of the Ministry of Information official confirmed
it without elaborating on the reasons.

The news quickly electrified participants in the virulent debate that has
erupted since coordinated suicide bombing attacks on May 12 killed 25 people at
three housing compounds.

Those who believe that religious institutions propagate extremist ideas were
dismayed by Mr. Khashoggi's dismissal, while members of the religious
establishment felt vindicated.

The paper, partly owned by prominent descendants of the late King Faisal, had
opened its pages to those who wished to examine the prevalence here of Islamic
militancy, which ranges from shunning Westerners in its most benign form to
violent attacks against them.

Mr. Khashoggi himself set the tone in a column written just hours after the
bombs exploded. "Those who committed yesterday's crime, which will have a
painful impact on the peaceful nature of our nation, are not only the suicide
bombers," he wrote, "but also everyone who instigated or justified the attacks,
everyone who called them mujahedeen, even everyone who ignored this irregular
direction in our religion and nature, or tried to find excuses for it."

The paper has been one of the leading voices calling for openness and reform in
the kingdom. After the attacks, Al Watan columnists discussed a plethora of
highly sensitive issues, including questioning the central role of the religious
police in Saudi society and whether the country gave too much credence to the
writings of Ibn Taimaya, a Muslim thinker of the early 14th century.

Ibn Taimaya argued that that religious scholars could assume the task of
declaring holy war if their rulers failed to. He is considered a main
inspiration for the conservative Wahhabi brand of Islam prevalent in the
kingdom.

The paper also opened an unprecedented petition on its Web site addressed to the
country's rulers, asking them to take action to curb extremist religious
discourse.

Conservative Muslims were particularly incensed by Al Watan's cartoons. One
showed a man in the garb adopted by some militant Muslims -- a short,
calf-length robe of the kind the Prophet Muhammad is believed to have worn, and
a straggly beard. The man was depicted as a suicide bomber, except the sticks of
dynamite around his waist were labeled "fatwas," or religious decrees.

The debate over Al Watan had grown so heated, in fact, that a senior Muslim
cleric who sits on the country's official fatwa council issued a religious fiat
earlier this week declaring it a sin to buy the paper.

Critics of Al Watan said Mr. Khashoggi went too far in using the paper to paint
the clergy as bearing responsibility for extremism.

"He has been exceeding red lines drawn not only by the government, but by the
social heritage of this society," said Mohsen Awajy, a lawyer active in
conservative Islamic causes.

A group of about seven senior clerics went to Crown Prince Abdullah, the
country's de facto ruler, late last week to complain about news coverage of the
bombing and about Al Watan in particular, Mr. Awajy said.

Although newspapers here are privately owned, editors and reporters serve at the
whim of the ruling family.

The press falls under the direction of Prince Nayef, the interior minister, who
has made no secret of his displeasure over criticism of the religious
establishment. At his first news conference after the attacks, he was asked by a
Saudi journalist whether there was any thought being giving to reshaping the
religious police. The prince denied this, and then rebuked the journalist,
saying: "As a Saudi, you should be ashamed to be asking this question."

Editors from other newspapers who attended a private meeting with him later said
he was even angrier, shouting at them that he did not want to see any more
articles criticizing Wahhabism or Ibn Taimaya.

No one at Al Watan, which means "The Homeland" in Arabic, could be reached for
comment. The chairman of the board of directors, Prince Bandar bin Khalid, a
grandson of King Faisal and the son of Prince Khalid, the governor of Asir
Province, where the paper is based, was traveling outside Saudi Arabia and could
not be contacted. The paper's general manager did not respond to several
telephone messages.

But members of the staff who were excited that their paper had been so central
to the debate over extremism were deflated by the firing of Mr. Khashoggi, who
was educated at Indiana State University and spent almost eight years covering
Osama bin Laden and extremist Islamic movements for Al Hayat, an Arabic
newspaper in London. He was appointed editor in chief in March.

"How can this happen now, at this time?" asked one writer at Al Watan. "They are
doing what the radicals want. A lot of journalists are asking what is going to
change in Saudi Arabia. If they fired Jamal Khashoggi, nothing is going to
change."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); DAILY NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (77%);
WRITERS (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); POLITICS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); CHURCH &
STATE (69%); WEB SITES (67%); INTERNET & WWW (65%) TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  NEWSPAPERS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  FREEDOM OF THE
PRESS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ISLAM;  CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: WATAN, AL (SAUDI NEWSPAPER)

PERSON: MACFARQUHAR, NEIL; KASHOGGI, JAMAL A

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (91%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (97%)

REGION: SAUDI ARABIA;  RIYADH (SAUDI ARABIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             666 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Colombia: Extradition In Americans' Deaths

BYLINE:  By Christopher Marquis (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 111 words


Colombia has extradited a leftist guerrilla to the United States for prosecution
in the 1999 killing of three Americans, State Department officials said.

Nelson Vargas Rueda, 33, a low-level member of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or FARC, was one of six rebels indicted by a grand jury in Washington
for the killing of the Americans -- Ingrid Washinawatok, 41, of Brooklyn;
Terence Freitas, 24, a California native, and Lahe'ena'e Gay, 39, of Hawaii --
who were in Colombia to aid in a fight over land rights of an indigenous tribe.
Senior FARC commanders acknowledged responsibility but called the killings a
mistake.   Christopher Marquis (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); LIBERALISM (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (87%); INDICTMENTS (86%); GRAND JURY (86%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (82%) EXTRADITION;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (93%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA; STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; RUEDA, NELSON VARGAS; WASHINAWATOK, INGRID;
FREITAS, TERENCE; GAY, LAHE'ENA'E

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             674 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Zimbabwe: Police Chief Gives Up Interpol Title

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 61 words


Zimbabwe's police commissioner has resigned from the executive committee of
Interpol after criticism that his title of honorary vice president amounted to
an endorsement for Zimbabwe from the international police organization. Rights
groups have accused the Zimbabwe police of using repressive measures, including
torture, on critics of President Robert Mugabe.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); RESIGNATIONS (88%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(86%); MISCONDUCT (85%); TORTURE (85%) SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;
POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  POLITICSAND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL) (94%)
INTERPOL

PERSON: MUGABE, ROBERT (PRES)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (96%); AFRICA (74%)

REGION: ZIMBABWE

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             678 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 6-01-03;
Weimar Whiners

BYLINE:  By James Traub;  James Traub is a contributing writer for the magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 988 words


Have you heard that it's 1933 in America? God knows I have. Three times in the
last few weeks I have been told -- by a novelist, an art historian and a
professor of classics at Harvard, none of them ideologues or cranks -- that the
erosion of civil liberties under the Bush administration constitutes an early
stage, or at least a precursor, to the kind of fascism Hitler brought to
Germany. I first heard the 1933 analogy a few months back, when one of the
nation's leading scholars of international law suggested at a meeting of
diplomats that Bush's advisers were probably plotting to suspend the election of
2004.

Now, I think I understand the argument that compares the United States with
imperial Rome, or with one of the unwitting great powers of 1914. But 1933?
Hitler? That's grotesque; and the fact that is has achieved such currency among
what the French call the bien pensant is vivid proof that in much of the left,
9/11 and its aftermath have increased the visceral loathing not of terrorism or
of Islamist fundamentalism but of President George Bush.

Like all forms of reductio ad Hitler, the 1933 analogy constitutes a gross
trivialization of the worst event in modern history. Do we remember what
actually happened in 1933? Hitler ascended to the chancellorship, suspended
constitutional rights and banned all opposition political parties, sent the
Brown Shirts into the streets and issued the first decrees stripping Jews of
their rights. To compare the passage of the U.S.A. Patriot Act and the proposed
-- but scotched -- program to get ordinary citizens to pass along tips about
suspicious dark-skinned strangers, not to mention the cancellation of Tim
Robbins's invitation to appear at the Baseball Hall of Fame because he might
criticize the war in Iraq -- to compare these and other inroads on our liberties
to Hitler's budding terror state is repellent.

But 1933 theorists, at least the more sophisticated ones, look beyond current
policy to what they consider the structural similarities between contemporary
America and various fascist states. In a recent article in The Nation, Sheldon
Wolin, an emeritus professor of politics at Princeton, described the
contemporary Republican party as "a fervently doctrinal party, zealous,
ruthless, antidemocratic and boasting a near majority." The combination of
toothless Democrats, a compliant media and "a politically demobilized society"
ensures that the Republicans, and their corporate overlords, will face little
opposition in their drive for total domination.

Haven't we been here before? Back in the 60's, when my ideological sympathies
were first shaped, practically everybody was considered a fascist, including
your junior-high-school principal. Those were genuinely apocalyptic times:
National Guardsmen were shooting protesters, black revolutionaries were
strapping on bandoliers and President Nixon was turning the F.B.I. into a
private investigative force. But the era ended not with the triumph of the
state, but with its humbling: the impeachment proceedings against Nixon, the
election of the modest Jimmy Carter, the clipping of the C.I.A.'s wings (now
being unpinned post-9/11). Civic and state institutions, including the media,
the judiciary and the party system, proved stronger than the forces that would
constrain them.

And this is really the fundamental point: fascist states arise not simply
because a mesmerizing leader seizes state power in unsettled times but because
the democratic institutions that might oppose him have rotted away, as they did
in Weimar Germany. Has that really happened here? It's true that today's
Republican Party is, by all historical standards, fervently doctrinal, if not
necessarily ruthless or antidemocratic. Left to its own devices, the Bush
administration, and especially Attorney General John Ashcroft, might be
perfectly willing to expand government powers to fight terrorism no matter the
cost to individual liberties. But the administration has not been left to its
own devices. Opposition from both liberals and libertarian conservatives --
i.e., Republicans -- killed the TIPS program and may already be hindering
next-generation Patriot II legislation; organs of the "corporate-controlled
media," like "60 Minutes," have reported on the growing threat to civil
liberties.

Much of the left seems to feel that the greatest threat to emerge from 9/11 is
an untrammeled Bush administration -- as if the destruction of the twin towers
was the functional equivalent of the Reichstag fire, as I have heard one of my
friends say. And yet even the most devout civil libertarians recognize that the
terrorist threat compels rethinking. Norman Siegel, the former head of the New
York Civil Liberties Union and a famous First Amendment purist, says, "The
security interests are real, they're legitimate and you have to balance freedom
and security in a different way post-9/11." Siegel says that he has been hard
put to explain to skeptical audiences that the Patriot Act, for all its
problems, does not preclude traditional forms of peaceful protest.

Why, then, the hysteria? I have several explanations. First of all, you cannot
miss the element of wish-fulfillment in these prophecies of doom. Those of
Bush's critics who loathe him as an overprivileged lout and corporate cats' paw
regard the new moral and political stature he has gained as a result of the war
on terror as an intolerable twist of fate; and so the terrible events they
predict will prove the ultimate unmasking. We will see "Bush as Fuhrer," to cite
one recent Internet posting. But we will also, of course, see America as
Germany, a society so "demobilized" that it will stay glued to reality TV as
Karl Rove cancels the presidential elections. It is this contemptuous dismissal,
I realize, that makes my blood boil every time I hear the 1933 analogy. When
will the left learn that this is not simply a nation of dimwitted yahoos?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Christopher Morris) Chart: "YOUTH MOVEMENT""The following would
be suitable for 12-year-olds. . . . 'I'm not saying our economy is all that bad
right now, or there's a crisis in it, even though the stock market's been really
weird. And the U.S. government is pretty different from the Nazi government. So
I'm not saying you need to worry too much. Just be thinking about these things.
There are some pretty crazy people in the government, and since Sept. 11,
they've chucked a lot of rights people thought they'd always have. They've
pretty much killed the Bill of Rights. . . . You've read the Bill of Rights,
right? No? Gosh. They don't teach that in your school? Well, here, I'll bookmark
it. . . . And I'll also download the Patriot Act. . . . Study them both, and
figure out how they relate.' "   From "Talking to Your Kids About Fascism," by
Gary Leupp, on the CounterPunch Web site

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CLASSICS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); POLITICS (88%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); ART HISTORY
(77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); US PATRIOT ACT (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (74%); IRAQ WAR (74%); RELIGION
(73%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (72%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (71%); EDUCATION
ADMINISTRATION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (68%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (66%); FUNDAMENTALISM (52%); BASEBALL (50%) TERRORISM;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); RICHARD NIXON (56%) TRAUB, JAMES; BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); SIEGEL, NORMAN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); GERMANY (90%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             680 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: THE COURTS;
Hearing to Affect Government's Ability to Try Terror Suspects in Civilian Courts

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 1


The Justice Department's ability to continue prosecuting members of Al Qaeda and
other important terrorist suspects in civilian courts is on the line in a
landmark appeals court hearing this week in the government's case against
Zacarias Moussaoui, Bush administration officials and defense lawyers agree.

The specific question before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit, in Richmond, Va., on Tuesday is whether Mr. Moussaoui, the only person
charged in an American court with conspiring in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, has the right to question captured Qaeda members held overseas whose
testimony may aid in his defense.

The Justice Department is arguing that he has no such right and that the
government cannot make captured terrorists available for testimony without
divulging national security secrets and interrupting the government's effort to
interrogate them for information that might pre-empt terrorist attacks.

But twice this year, Judge Leonie M. Brinkema of Federal District Court in
Alexandria, Va., has ruled that Mr. Moussaoui's right to seek out trial
testimony for his defense overrides the government's claims of national security
damage.

And twice, she has ordered the government to make preparations for Mr.
Moussaoui, who wants to act as his own trial lawyer, and his court-appointed
legal advisers to question Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a coordinator of the 9/11 attacks
who was caught last year in Pakistan.

Mr. bin al-Shibh is being held at an undisclosed place outside the United
States.

The impact of the ruling by the Fourth Circuit, which is hearing the Justice
Department's appeal of the orders by Judge Brinkema, will most likely go far
beyond Mr. Moussaoui, because the issue of defense access to testimony from
captured terrorists is almost certain to confront prosecutors whenever they try
to bring Qaeda members to trial.

Bush administration officials acknowledge that a ruling against the government
in the courts would almost certainly prompt the Justice Department to abandon
its prosecution of Mr. Moussaoui in a civilian court and turn him over to the
Pentagon for a military tribunal. The case could finish up before the Supreme
Court.

In a tribunal, Mr. Moussaoui would most likely have far fewer rights to seek out
defense testimony from Mr. bin al-Shibh and others and to control how his case
was presented to a jury.

The officials say that a decision to abandon a civilian trial would create
dismay at the Justice Department, which wants to retain its authority to
prosecute terrorists in civilian courts, but that the Pentagon has made it clear
that it would never agree to make important Qaeda suspects available for
testimony on behalf of Mr. Moussaoui.

"The implications are uncomfortable," a senior administration official said. "If
the Justice Department can't prosecute Moussaoui, there's general agreement that
we'll need to avoid civilian trials for other suspects like him." The official
said that "these cases will become the Pentagon's show."

Alternately, Mr. Moussaoui's court-appointed legal advisers and some outside
legal scholars sat a decision against Mr. Moussaoui -- barring him from
interviewing Mr. bin al-Shibh and others -- would be a serious blow to his case
and create troubling limitations on the right of other types of criminal
defendants to seek out testimony or evidence that might prove their innocence.

"I will go into the courthouse with a sense that a lot is riding on this," said
Frank W. Dunham Jr., the federal public defender in eastern Virginia, who will
help argue the appeal in Richmond on behalf of Mr. Moussaoui.

"If I'm not at the top of my game," he said, "I think I could do some serious
harm to the Bill of Rights."

The issues, Mr. Dunham said, "involve the right to a fair trial, the right to
present a defense, the right to call witnesses in your own behalf, the right to
force the government to produce evidence it has that is favorable to the defense
-- all of those things are on the table."

There appears to be no consensus among lawyers who watch the Fourth Circuit over
how it will rule.

While the Fourth Circuit is perhaps the nation's most conservative appeals court
and is generally sympathetic to the government's national security arguments,
criminal law specialists say that Mr. Moussaoui is supported by long, detailed
precedent in arguing that he is entitled to any testimony or evidence that may
help exonerate him.

"This is a very difficult balancing act," said Sean D. Murphy, a former State
Department lawyer who is now an associate professor of law at George Washington
University.

"The Fourth Circuit has been very supportive of the Bush administration's
initiatives in prosecuting the war on terrorism," he said. "At the same time, it
has drawn a line and made clear that it will not simply defer to what the
government wants."

The United States attorney's office in Alexandria, Va., which is prosecuting the
case, had no comment on the pending appeals court case apart from its public
court filings.

But Andrew G. McBride, a former member of the office who remains in contact with
prosecutors there, said his former colleagues were eager to hold on to the
Moussaoui case and to prove that the civilian court system was the appropriate
place to bring terrorists to justice.

Mr. McBride said he believed the Justice Department had a strong case in arguing
that because Mr. bin al-Shibh and other captured Qaeda leaders were being held
by the government as enemy combatants outside American borders, the government
had no responsibility to make them available to Mr. Moussaoui.

"It's an open issue, but I think there is case law that can be read to be
supportive of the government," he said. "I think the prosecutors have handled
this case well."

The appeals court showdown is the latest twist in the tortured, 17-month
prosecution of Mr. Moussaoui, a confessed Qaeda member who has repeatedly
expressed his loyalty to Osama bin Laden, even as he has insisted that he had
nothing to do with the 9/11 attacks.

He has been in government custody since August 2001, when he was arrested on
immigration charges in Minnesota after arousing the suspicion of a local flight
school. He was indicted in December of that year on charges of conspiring to
destroy aircraft and commit terrorism, which make him eligible for the death
penalty.

As the case has gone on, his handwritten court filings have grown more
inflammatory, many of them taunting and ridiculing Judge Brinkema and his
court-appointed legal advisers, whom he has repeatedly tried to fire.

Although Mr. Moussaoui has appeared to relish the opportunity at public court
hearings to denounce the American government and voice his support for Al Qaeda,
he has passed up the chance to appear before the Fourth Circuit on Tuesday, a
decision that will leave the arguments in the hands of the court-appointed
defense team that he says he reviles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: From left, Edward B. MacMahon Jr., Frank W. Dunham Jr. and Alan
Yamamoto will represent Zacarias Moussaoui in a court hearing involving Mr.
Moussaoui's right to question captured members of Al Qaeda. (Doug Mills/The New
York Times); Zacarias Moussaoui, top, wants to question Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a
coordinator of the 9/11 attacks. (Reuters); (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); APPEALS (89%); LAWYERS
(78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (65%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST
GROUP)

PERSON: SHENON, PHILIP; MOUSSAOUI, ZACARIAS; BRINKEMA, LEONIE M (JUDGE); BIN
AL-SHIBH, RAMZI

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); RICHMOND, VA, USA (92%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             689 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT;
Ashcroft Seeks More Power To Pursue Terror Suspects

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


Attorney General John Ashcroft today defended the Justice Department's detention
of hundreds of illegal immigrants after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and urged
Congress to give the authorities still greater power to pursue terrorism
suspects.

Mr. Ashcroft, in five hours of testimony before the House Judiciary Committee,
made his first public comments on a report from his inspector general that
criticized the department's treatment of 762 illegal immigrants after Sept. 11.
He said "we make no apologies" for holding suspects as long necessary to
determine whether they had links to terrorism. In the end, none of the 762
suspects were charged as terrorists.

"Al Qaeda is diminished but not destroyed," Mr. Ashcroft said. He said the
nation "must be vigilant."

We must be unrelenting," he said. "We must not forget that Al Qaeda's primary
terrorist target is the United States of America."

Mr. Ashcroft told lawmakers that the authorities need still greater powers to
track and pursue terrorists.

The USA Patriot Act, as the sweeping antiterrorism law that grew out of the
Sept. 11 attacks is known, has sparked official votes of protest from more than
100 communities around the country because of civil liberties concerns. But Mr.
Ashcroft said the law does not go far enough and "has several weaknesses, which
terrorists could exploit undermining our defenses."

Mr. Ashcroft, a strong proponent of capital punishment, said the penalties for
some terrorism-related crimes should be toughened to include the death penalty.
He also urged Congress to allow the authorities to detain terrorism suspects
before trial without bond and to clarify what constitutes illegal "material
support" of terrorists, the standard the Justice Department has used against
terror suspects.

"We must make it crystal clear that those who train for and fight with a
designated terrorist organization can be charged under the material support
statutes," he said.

Mr. Ashcroft's lengthy and impassioned defense of the Justice Department's
counterterrorism campaign and his push for greater authority met with strong
endorsement from many, but not all, of the Republicans on the judiciary panel.

Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., the Republican chairman of the panel,
said that while the Justice Department had made impressive strides in fighting
terrorism, he remained concerned about the potential threat to civil liberties
posed by the long reach of counterterrorism efforts.

"To my mind," Mr. Sensenbrenner said, "the purpose of the Patriot Act is to
secure our liberties and not to undermine them."

Just last month, the Senate rebuffed efforts by senior Republicans to make
permanent some critical provisions of the Patriot Act that are to expire in
2005. The concerns raised by Mr. Sensenbrenner, and echoed in even stronger
terms by virtually all the Democrats on the panel, signaled that Mr. Ashcroft
may face a tough sell in seeking to broaden the Justice Department's authority
to pursue terrorists.

"Some of us find that the collateral damage may be greater than it needs to be
in the conduct of this war," said Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat of
California.

Democrats said they were particularly concerned about the report released on
Monday by Glenn A. Fine, the Justice Department's inspector general. The report
found "significant problems" in the way the authorities arrested and treated
hundreds of illegal immigrants as part of the Sept. 11 investigation. The report
found that the authorities had made little effort to distinguish real terrorist
suspects from those who became ensnared by chance in the investigation. Many
suspects were jailed for months, often without being formally charged or given
access to lawyers, and some inmates in Brooklyn were physically and verbally
abused before they were cleared of any terrorist ties, the report said.

While the report drew no conclusions about the legality of the Justice
Department's actions, Representative Robert C. Scott, Democrat of Virginia,
suggested that the denial of the detainees' civil rights and evidence of
physical assaults by Justice Department employees might have risen to the level
of criminal conduct.

The congressman asked Mr. Ashcroft whether he planned to appoint an outside
counsel to investigate the accusations further, but the attorney general
responded that "I have no plan at this time to employ a special counsel in this
matter."

Mr. Ashcroft said the department's civil rights division had investigated 18
complaints of abuse by guards against immigrant prisoners and had found in 14
cases that there was not enough evidence to bring criminal charges. Four
investigations are pending.

"We do not stand for abuse," he said.

Mr. Ashcroft said he also wished that the department could have resolved cases
against many of the 762 illegal immigrants more quickly.

"God forbid, if we ever have to do this again, we hope that we can clear people
more quickly," he said. "We'd like to clear people as quickly as possible.
There's no interest whatsoever that the United States of America has in holding
innocent people, absolutely none. It's costly. It takes up resources that makes
it difficult for us to do what we need to do with other people who are threats."

But Mr. Ashcroft stressed repeatedly that he believed the policy of detaining
people for as long as it took to clear them of terrorist ties was the right one,
and he said that several illegal immigrants did have terrorist connections that
are still considered suspicious. One suspect was the roommate of one of the
Sept. 11 hijackers, and another was found with "jihad material" and more than 30
pictures of the World Trade Center, Mr. Ashcroft said.

Mr. Ashcroft said past data showed that people who were facing deportation and
were released from custody on bond fled about 85 percent of the time, and he
said he was not willing to take that risk with the suspects apprehended after
the Sept. 11 attacks.

"We had had to balance the risk," Mr. Ashcroft said. And in doing so, he added,
"we did not violate the law."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft testified yesterday before the
House Judiciary Committee, asking that the Patriot Act be strengthened. (Doug
Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (98%); IMMIGRATION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TESTIMONY (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%)
TERRORISM;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL
ALIENS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (91%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST
GROUP)

PERSON: F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (77%) LICHTBLAU, ERIC; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY
GEN)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             690 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberian Denounces War Crimes Indictment

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: MONROVIA, Liberia, June 5


Liberia's embattled president today rejected his indictment on war crimes
charges and claimed that his government fended off a coup attempt, while rebel
forces advanced on the country's capital.

Gunfire outside this capital city sent thousands of panicked people fleeing,
with soldiers turning back refugees who came to the city seeking sanctuary.

Tension surged a day after the announcement of President Charles Taylor's
indictment on war-crimes charges by a United Nations-sponsored court. Mr. Taylor
was accused of "bearing the greatest responsibility" for a 10-year terror
campaign in which tens of thousands of people were killed, raped, kidnapped or
maimed in neighboring Sierra Leone.

Mr. Taylor denounced the indictment today, saying, "To call the president of
Liberia a war criminal? God himself will not permit it."

Mr. Taylor also announced the alleged coup attempt while speaking to journalists
in Monrovia. He had returned home overnight from nearby Ghana, site of new peace
talks between Liberia's government and rebels, who have taken about 60 percent
of the country during their three-year campaign.

The rebels want to oust Mr. Taylor, a former warlord who has been blamed by the
United Nations for involvement in many of West Africa's conflicts.

While in Ghana, Mr. Taylor escaped a push by war-crimes prosecutors for his
arrest on the new indictment. He said the coup attempt was launched Wednesday
while he was out of the country, by "certain officials" supported by
unidentified foreign diplomats.

Mr. Taylor said he accepted the resignation of Vice President Moses Blah because
of the coup attempt. He also said he would ask his entire cabinet to resign to
"open the road to a government of national unity."

"We are going to remain on course not for me, but for the Liberian people," he
said, adding, "We want to continue to ask for your prayers."

Mr. Blah was being detained at the home of a Liberian general and two of his
bodyguards were under arrest elsewhere, a senior government official said on
condition of anonymity.

Authorities gave no details of the alleged coup attempt.

"As I'm talking to you, there's massive fighting going on . . . with units
trying to enter Monrovia," Mr. Taylor told reporters.

Panicked villagers fled the sounds of gunfire near a bridge over the Po River,
about six miles northwest of the city.

Liberian defense officials said loyalist troops and rebels were fighting there.

Several hours later, the rattle of automatic weaponsand louder, more percussive
explosions were heard by an Associated Press reporter at Brewerville, several
miles closer to the capital.

Government and rebel forces also were battling in the country's southeast,
defense officials said.

In Monrovia, troops patrolled streets in army trucks, while other soldiers on
the city's outskirts blocked thousands of people -- mainly people staying in
temporary camps -- who were seeking sanctuary.

"The already precarious humanitarian situation risks becoming catastrophic if a
peaceful solution isn't reached immediately," said Ramin Rafirasme, spokesman
for the United Nations World Food Program.

The joint United Nations-Sierra Leone court accused Mr. Taylor of trafficking
guns and diamonds with the Sierra Leone rebels, who killed, raped, kidnapped and
maimed tens of thousands of Sierra Leone's civilians.

Military intervention by Guinea, Britain and the United Nations finally defeated
the rebels in 2002.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Charles Taylor of Liberia and his wife, Jewel Howard
Taylor, yesterday at the Executive Mansion in Monrovia, the country's capital.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (96%); COUPS (93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%);
ARRESTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); JOURNALISM
(73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); RESIGNATIONS (69%);
WRITERS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (54%) COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: TAYLOR, CHARLES (PRES); BLAH, MOSES

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (92%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (98%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); GHANA (92%); AFRICA (79%); WESTERN
AFRICA (79%)

REGION: LIBERIA;  SIERRA LEONE;  MONROVIA (LIBERIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             697 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Resolution on World Court Revives Hostility

BYLINE:  By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 10


An American resolution that would extend United States citizens' immunity from
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court has rekindled some of the
trans-Atlantic hostility that led to the diplomatic debacle over the Iraq war.

The resolution in the Security Council, which would extend the immunity for one
year, is set for a vote here on Thursday and is assured of passage, diplomats
said today. But they indicated that it was likely that Germany, and perhaps
France, would abstain, cracking the facade of harmony that has prevailed since
the end of the war.

The United States has also spent the last year cajoling countries to sign
agreements that would guarantee that United States citizens, whether part of a
peacekeeping force or otherwise, could not be extradited to the International
Criminal Court. To date, 37 countries have signed such agreements.

The American effort has prompted counter-lobbying by European opponents who have
been pressing smaller Eastern European nations, indicating that their chances of
joining the European Union might be hurt if they cooperated with the United
States, one Council diplomat said.

"The reason this is so hard fought and so emotionally fought -- it's not the
substance of it," the diplomat added. "It's the politics of law and order in a
one-superpower world and who provides that: the one superpower or international
bodies and international consensus. That's why you've got all this ire."

The treaty that created the international criminal court was signed by President
Clinton after protracted negotiations over Washington's concerns that its troops
or diplomats could fall prey to frivolous or politically motivated prosecutions.

The Bush administration has said the United States will not ratify the treaty,
which has now been signed by 137 countries and ratified by 90, according to
Human Rights Watch.

Britain and Spain are expected to support the American resolution on Thursday.
"We don't share the U.S. concerns about the court," a British diplomat said,
"but we recognize that they have those concerns and that we can't ignore them."
Supporters of the court, led by Canada, won a small victory by persuading
Council members to hold an open debate before the vote.

The crimes covered by the treaty that created the court include genocide,
"widespread and systematic" crimes against civilians, including murder, torture,
rape, deportation and enslavement, as well as war crimes and crimes of
aggression.

At the time the treaty was passed, France opted to take a seven-year grant of
immunity for all war crimes charges, an immunity that was available to all
signatories.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); EXTRADITION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); IMMUNITY (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%);
LOBBYING (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); POLITICS (73%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (72%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); IRAQ WAR (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); TORTURE (67%) WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  TREATIES;  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%); UNITED
NATIONS (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT; UNITED NATIONS; EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (78%) BARRINGER, FELICITY

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); EUROPE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%);
IRAQ (92%); FRANCE (92%); SPAIN (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); GERMANY (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (56%)

REGION: EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             700 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Croatia: General Says He May Surrender

BYLINE:  By Peter S. Green (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 92 words


The third-most-wanted war crimes suspect at the international war crimes court
in The Hague said he would talk to investigators from the court and surrender
for trial if he could not convince them of his innocence.

Ante Gotovina, a former Croatian Army general, was indicted by the United
Nations court in July 2001 for atrocities against ethnic Serbs committed when
Croatian forces swept through the Krajina region in 1995. Mr. Gotovina made the
offer of a possible surrender in an interview with the Croatian weekly Nacional.
Peter S. Green (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); ARMIES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%);
INTERVIEWS (82%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GREEN, PETER S; GOTOVINA, ANTE (GEN) (RET)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: CROATIA;  KRAJINA (BOSNIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             707 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reining Ashcroft In

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 145 words


To the Editor:

I found your June 6 front-page article "Ashcroft Seeks More Power to Pursue
Terror Suspects" absolutely frightening.

As a World War II veteran and a former F.B.I. special agent, I am no less
concerned about terrorism than Attorney General John Ashcroft is.

But as I recall the oaths that I took upon enlisting in the Army, joining the
F.B.I. and being admitted to the bar, I can't help but wonder if he and I have
sworn to "support and defend" the same "Constitution of the United States."

Is our form of government so fragile that it should be permissible for him to
thumb his nose at some of our most fundamental principles of law and justice? I
can only hope that members on both sides of the aisle in Congress have more
sense than Mr. Ashcroft, and that they'll show some fortitude in denying his
request.

HARVEY BURSTEIN
Wellesley, Mass., June 6, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ARMIES (88%); WORLD WAR II (88%); LEGISLATION
(85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%)

PERSON: BURSTEIN, HARVEY; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             708 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Helping Women Abused in War

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 193 words


To the Editor:

Re "Congo's Warring Factions Leave a Trail of Rape" (news article, June 9):

Gender-based violence, like rape and exploitation, is a part of virtually all
conflicts today, with those most at risk -- refugee and internally displaced
women and adolescent girls -- often remaining unprotected.

Survivors of gender-based violence are often identified through reproductive
health services, and it is by way of these programs that their trauma is
addressed.

Without these services and the recognition of the basic rights that underpin
them, the world's most at-risk population would lose basic protection and care;
this would have a devastating effect on efforts to eliminate violence against
them.

The United States has been withdrawing its support for international
reproductive health services for women worldwide; the retraction of $34 million
in financing for the United Nations Population Fund last year is just one
example.

As the violence in Congo shows, we should be doing more to protect women around
the world, not less.

MEGAN MCKENNA
Acting Director of Communications
Women's Commission
for Refugee Women and Children
New York, June 9, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENDER EQUALITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WOMEN (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); SEXUAL & REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SEX OFFENSES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
GENOCIDE (66%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%) SEX CRIMES;  WAR CRIMES,
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  WOMEN

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND (56%) WOMEN'S COMMISSION FOR
REFUGEE WOMEN AND CHILDREN

PERSON: MCKENNA, MEGAN

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             711 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DOMESTIC SECURITY;
U.S. WILL TIGHTEN RULES ON HOLDING TERROR SUSPECTS

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


Federal authorities said today that they planned to use stricter standards for
identifying and locking up terrorist suspects in light of concerns raised in a
recent report that hundreds of illegal immigrants were mistreated after the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Law enforcement officials plan to make at least 12 structural changes that were
recommended in a report issued last week by the Justice Department inspector
general, according to interviews with officials at the agencies affected by the
report. Nine other recommendations are being actively considered, they said.

The move to embrace the bulk of the changes appeared to signal a greater
acknowledgment of shortcomings in antiterrorism and detention policies than
Justice Department officials had publicly admitted.

The recommendations that law enforcement officials have signed off on go to the
heart of the criticisms leveled by the inspector general, officials said, and
could portend significant changes in how illegal immigrants suspected of
terrorism are investigated, arrested and detained.

Inspector General Glenn A. Fine's report found that few of the 762 illegal
immigrants arrested after Sept. 11 had clear ties to terrorism, but that many
were held for months in what the report characterized as harsh conditions, often
without access to lawyers. Inmates in Brooklyn were subjected to physical and
verbal abuse, the report found.

Attorney General John Ashcroft and his aides defended the department's conduct
after the report was released, saying they "make no apologies" for doing
everything in their legal power to aggressively deter another attack on American
soil.

But officials at the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security,
which now handles immigration, have been scouring the report to determine how
the problems it spotlighted can best be addressed. About a half-dozen agencies
and offices within the two departments, including the F.B.I., the Bureau of
Prisons and immigration operations, are affected.

Among the 12 recommendations that officials said they were ready to adopt are
developing clearer criteria for determining which illegal immigrants are
terrorist suspects, improving lockup conditions and policies for those in
custody and giving immigration officials -- rather than the F.B.I. -- more
authority to remove a suspect from custody.

Officials at different law enforcement agencies are still reviewing the other
nine recommendations and are likely to accept many of those as well, officials
said, adding that none has been rejected outright. The agencies affected by the
report are expected to give their responses to the inspector general by mid-July
on how they plan to follow up, if at all, on the recommendations.

Immigrant rights advocates cautioned, however, that even if all the
recommendations were adopted, they might not go far enough to ensure that
illegal immigrants suspected of terrorism were given proper access to lawyers,
judicial review and adequate conditions of confinement.

Michael Chertoff, the assistant attorney general who leads the criminal
division, said in a letter to Congress last week that he expected that the
F.B.I. and domestic security officials would develop a better system for
classifying subjects of terrorism investigations "at the appropriate level of
concern."

The inspector general found that the F.B.I., particularly in New York City, made
little attempt to determine whether the illegal immigrants arrested after the
Sept. 11 attacks had true connections to terrorism.

The report suggested that the authorities arrested many illegal immigrants --
most of them Middle Eastern -- who became entangled in the terrorism
investigation by chance through traffic stops, anonymous tips and other means.
Investigators found that many suspects were simply grouped into categories "of
interest" to the terrorism investigations and subjected to restrictive and
sometimes abusive conditions of confinement as a result of that classification.

Mr. Chertoff said he expected the authorities to develop better systems to
classify terrorism suspects, to set deadlines to release those cleared of
terrorist links, to share information among agencies and to formalize a "crisis
management plan" that defines responsibilities in the event of a similar
national emergency.

"These enhancements would further reduce the potential for impinging on civil
liberties," Mr. Chertoff said.

Law enforcement officials said they had already begun to make some structural
and policy changes even before the inspector general's report was released, and
they expected to make a host of further changes to reflect Mr. Fine's highly
critical conclusions.

In one important change, immigration officials said they were no longer waiting
for the F.B.I. to let them know if they could release or deport an illegal
immigrant "of interest" in a terrorism investigation. Instead, immigration
officials began notifying the F.B.I. this year that they planned to remove
someone and then give the F.B.I. the chance to step in if it can show that the
suspect could be linked to terrorism. Officials are now seeking to formalize and
strengthen that policy.

Illegal immigrants taken into custody "will no longer automatically be
considered a special interest case just because they happen to go to the same
flight school or register at the same Department of Motor Vehicles office as one
of the hijackers," a senior immigration official said.

Like others interviewed about the recommendations, the official spoke on the
condition of anonymity because of the topic's sensitivity.

Such changes are being made "really in response to our frustration" over
policies after the Sept. 11 attacks, the immigration official said.

"We were answering to the F.B.I. in more ways than we thought we ever would,"
the official added.

Immigration officials said they expected that the greater level of scrutiny
would be likely to lead to fewer illegal immigrants being identified and
detained as possible terrorism suspects. Fewer than 24 suspects remain in
custody, the official said.

A senior F.B.I. official said the bureau planned to adopt a more consistent set
of criteria for classifying suspects so that illegal immigrants in New York City
were not treated more harshly than those picked up in other parts of the
country. But the official added that the analysis would be case by case, and
that it would not necessarily mean fewer terrorism suspects.

"You have to go for uniformity," the official said. "You can't just raise or
lower the bar. It will depend on the situation."

While F.B.I. officials acknowledged a clear need to refine their internal
policies, they rejected the suggestion from the inspector general that they had
gone too far in the months after Sept. 11.

F.B.I. officials said they believed that the current debate obscured the climate
of public fear and the logistical challenges faced by the F.B.I. after the
attacks.

Joseph Billy Jr., who oversees counterterrorism in the New York office of the
F.B.I., said: "Yes, we're going to work to improve the process. A lot of it is
really about better communication."

"But you have to remember the tenor of the times after 9/11," he said. "New York
had 3,000 people killed. We were the target. Was what we did out of the realm,
considering the times we were in? I don't know."

Among other changes, Justice Department officials have decided to adopt a number
of recommendations from the inspector general concentrating on the treatment of
prisoners, a law enforcement official said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAWYERS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); REFUGEES (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
CORRECTIONS (76%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (76%); PRISONS (74%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(59%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

PERSON: LICHTBLAU, ERIC

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             718 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia and Montenegro Meet Test For War Crimes Tribunal, U.S. Says

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


Serbia and Montenegro have met Washington's criteria for cooperating with the
United Nations war crimes tribunal, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said
today, clearing the way for them to receive American financial assistance.

But the State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said Mr. Powell's decision
means that the two republics, partners in the loose union that emerged from the
ruins of Yugoslavia, still could do more to extradite war crimes suspects to the
tribunal, which sits in The Hague.

The United States has made clear to authorities in Belgrade that it "expects
further actions to be taken in order to meet those obligations," Mr. Boucher
said. "We continue to call on all states of the region to cooperate fully with
the tribunal, including by arresting and transferring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic."

Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Mladic, leaders of Bosnia's Serbs during the Bosnian war
from 1992 to 1995, are the tribunal's most wanted suspects. Mr. Karadzic is
believed to be hiding in the Serbian-controlled part of Bosnia. Serbian
authorities say they have no information on Mr. Mladic's whereabouts.

The most notorious of the Serbs indicted by the tribunal is the former Yugoslav
president, Slobodan Milosevic, who is on trial in The Hague for alleged abuses
committed in Kosovo, Croatia and Bosnia.

Under United States law, all aid to Serbia and Montenegro depends on Mr.
Powell's certification. Mr. Boucher said he could not immediately say how much
money was involved.

The United States Helsinki Commission, a federal agency that monitors human
rights around the world, said last week in a letter to Mr. Powell that
certification could not be justified at this time and that a decision to do so
"would be detrimental to U.S. foreign policy goals supporting international
justice and successful and complete democratic change in Serbia."

The group said Mr. Mladic and five others indicted by the tribunal for their
connection to the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 remain at large, most likely in
Serbia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%);
INDICTMENTS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%)
FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); BOUCHER, RICHARD; KARADZIC, RADOVAN; MLADIC,
RATKO

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); MONTENEGRO (91%); CROATIA (79%); KOSOVO
(79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             720 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DETAINEES;
SECRECY IS BACKED ON 9/11 DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


A sharply divided appeals court ruled today that the Justice Department was
within its rights when it refused to release the names of more than 700 people
arrested for immigration violations in connection with the Sept. 11 terrorist
attacks.

The 2-to-1 ruling by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit upheld the government's contention that disclosing
the names of people arrested on immigration charges after the September 2001
attacks could help Al Qaeda figure out how law-enforcement officials were
conducting the nation's antiterrorist campaign.

The opinion extends a string of significant legal victories, against some
setbacks of lesser importance, for the White House from federal judges as they
begin to rule on challenges to the administration's actions in response to the
terrorist attacks.

An appeals court in Philadelphia has already upheld the right of the
administration to hold hearings in secret on possible immigration violations in
connection with the attacks. Another panel of the District of Columbia Circuit
has ruled that the detainees at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba are
outside the reach of American constitutional law. And in January, the appeals
court based in Richmond, Va., gave the administration a major victory in ruling
that a wartime president like Mr. Bush could indefinitely detain a United States
citizen captured as an enemy combatant on the battlefield and deny that person
access to a lawyer.

Today's case pitted two fundamental values against each other -- the right of
the public to know details of how its government operates versus the
government's need to keep some information secret to protect national security.

The majority opinion, written by Judge David B. Sentelle, said that courts had
always shown deference to executive branch officials in the field of national
security.

"The need for deference in this case is just as strong as in earlier cases,"
Judge Sentelle wrote in the opinion that was joined by Judge Karen LeCraft
Henderson. "America faces an enemy just as real as its former cold war foes."

Judge Sentelle said that when government officials tell the court that
disclosing the names of the detainees will produce harm, "it is abundantly clear
that the government's top counterterrorism officials are well suited to make
this predictive judgment. Conversely, the judiciary is in an extremely poor
position to second-guess" government views in the field of national security.

Judge David S. Tatel offered a blistering dissent, saying that the majority of
the court was just agreeing with what he said is the Bush administration's
demand to "simply trust its judgment."

Judge Tatel wrote that "by accepting the government's vague, poorly explained
allegations, and by filling in the gaps in the government's case with its own
assumptions about facts absent from the record, this court has converted
deference into acquiescence."

The opinion also demonstrated again the ideological divide on the nation's
appeals courts and especially the District of Columbia Circuit, which is widely
viewed as second in importance only to the Supreme Court. Judges Sentelle and
Henderson are Republican appointees while Judge Tatel is a Democratic appointee.

Kate Martin, the director of the Center for National Security Studies, the lead
plaintiff, said the case will be appealed, either to the full District of
Columbia Circuit or to the Supreme Court.

The case revolved around an effort by several civil liberties groups that had
asserted the Freedom of Information Act required the Justice Department to
disclose the names of those detained on immigration charges. The government
argued that it was entitled to an exception in the law that allowed information
to be withheld for continuing law-enforcement investigations.

Attorney General John Ashcroft argued that while he was obliged by the
Constitution to disclose the names of anyone arrested and charged with a
criminal act, he did not have to do so in the case of those charged with
immigration violations. In addition, he argued that it would violate the privacy
of those arrested on immigration violations.

Today's ruling reversed a lower court decision by Judge Gladys Kessler, who said
that while there were important national security concerns, "unquestionably, the
public's interest in learning the identity of those arrested and detained is
essential to verifying whether the government is operating within the bounds of
law."

A report this month from the Justice Department's inspector general, relying on
information not available to the public, seemed to bolster the case that the
arrests of people on immigration violations demonstrated the kinds of problems
the public is generally entitled to be aware of.

That report found "significant problems"in the way the authorities arrested and
treated hundreds of illegal immigrants as part of the Sept. 11 investigation.
The report concluded that authorities had made little effort to distinguish real
terrorist suspects from those who became ensnared by chance in the
investigation. Many suspects were jailed for months, often without being
formally charged or given access to lawyers, and some inmates in Brooklyn were
physically and verbally abused before they were cleared of any terrorist ties,
the report said.

"This report highlights what we believe is fundamentally wrong with the court's
decision," said Steven Shapiro, the national legal director of the American
Civil Liberties Union, one of the plaintiffs.

"Our whole reason for seeking this is because we believe that secrecy invites
abuse and we now know that from this report that abuses did take place," Mr.
Shapiro said.

The report also asserted that the vast majority of the immigration detainees had
no connection with terrorists. But Judge Sentelle's opinion today said that
declarations by government officials establish "that many of the detainees have
links to terrorism."

Mr. Ashcroft said that "today's ruling is a victory for the Justice Department's
careful measures to safeguard sensitive information about our terrorism
investigations as well as the privacy of individuals who chose not to make
public their connection to the government's probe."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft argued that he did not have to
disclose the names of detainees. (Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); IMMIGRATION (93%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (91%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); APPEALS (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); REFUGEES (78%); JUDGES (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); COLD WAR (78%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HIJACKING (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%);
LAWYERS (75%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); NAVIES (66%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION POLICIES;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT;
AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: DAVID S TATEL (89%); DAVID B SENTELLE (89%); KAREN L HENDERSON (79%)
;ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); SENTELLE, DAVID B (JUDGE);
TATEL, DAVID S (JUDGE); LEWIS, NEIL A

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%); RICHMOND, VA, USA
(79%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); VIRGINIA, USA
(79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (87%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             730 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kashmir Clash Kills 12 Indian Soldiers During Visit by President

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR, Kashmir, June 28


In the deadliest attack on Indian forces in the disputed territory of Kashmir in
months, two suspected separatists killed 12 Indian soldiers and wounded 7 before
dawn today after sneaking into a military base outside the city of Jammu.

The attack, in which the two men lobbed grenades and fired assault rifles at the
soldiers before being shot dead themselves, came during the first visit to
Kashmir by a sitting Indian president in six years. It poses a challenge to a
fragile, American-backed peace effort under way between India and Pakistan.

President A. P. J. Abdul Kalam was hundreds of miles away from the site of the
attack and was in no danger. But it occurred only a few miles from the site of a
May 2002 suicide strike on army barracks that killed 34 soldiers and family
members, infuriating Indian officials.

That strike, which followed a failed December 2001 attack on the Indian
Parliament building in New Delhi, prompted India to mass hundreds of thousands
of soldiers on its border with Pakistan and brought the two nuclear-capable
countries to the brink of war.

Indian accuses Pakistan of arming, training and financing separatists in
predominantly Muslim Kashmir where they have been waging a 13-year campaign to
win independence from India. Pakistan denies financing the groups, and accuses
Indian forces of human rights violations in Kashmir.

Senior American diplomats have applauded the new peace initiative and repeatedly
visited the region since last year's war scare.

This week, President Bush urged Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, to
resolve the dispute peacefully. The two leaders met at the presidential retreat
at Camp David.

Kashmiris, caught between India and Pakistan, have suffered the most in a
conflict waged in one of the most beautiful places in the world. More than
35,000 people, including 14,000 civilians, have been killed in skirmishes, raids
and suicide attacks carried out in a stretch of Himalayan territory claimed by
both countries.

The Press Trust of India reported that an unidentified caller said a previously
unknown group, Al Nasreen, claimed responsibility for the attack.

Indian military officials said two men dressed in Indian army uniforms walked
into the Sujwan military base about five miles south of Jammu at 4:30 a.m.

"They entered into a barracks where unarmed soldiers were," Brig. J. S. Thind,
the camp's commander, said on Indian television.

For five minutes, the militants hurled hand grenades and fired assault rifles,
killing and wounding as many soldiers as they could.

Brigadier Thind said a "quick reaction force" located the attackers within
minutes.

Other officials said one of the attackers was killed instantly, while the other
was able to hide behind a wall and shoot at pursuing soldiers.

In any case, the killing of 12 soldiers will most likely complicate a peace
effort begun by India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, in April with a
speech in Kashmir.

As an initial step, the two countries had restored full diplomatic relations and
had planned to re-establish bus and air links that were severed when they nearly
went to war last spring.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); ARMIES (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
MILITARY BASES (89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); FIREARMS (72%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: PRESS TRUST OF INDIA LTD (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519110 NEWS SYNDICATES (52%); SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (52%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (58%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (96%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (96%); INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             737 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: TRACKING TRAVELERS;
U.S. to Make Airlines Give Data On Americans Going Overseas

BYLINE:  By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


Americans traveling abroad would have to give the government detailed personal
information before leaving or returning under an antiterrorism rule that the
Immigration and Naturalization Service proposed today.

The rule would force airlines and shipping companies to collect and submit to
the government the name, birth date, sex, passport number, home country and
address of every passenger and crew member. The intent is to provide the
authorities with more complete information about who enters and leaves the
United States.

Currently, air and shipping lines are not required to provide such information
to the government about Americans. The proposed rule would make it mandatory for
carriers to supply the information about American citizens and noncitizens,
immigration officials said.

Much of the information is already collected from people entering the country in
an arrangement in which 80 percent of commercial carriers voluntarily give
personal information about their passengers to the immigration service, the
officials said. The added information would be collected while the aircraft or
vessel was en route to the United States and electronically transmitted to
immigration officials on the ground at the port of entry.

The rule would also require carriers to provide information about people who are
leaving the United States within 48 hours after the departure of their flight or
vessel, the officials said.

The rule would take effect after a 30-day comment period. It would apply to
passengers and crew members on airlines, cargo flights, cruise ships and other
vessels. The information would be electronically checked against watch lists and
databases of people suspected of being involved in terrorism or other criminal
activity.

The changes are part of a border security bill passed overwhelmingly by Congress
and signed into law by President Bush on May 14, 2001. The law increases the
number of immigration inspectors and investigators and heightens the scrutiny of
visa applications from countries listed as sponsors of terrorism. The F.B.I. and
the Central Intelligence Agency would have to increase information sharing with
the State Department, which issues visas. The government will meld certain
databases of law enforcement and intelligence agencies, to help screen visa
applicants and foreigners entering the United States.

The American Civil Liberties Union said the new information storehouse must not
be used as the basis for a national identification system. In monitoring foreign
visitors, the rights group said, the government must not compromise Americans'
privacy rights or harass people who "look foreign" or are members of racial
minorities.

Civil liberties advocates were alarmed at some early proposals, including one
that might have made noncitizens carry identification documents. Those ideas
were dropped after bipartisan negotiations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MARINE SHIPPING (90%);
INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (90%); AIRLINES (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); TERRORISM
(86%); LEGISLATION (86%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY
(78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%);
NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (78%); CRUISES (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%);
CITIZENSHIP (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); AIR FREIGHT
(77%); MARINE PASSENGER TRANSPORT (76%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (73%); BORDER CONTROL
(72%); MARINE VESSELS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS
(69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (64%); RACE & RACISM (50%) TRAVEL AND VACATIONS;
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  SHIPS AND SHIPPING

ORGANIZATION: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE

PERSON: DAVID S JOHNSON (50%) JOHNSON, DAVID

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             740 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yayori Matsui Dies at 68; Championed Asian Women

BYLINE:  By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 452 words


Yayori Matsui, a journalist and campaigner for the rights of Asian women, died
on Dec. 27 at a Tokyo hospital. She was 68 and a resident of Tokyo.

The cause was liver cancer, said an associate, Norma Field, professor of
Japanese studies at the University of Chicago. Dr. Field said Ms. Matsui had
reported her illness in a message to her associates in which she also outlined
her ideas for a projected Women's Museum of War and Peace.

Ms. Matsui was the founder, in 1998, of the Violence Against Women in
War-Network, Japan. It was a principal sponsor of the Women's International War
Crimes Trial held in Tokyo in 2000.

A symbolic trial, it found Emperor Hirohito ultimately responsible for the
policy by which the Japanese military forced Asian women into sexual slavery
during World War II. It convicted other wartime leaders individually of crimes
against humanity for their part in what was euphemistically called the "comfort
women" system.

Ms. Matsui was in the forefront of efforts to make Japanese school textbooks
deal more openly with the realities of World War II. She traveled widely,
writing and speaking about women as the victims of armed conflicts and social
injustices.

She was born in Kyoto. Her parents, both Christian missionaries, moved to Tokyo
after the war to build the Yamate Christian Church in the devastated capital.
Ms. Matsui's funeral was held there Monday, according to Margaret Mitsutani, a
member of her Violence Against Women group in Tokyo.

She said Ms. Matsui was survived by her parents and five siblings.

Ms. Matsui worked for Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan's leading newspapers, for 30
years, starting in the early 1960's. She reported from Singapore, worked as a
senior staff writer and contributed articles on the environment, Asian affairs
and women's issues.

In 1976 she founded Asian Women in Solidarity, a grass-roots organization that
grew out of opposition to "sex tourism" conducted for well-heeled visitors to
Asia. This in turn led to the establishment in 1995 of the Asia-Japan Women's
Resource Center in Tokyo, which researches women's issues, publishes a magazine,
conducts seminars and sponsors lectures by Asian feminists.

She was the author of "Women in New Asia: From Pain to Power," published in
Britain in 2000 and distributed here by St. Martin's Press. The Women's Museum,
tentatively set to open in Tokyo in 2006, is to include a library and video
archive documenting the fate of "comfort women" and violence against women in
conflicts around the world.

According to Ms. Mitsutani, Ms. Matsui was in Afghanistan meeting with Afghan
feminists in October when her illness overtook her. She returned to Tokyo where
she worked on plans for the women's museum.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Yayori Matsui

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yayori Matsui (Asahi Shimbun)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (95%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DISEASES
& DISORDERS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); WRITERS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (89%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (89%); TEXTBOOKS (77%); CANCER (77%); WORLD WAR II
(76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (74%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); SLAVERY (73%); LIVER DISEASE (72%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (69%); MAGAZINE PUBLISHING (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (57%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (58%)

MATSUI, YAYORI; SAXON, WOLFGANG

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (94%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (88%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (94%); ASIA (93%); UNITED STATES (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
SINGAPORE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             741 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

AIDS in Africa

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 118 words


To the Editor:

Meeting the United Nations secretary general's compelling call for action to
save Africa's women ("In Africa, AIDS Has a Woman's Face," by Kofi A. Annan,
Op-Ed, Dec. 29) requires a sea change in men's behavior.

Policy makers, who are mostly men, must pass and put into effect laws, as well
as allocate resources, to end discrimination and violence against girls and
women.

Simultaneously, governments, communities and families must educate boys to
respect the human rights of girls and women, at home and in the public arena.

We must remember that most women living with H.I.V. or AIDS were infected by
men.

ADRIENNE GERMAIN
President, International Women's
Health Coalition
New York, Dec. 30, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIDS & HIV (92%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); WOMEN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); MEN (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (72%) ACQUIRED IMMUNE
DEFICIENCY SYNDROME;  WOMEN;  MEN

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH COALITION (59%)
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH COALITION; UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GERMAIN, ADRIENNE; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (95%)

REGION: AFRICA

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             745 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 7, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Won't Let Palestinian Leaders Attend London Talks

BYLINE:  By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Jan. 6


Israel's leaders today answered a pair of deadly suicide attacks by forbidding
Palestinian leaders to leave the country for talks in London, while much of the
rest of Israel took the day to mourn its dead.

A day after two Palestinian bombers killed at least 22 people here, Israel's
leaders said they would block a Palestinian delegation from traveling to London
for talks, sponsored by Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and intended to
encourage the Palestinian leadership to become more democratic and less corrupt.

Israeli officials also ordered the closing of three Palestinian universities.
Israeli tanks and helicopters continued military operations in the Gaza Strip,
where they said they killed one Palestinian gunman.

On Tuesday morning the bodies of two more Palestinians were found in in the
Maghazi refugee camp in the central Gaza, Agence France-Presse reported, citing
Palestinian officials. They said the two men were victims of Israeli Army fire
during an incursion. An Israeli Army spokesman confirmed the operation and said
Palestinians had shot at the soldiers, who returned the fire and hit several of
their assailants.

In Tel Aviv, Israeli officials also said they would prohibit a gathering on
Thursday of the Palestinian Central Council, which was set to review a draft
Palestinian Constitution.

After the attacks on Sunday, for which a militant group linked to Yasir Arafat's
Fatah organization claimed responsibility, Israeli leaders suggested that the
Palestinian leaders should be barred from going to London because they was
beyond redemption.

"The Palestinian leadership does not need to meet abroad to close down suicide
kindergarten camps, to stop incitement to murder and to fight terrorism,"
Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli foreign minister, said today. "This they can do
in Ramallah, right here, right now. Until the Palestinian leadership does so, it
must be given no quarter and no legitimacy in the free world."

The decision was sharply criticized by British officials, who saw the London
talks as a complement to the Bush administration's policy of pressing the
Palestinian leadership for reforms. Indeed, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell
appeared to nudge Israeli leaders to reconsider, telling Mr. Netanyahu in a
telephone conversation that he "regretted" the Israeli decision.

For all of today's diplomatic and military activity, the Israeli response to the
bombings on Sunday seemed unusually restrained. Ten months ago, when a
Palestinian suicide bomber killed 29 people on the Passover holiday, Israeli
leaders carried out a large-scale attack on the West Bank, rounded up hundreds
of Palestinian suspects and laid siege to Mr. Arafat's compound in Ramallah for
34 days.

There was no such attack today, and the limited measures undertaken seemed to
underscore the difficulty of putting any more pressure on the Palestinians.

Israeli soldiers already occupy nearly every major town in the West Bank. They
have imposed strict controls on people's movements, and Israeli undercover teams
have been regularly carrying out pinpoint killings of suspected militants. An
Israeli human rights organization here estimated recently that about 1,000
Palestinians are being held without charges or trials, compared with 36 a year
ago.

One of the sources for the relative Israeli restraint is thought to be the Bush
administration, which is believed to be putting pressure on Israel's leaders to
limit their military operations as the United States prepares for a possible war
in Iraq. In an interview today on Israel TV, Finance Minister Silvan Shalom
hinted at that pressure, and what Israeli leaders might do if it were to
subside.

"We have to get through the Iraq crisis and after that maybe get to more
far-reaching steps," Mr. Shalom said. "Arafat is mixed up in terror."

The Sunday attack occurred when two bombers, 150 feet apart, set off nearly
simultaneous explosions in a downtown Tel Aviv neighborhood that is frequented
by foreign laborers. The bombs scattered people and limbs, creating a scene of
horror that lasted well into today.

The death toll stood at 22, one less than was originally thought. Israeli
officials said that at least six of the dead were foreigners, from Bulgaria,
China, Romania and Ghana. The Israeli officials said they were preparing to fly
families of some of the foreigners to Israel to identify their bodies.

The suicide attacks, the first in Israel since mid-November, appeared to ignite
a fierce debate within the Palestinian leadership. Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a
militant group linked to Mr. Afarat's Fatah group, claimed responsibility for
the attacks and said it intended to continue killing Israeli civilians.

But Mr. Arafat's Fatah issued a statement today denouncing the suicide attacks,
the second such statement in two days. It said the two Palestinian men
identified as the bombers by Al Aksa had never been members of Fatah.

The statement accused the bombers of trying to scuttle ongoing talks, led by
Egyptian officials, to persuade the various Palestinian factions to agree to a
cease-fire.

"They are trying to stamp our movement with the brand of inhumanity for the
killing of innocent civilians," the Fatah statement said.

A spokesman for Al Aksa accused members of Mr. Arafat's group of trying to curry
favor with the Israelis. He said his group would continue attacks aimed at
Israeli civilians as long as Palestinian civilians continued to die.

"These operations aim to create a balance of fear," the spokesman said. "As long
the Israelis kill our civilians, we will respond by targeting their civilians."

The question of a split within the Fatah network has been hotly debated since Al
Aksa's suicide bombers began attacking Israeli civilians two years ago.

While the main Fatah organization, as well as Mr. Arafat, have publicly
denounced Al Aksa's attacks in recent months, many Israelis contend that Mr.
Arafat has more control over the group than he admits.

The debate over Mr. Arafat cut to the heart the Israeli decision to prohibit the
Palestinian delegation from traveling to London. While Israeli leaders have
declared much of the current Palestinian leadership complicit in attacks,
Palestinian leaders said today the Israeli decision would make it difficult for
moderates within the organization to reform it.

"I think it's like someone shooting himself in the foot," said Saeb Erekat, the
Palestinians' chief negotiator. "How can such a decision give Israelis more
security?"

In Israel's graveyards today, Israelis buried many of those killed in the Sunday
bombing. One of those laid to rest was Mazal Orkabi, a 20-year-old sergeant in
the Israeli Army, known by her friends as "Mazi," who was killed as she was
waiting for a bus to take her home.

As a group of fellow soldiers carried Ms. Orkabi's flag-draped coffin toward her
grave, hundreds of friends and comrades and family members trailed behind.

One after the other they rose to remember her, describing an affable and honest
officer full of the promise of youth.

"Never in my life did I imagine that I would ever have to deliver a eulogy,
especially not to you, Mazi dearest," said Yoav Orkabi, her grandfather, staring
into her grave.

The gathering broke up shortly thereafter, with the sobs and moans of those
closest to her. One of the last to leave was Ms. Orkabi's mother. She had to be
led away, supported under each arm, as she cried and mumbled and seemed to
search for a face amid the mourners.

"I can't," she said, hobbling away, "I can't go on without her."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An Israeli soldier mourned yesterday for Mazal Orkabi, 20, an
army sergeant who was killed in the suicide attacks in Tel Aviv on Sunday.
Below, family members of a man killed in the attacks grieved at his coffin.
(Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times); An Israeli soldier checked the
identifications of Palestinian men at a checkpoint near the West Bank town of
Ramallah yesterday. Israeli officials ordered the closing of three Palestinian
universities. (Associated Press) Map of Israel highlighting Tel Aviv: Israel is
responding to the deadly suicide raids in Tel Aviv.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(88%); AL FATAH (79%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (79%); SHOOTINGS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ARMIES (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (73%); SUICIDE (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); BRITISH PRIME
MINISTERS (71%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (68%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (65%); MURDER (57%); HELICOPTERS (55%); REFUGEES (55%);
PASSOVER (50%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS;  TRAVEL
RESTRICTIONS

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (70%); BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (59%) FILKINS, DEXTER; BLAIR, TONY
(PRIME MIN)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (94%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED KINGDOM
(95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GREAT BRITAIN;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             747 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 7, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru's Leader Says Ruling Doesn't Open Prison Gates

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Jan. 6


President Alejandro Toledo sought today to soothe fears that hundreds of rebels
could be freed from jail after a ruling by the country's highest court last week
that struck down several antiterror laws.

"The Constitutional Court's ruling does not open the doors and windows of
prisons," he said. "We will do everything possible to make sure that terrorists
are not put back on the streets."

Promising to respect the autonomy of the courts, Mr. Toledo said he would invite
legal and other experts to join a board that will oversee the complex legal
process of re-examining long-shut cases.

The ruling on Friday by the Constitutional Court, which is senior to the Supreme
Court on some matters, struck down several antiterror laws laid down by
President Alberto Fujimori in 1992, at the height of a war with rebels that
caused 30,000 deaths.

Seeking to reform those Draconian laws -- which created secret military trials
run by hooded judges, for example -- the court overturned a clause that allowed
rebels to be tried for treason, and declared life sentences unconstitutional.

The ruling caused an outcry across Peru, which remains wary of lenient treatment
of guerrillas and is still nursing its wounds from a long, violent struggle,
which lasted from 1980 to the late 1990's.

Experts warned that the ruling would lead to an avalanche of retrials and could
result in lighter jail terms for inmates like Abimael Guzman, who was the brains
behind the Maoist Shining Path.

It was thought unlikely that the ruling would change the sentence of Lori
Berenson, a New York woman serving a 20-year term on terrorism charges, because
the court did not overturn the law under which she was sentenced.

Some experts have criticized the court for making the ruling before Congress had
enacted new antiterror legislation needed to bring Peruvian law in line with
international standards.

Mr. Toledo brushed aside those concerns. "We have to set our justice system
right," he said, but "we will not cede an inch to terrorism, drug trafficking,
or to those who trample human rights."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SENTENCING (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
VERDICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TREASON (78%);
LEGISLATION (77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%) DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;
TERRORISM;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (59%) SHINING PATH (GUERRILLA ORGN)

PERSON: TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO (PRES); FUJIMORI, ALBERTO

CITY: LIMA, PERU (71%)

COUNTRY: PERU (95%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             749 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

White Supremacist Is Held In Ordering Judge's Death

BYLINE:  By JODI WILGOREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 8


A white supremacist was arrested this afternoon on charges that he had solicited
someone to kill a federal judge presiding over a copyright case regarding the
name of his organization, the World Church of the Creator.

The man, Matthew Hale, 31, who calls himself the church's supreme leader and
Pontifex Maximus, was taken into custody at the federal building in downtown
Chicago as he headed to a conference on the copyright case in the courtroom of
Judge Joan Humphrey Lefkow of Federal District Court. The arrest came shortly
after Mr. Hale denounced Judge Lefkow in a news conference, saying she was
biased against him because she was married to a Jewish man and had grandchildren
who were biracial.

Law enforcement officials with Chicago's Joint Terrorism Task Force said Mr.
Hale had crossed the line when he asked another person to "forcibly assault and
murder" Judge Lefkow.

"Certainly freedom of speech and freedom of religion are important in our
society here in America," Thomas J. Kneir of the F.B.I. told reporters in
announcing Mr. Hale's indictment. "But the threat of physical violence will not
be tolerated."

Patrick J. Fitzgerald, the United States attorney here, added, "Freedom of
speech does not include the freedom to solicit murder."

About a dozen World Church of the Creator members stood when Mr. Hale entered a
federal courtroom this afternoon for his arraignment, several of them raising
their right hands in what they called a Roman salute but is more commonly known
as a Nazi salute. Mr. Hale pleaded not guilty to the solicitation and
obstruction of justice charges and will remain in custody until a detention
hearing on Monday afternoon.

"This is totally bogus -- it's in our Constitutional rights to believe in a
religion," said Shawn Powers, 21, a member of Mr. Hale's movement. "We are a
bona fide religion, and they are trying to take that away from us. Matt Hale is
not a violent man, he doesn't advocate violence."

The arrest revived memories of the Fourth of July weekend in 1999, when one of
Mr. Hale's followers, Benjamin Smith, went on a three-day rampage in Illinois
and Indiana, killing two men, one black and one Korean, and injuring nine other
Jews, Asians and African-Americans before committing suicide.

Those who monitor white supremacist and other hate groups said Mr. Hale had been
brilliant in using the Internet to recruit young members, luring them through a
network of 30 Web sites featuring compelling graphics and interactive games. His
church, "dedicated to the survival, expansion and advancement of the white
race," claims 70,000 members in 49 states and 28 countries, though some experts
say the movement has just a few hundred adherents.

"Matt Hale has been allowed with impunity to engage in terrorist-like activity
for four years now," Richard S. Hirschhaut, director of the Anti-Defamation
League's Midwest office, said today. "He has had blood on his hands for more
than four years. He is now where he should be."

Rabbi Abraham Cooper, associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish
human rights organization based in Los Angeles, said in a statement that Mr.
Hale's arrest "could remove the most dangerous American racist of his
generation."

Mr. Hale's path crossed Judge Lefkow's after an Oregon organization known as the
TE-TA-MA Truth Foundation filed a lawsuit to block Mr. Hale from using the term
"Church of the Creator," which it had registered as a trademark. Judge Lefkow
originally ruled in favor of Mr. Hale but was overturned on appeal, and in
November she ordered his group to stop using the name on the Internet and to
destroy any printed materials including it.

Mr. Hale later sued Judge Lefkow, 59, who was appointed to the district court by
President Bill Clinton in 2000, claiming her order violated the Constitution by
requiring the destruction of the group's bibles.

"If federal judges are to sit in judgment of the people, the people must be able
to sit in judgment of them," he said at the time. On various Web sites, Mr. Hale
has urged followers to picket Judge Lefkow's church, and has referred to her as
"a white woman married to a Jew with three mixed grandchildren."

Glenn Greenwald, a lawyer for Mr. Hale, said the charges filed today might stem
from a misinterpretation of a statement by his client on the Internet that "we
are in a state of war with Judge Lefkow."

"They are probably trying to take things he said along the lines of political
advocacy and turn it into a crime," Mr. Greenwald said. "The F.B.I. may have
interpreted this protected speech as a threat against a federal judge, but it's
probably nothing more than some heated rhetoric."

Mr. Fitzgerald, the prosecutor, would not provide details about Mr. Hale's case,
including whom he had solicited for the murder, whether money was involved, how
officials discovered the plot or whether Judge Lefkow was in danger.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Matthew Hale, leader of the World Church of the Creator, and two
followers yesterday in the Chicago federal building before his arrest. (Jennifer
Warburg for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); JUDGES (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); COPYRIGHT (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
FREEDOM OF RELIGION (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (74%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (73%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY (67%); SUICIDE (66%); INTERNET &
WWW (63%); ASIAN AMERICANS (60%); MURDER (58%) MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS;
HATE CRIMES;  FRINGE GROUPS AND MOVEMENTS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  BLACKS;
JEWS;  ASIAN-AMERICANS;  SUICIDES AND SUICIDE ATTEMPTS

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (55%) WORLD CHURCH OF THE CREATOR;
TE-TA-MA TRUTH FOUNDATION

PERSON: WILGOREN, JODI; HALE, MATTHEW; LEFKOW, JOAN HUMPHREY (JUDGE); SMITH,
BENJAMIN

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (91%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (91%); INDIANA, USA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: CHICAGO (ILL)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             751 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Family Leave Case, Supreme Court Steps Back Into Federalism Debate

BYLINE:  By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Eight years into the Rehnquist court's federalism revolution, it is almost
routine for the new year to bring a new Supreme Court test of the limits of
federal authority over the states. But there is nothing routine about the
federalism case the justices will hear on Wednesday, potentially the most
important of the half-dozen cases so far in which the court has shielded the
states from the full reach of federal law.

The new case, an appeal by the State of Nevada seeking immunity from suit under
the Family and Medical Leave Act, on the surface resembles others in a series of
increasingly caustic 5-to-4 rulings. In 2000, for example, the court held that
employees could not sue states for violating the federal law against age
discrimination. The next year, it ruled that states were immune from employment
discrimination suits under the Americans With Disabilities Act.

Now the question is whether state employees can sue for damages under the Family
and Medical Leave Act's family leave provision, which gives both men and women
the right to take up to 12 weeks off without pay to care for a seriously ill
family member. A Nevada state worker, William Hibbs, sued the state after being
denied the full 12 weeks he requested to care for his ailing wife.

There is no doubt that Congress meant the 1993 law to apply to state employers.
Congress included language that explicitly removed the immunity from private
damage suits that the states would otherwise enjoy under the 11th Amendment,
which bars suits in federal court against states that have not given their
consent to be sued. As in the earlier cases, the constitutional question is
whether Congress acted within the scope of its authority when it removed the
states' 11th Amendment shield.

The recent precedents have made this a very complex conceptual issue, and a
heavily freighted one in terms of the relationship between the court and
Congress. Through a series of incremental and highly technical decisions, the
court has placed Congress in an increasingly tight vise.

The question now is whether in the new case, Nevada Department of Human
Resources v. Hibbs, No. 01-1368, the court will put a stranglehold on the
ability of Congress to pursue its own constitutional vision.

For that reason, the case has drawn enormous attention not only from civil
rights organizations but also from dozens of current and past members of
Congress, who signed a brief arguing that Congress acted within the core of its
constitutional authority in applying the family leave requirement to the states.
In its brief on behalf of Congress, the Bush administration says the
implications of a ruling in favor of state immunity would be disturbing for
civil rights enforcement generally.

The basis for that assessment lies in the route the court has taken to reach
this point. Decisions in the late 1990's held that Congress lacked authority to
abrogate the states' immunity when acting within its ordinary power to regulate
interstate commerce, the basis for most federal legislation.

Those cases did not shut the door completely. They left one potential source of
Congressional power over the 11th Amendment: Section 5 of the 14th Amendment,
which gives Congress authority to "enforce, by appropriate legislation" the
amendment's twin guarantees of equal protection and due process.

Both age discrimination and disability discrimination implicate equal
protection, and the defense of Congress's application of the Age Discrimination
in Employment Act and the Americans With Disabilities Act to the states was that
Section 5 empowered Congress to act. But in Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents,
the age case, and Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett, the
disability case, the court rebuffed that argument.

The 5-to-4 majority in both cases gave several reasons for its disapproval,
essentially concluding that Congress had not come up with enough evidence of
unconstitutional discrimination by state employers and so could not justify
opening the states to lawsuits by their employees. The legislation was not
"appropriate" under Section 5, the court held.

But the Family and Medical Leave Act is different, or at least that is the
argument of its defenders. It was passed, after eight years of debate and two
presidential vetoes, in an effort to combat the lingering effects of sex
discrimination in the workplace by creating a level playing field where the
duties of providing care at home were no longer "women's work" that made women
less reliable, and therefore less desirable, as employees.

As Solicitor General Theodore B. Olson expressed it in the Bush administration's
brief, "Congress aimed to transform family leave from its historic genesis as a
'women's issue' into a routinized, across-the-board employment benefit," no
longer "a 'problem' attributed to the presence of women in the work force."

Under the Supreme Court's equal protection doctrine, sex discrimination is in a
separate category from age and disability discrimination. Official policies that
treat people differently on the basis of age, disability, income and -- unless
the court says otherwise in a case that is currently pending -- sexual
orientation are presumed to be constitutional, as long as the government
presents a "rational basis" for their defense. But sex and race discrimination
are presumed to be unconstitutional. Further, Congressional measures to prevent
or cure these types of discrimination have traditionally received the court's
deference, even if the justices would not themselves have defined the problem as
Congress did or designed the remedy it chose.

That history of deference, and of constitutional interpretation as an enterprise
to be shared between the court and Congress, is now at stake. The implications
are both practical and symbolic.

The practical impact would be felt by the 4.8 million people who work for state
governments. If the states win, there would be no direct impact on
private-sector workers. Even if the court finds that the Family and Medical
Leave Act is not valid under Section 5 of the 14th Amendment, the law would
remain unquestionably valid as legislation under the Commerce Clause, binding on
private employers.

But a ruling that the act was not "appropriate" 14th Amendment legislation would
entail the court's rejection of Congress's vision of what equal protection
means. It would import into the core constitutional area of civil rights
enforcement the muscular approach to judicial review displayed in recent cases:
that the Constitution is only what the Supreme Court says it is.

To hold that civil rights laws could be justified only as economic measures
under the Commerce Clause, rather than the Equal Protection Clause, "would be a
huge symbolic turn in American politics," Prof. Robert C. Post of the University
of California at Berkeley said in an interview.

"Nothing could be more symbolic of this court's hostility to civil rights than
to strip these laws of their constitutional resonance," Professor Post said.

The states are of two minds about the case. Fourteen have joined Nevada's brief,
while Connecticut and four others have joined a brief filed by New York's
attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, in defense of the law.

Nevada maintains that application of the law would be nothing less than a
constitutional insult.

"States maintain the dignity of a co-equal in our system of dual sovereignty,"
Nevada's brief says, "and immunity is central to that dignity."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FAMILY (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); CIVIL SERVICES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LABOR
& EMPLOYMENT LAW (90%); EMPLOYEE LEAVE (90%); PENSIONS & BENEFITS LAW (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); US FAMILY &
MEDICAL LEAVE ACT (90%); IMMUNITY (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); SOVEREIGN
IMMUNITY (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (77%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (76%); EMPLOYMENT (76%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (75%); DAMAGES
(75%); HUMAN RESOURCES (74%); DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (74%);
GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); US AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (73%); AGE DISCRIMINATION (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%) STATES (US);  SUITS AND LITIGATION;
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES;  FAMILY LEAVES;  MEN;  WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT (US)

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, LINDA

STATE: NEVADA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEVADA

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             753 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IMMIGRATION;
Complying, Anxiously, With an I.N.S. Roundup

BYLINE:  By NICK MADIGAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 12


Shoaib Muhammad, a 29-year-old computer engineer from Karachi, Pakistan, who has
worked here for two years, says he is as far from being a terrorist as one could
imagine.

But he is still afraid of being arrested when he shows up Monday at the federal
building downtown to register with the Immigration and Naturalization Service
under a program designed to root out terrorists. The program focuses on men from
20 countries, including Iraq, Iran, North Korea, Afghanistan, Syria, Sudan and
Libya. Since it began last month, more than 500 men have been detained, most for
visa violations. On Friday alone, about 125 were arrested nationwide, an
immigration official said today.

"I've never been involved in a crime, but I'm still worried," said Mr. Muhammad,
who holds a visa to work in the United States. "If they want me to go back, I
will, but it's the way they're doing it, with handcuffs and detentions, that
bothers me."

A statement released Friday by the immigration service said that its officers
"have made every effort to minimize any delay or inconvenience to those
individuals required to register."

The roundup is aimed solely at men over the age of 16 who entered the United
States as students, as tourists or on business before Oct. 1, 2002. But the
program ran into trouble from the outset, primarily here in Los Angeles, when
scores of immigrants, many of them from Iran and with relatives who are
long-term residents of California, were arrested as they registered in December.
Many had pending applications for visa extensions or were in the process of
applying for legal residency. Officials have since acknowledged that they were
overwhelmed by the number of people they had to process through fingerprinting
and criminal background checks, and that some of the detentions may have been
unwarranted. Most of the men have been released, with visa violators being
required to appear before immigration judges soon.

In a letter to Attorney General John Ashcroft on Friday, Dr. William F. Schulz
of Amnesty International U.S.A. wrote that singling out individuals on the basis
of national origin "is tantamount to racial discrimination."

Officials from the Department of Justice and the immigration service, which it
oversees, did not return calls seeking comment.

"The I.N.S. is trying to make it look like we're doing something about terrorism
by targeting an entire community because they happen to be from a Muslim
country," said Sarah Eltantani, a spokeswoman for the Muslim Public Affairs
Council.

In a waiting room at the federal building here on Friday, a group of Armenian
men from Lebanon wondered whether they would be going home for dinner or
spending the night in jail. One, who would give only his first name, Joseph,
said he had spent 18 years in the United States and had been turned down three
times for a green card.

"I'm a good citizen -- I work hard and I pay my taxes," said Joseph, 41, who
said he was a restaurant manager in nearby Glendale. "America has a right to
protect herself, but the way she's doing it is all wrong. She has to go after
the bad guys; she knows who they are."

Another Lebanese man, who said his name was Panos, emerged from his interview
with an immigration official after posting a $1,500 bond and scheduling a court
date for overstaying his visa. "It's the law, and they're doing it right," he
said. "I'm going to tell the judge I love this country and I need to stay here."

An immigration lawyer, John W. Craig III, said one of his clients, a 25-year-old
Tunisian, had been arrested for overstaying his visa and "questioned intensely
for four hours" before being released on Thursday after 36 hours in jail.

In New York City, several blocks from where the World Trade Center once stood,
some of the immigrants who lined up Friday to register at the I.N.S. office in
Federal Plaza admitted having expired visas and said they feared being arrested
or even deported.

Elyes ben Taleb, 28, said he had arrived from Tunisia five years ago "for the
American dream."

"I love this country, but on a day like today, I don't feel like a part of
America anymore," said Mr. ben Taleb, who lives in the Bronx and works as a
marketing consultant. "Do they really think terrorists are going to stand on
line for hours in the cold and turn themselves in?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); TERRORISM (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); ARRESTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (77%);
DEPORTATION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); FINGERPRINTING (72%);
REFUGEES (72%); LAWYERS (70%); DISCRIMINATION (70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%);
BACKGROUND CHECKS (64%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (64%); RACE & RACISM (64%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (61%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION

ORGANIZATION: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE

PERSON: MADIGAN, NICK

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%);
ARMENIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); LIBYA (79%); IRAQ (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); LEBANON (79%); SYRIA (72%)

REGION: MIDDLE EAST

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             763 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Embargo on Cuba

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

Adam Cohen speaks glowingly of drinking mojitos at the Hotel Nacional in Havana
("Two Things Linger in Cuba: Fidel and a Pointless Embargo," Editorial Observer,
Jan. 12).

He doesn't mention that the average Cuban is barred from resort hotels, a
practice known as "tourist apartheid." He also doesn't note that there is
rampant racial discrimination in hiring in Cuba's tourist industry.

Poverty in Cuba is not, as he says, a result of the embargo. It is because of
Fidel Castro's adherence to a failed Marxist economic model.

Freedom will come to Cuba through the efforts of the brave men and women who are
standing up to the regime to demand their human rights, not as a byproduct of
tourists drinking mojitos at the Nacional.

DENNIS HAYS
Washington, Jan. 13, 2003

The writer is executive vice president of the Cuban American National
Foundation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOTELS & MOTELS (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); TOURISM (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); RESORTS (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (70%); RACE & RACISM (70%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (69%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (69%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
IN EMPLOYMENT (55%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (78%)

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (88%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             772 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-President Of Serbia Surrenders To Tribunal

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Jan. 20


The former Serbian President, Milan Milutinovic, surrendered today to the United
Nations tribunal, which has charged him with crimes against humanity related to
the 1999 conflict in Kosovo.

He was the last ally of Slobodan Milosevic to hold high office and had enjoyed
immunity from prosecution until he stepped down in December.

Mr. Milutinovic, who became Serbia's president in 1997, arrived here on a
special plane provided by the Yugoslav government. Belgrade has been lobbying on
his behalf for special concessions, like release on bail until his trial begins.

He was meeting today with the tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, but
no details were immediately forthcoming on the conditions of his surrender. When
Mr. Milutinovic appears in court on Wednesday, tribunal judges will probably
decide if he can return to Belgrade pending trial. His health may be a factor:
the Serbian politician has already had heart surgery and is said to require
medical supervision.

For now, Mr. Milutinovic, 60, is being held at the same United Nations prison
here as his one-time patron, Mr. Milosevic, the former Yugoslavian president.

Mr. Milosevic also has a heart condition, and tribunal officials said today that
his trial remained suspended while he fought another bout of flu. Mr.
Milosevic's high blood pressure and heart disease make him prone to infections
and fatigue, according to one of his legal assistants. Hearings last year were
repeatedly interrupted by Mr. Milosevic's health problems, prolonging already
lengthy proceedings.

It was not clear whether Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Milutinovic are allowed to meet
in the three-story United Nations jail here, where Serbs, Croats and Bosnians
often mingle. Although Mr. Milutinovic was a member of the Milosevic inner
circle, he was widely regarded as a figurehead who attended meetings but seldom
involved himself in decision making or operations.

As the head of the Serbian delegation to talks with the Kosovar Albanians at
Rambouillet in February 1999, before NATO bombed Yugoslavia, Mr. Milutinovic
bore the brunt of Western efforts to force Mr. Milosevic to withdraw his forces
from Kosovo. But he was unwilling, and probably unable, to persuade Mr.
Milosevic to back down. He ended his speech at the summit with the words: "Que
sera sera."

He hopes to fashion his defense around his reputation for disengagement in
government affairs, and has denied the prosecution's charges of crimes against
humanity, including deportation, murder and persecution. During the Serbian
crackdown of the late 1990's, which Belgrade said was necessary to maintain
control over its province of Kosovo, some 800,000 ethnic Albanians fled Serbian
police and military violence and hundreds were killed.

This week, the Belgrade government has made much of its cooperation with the
tribunal by helping ensure the arrival of Mr. Milutinovic here. But this may be
as much a signal to Washington as it is a good-will gesture. The United States
has said Yugoslavia risks losing economic assistance after March 31 if it does
not arrest war crimes suspects and cooperate with the tribunal. But Belgrade has
not yet detained others indicted by the tribunal, including the former Bosnian
Serb military chief Ratko Mladic, who is often seen in Belgrade. The former
Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, has also been seen in Yugoslavia, but he
reportedly spends most of his time in hiding in eastern Bosnia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEART DISEASE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (88%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); LOBBYING (76%); SURGERY &
TRANSPLANTATION (74%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (73%); BAIL (73%); DEPORTATION
(73%); IMMUNITY (72%); INFLUENZA (66%); HYPERTENSION (65%); MURDER (58%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; MILUTINOVIC, MILAN (PRES); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             778 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

BUSH PLANS TO LET RELIGIOUS GROUPS GET BUILDING AID

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


The Bush administration plans to allow religious groups for the first time to
use federal housing money to help build centers where religious worship is held,
as long as part of the building is also used for social services.

The policy shift, which was made in a rule that the Department of Housing and
Urban Development proposed this month, significantly expands the
administration's contentious religion-based initiative.

The White House says it wants to end discrimination against religious groups.
Opponents say the policy breaches the separation of church and state.

Current regulations generally prohibit religious groups from using federal
housing and community development grants, which totaled $7.7 billion last year,
to build or rehabilitate structures. The new rules, still subject to final
approval by housing officials, allow the use of federal aid to acquire,
rehabilitate or build centers used for religious and specifically approved
nonreligious activities, so long as no federal money is used for the religious
section.

A church could erect a building using federal money to create a shelter for the
homeless in one part and private money to create a sanctuary in another part,
officials said. A synagogue could use a grant to rehabilitate part of its
building for a counseling center for AIDS patients or the poor. A Muslim group
could apply for federal money to upgrade the lighting and equipment in a room in
its mosque to allow it to be used as an counseling center for single parents.

Bush administration officials, who have made religion-based initiatives a
cornerstone of their agenda, said that religious organizations had historically
been discriminated against in the fierce competition for federal grants and that
the change was simply intended to level the field to compete for the pool of
money.

"We see no reason to exclude religious organizations from participation in these
programs if there can be a reasonable mechanism to ensure that a program has no
particular religious connotation one way or another," the general counsel of the
housing department, Richard A. Hauser, said in an interview. "There's no reason
you can't have a cathedral upstairs and something that would look like any other
room in the basement" for counseling.

Civil rights advocates, legal experts and Congressional critics attacked the
change. They said it moved the government dangerously close to financing the
building of houses of worship in violation of the separation of church and
state.

"This is probably the most clearly unconstitutional aspect of the White House's
faith-based initiative that we've seen up to this point," said Christopher
Anders, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. "What this
does is take federal money that is serving the neediest of the needy in our
society and diverts it to the bricks-and-mortar construction of churches and
sanctuaries and other places of worship."

Opponents said the change forced the government into the difficult position of
having to determine which part of a building is used for worship and which is
for social services.

"You run into the nightmarish problem of having the government monitor what goes
on inside churches" and sanctuaries, said Representative Barney Frank, Democrat
of Massachusetts, who promised to seek hearings on the change. "Are we going to
start sending in the inspector general to charge people with committing a bar
mitzvah?"

A spokeswoman for the housing department, Diane Tomb, said the proposed change
grew out of misinterpretations of past policy that effectively blocked religious
groups from access to housing programs.

In a New York City case, Ms. Tomb said, a religious group was wrongfully blocked
from activities in a common area of a publicly financed housing project. "That's
discrimination," she said.

President Bush made headlines in a speech on Dec. 12 when he bypassed Congress
and issued an executive order to make it easier for religious groups to receive
federal money for welfare programs.

Like most of the debate in the two-year push for initiatives that involve
religious groups, the order focuses on the social services that many groups rely
on the government to pay for. In the change, released on Jan. 6 without fanfare,
officials proposed a potentially far-reaching shift that centers not on services
but on how buildings run by religious groups are financed and built.

The rules have consistently banned grants for buildings with any religious
component, officials said. The current regulations for one popular home
investment program, for instance, ban grants to "primarily religious
organizations" and say housing projects "must be used exclusively" for secular
activities.

The new regulations set up a system for programs at mixed-use sites "where a
structure is used for both eligible and inherently religious activities." The
change does not spell out how the proportion would be formulated. Officials said
that would have to be determined case by case.

The public has until March 7 to comment before the department is scheduled to
issue its final approval. The change would apply to all HUD grants, including
programs for economic development in low-income areas, emergency shelters and
housing aid for single-parent families, young people and AIDS cases.

Many funds like the widely used community development block grants are sent
through cities, which give them to local groups. Other funds go directly to
private providers.

Advocates for religious groups applauded the shift, saying it sends a message of
inclusion and predicting that it will open financing avenues that had been
closed to many groups.

"This should be a welcome step," said the Rev. Eugene F. Rivers III, president
of the National 10-Point Leadership Foundation, a coalition of groups that
represents primarily black churches. "It's entirely reasonable."

Some civil rights advocates and Congressional critics promised to fight the
change. Several legal experts said the new policy might not pass muster under a
1971 Supreme Court case, Tilton v. Richardson, that restricted aid to religious
institutions.

"The question is whether you can legitimately allocate, say, 80 percent of a
building for religious use and 20 percent for secular use and say that the
federal money is only paying for the secular use," said Douglas Laycock, a
professor and religious liberties specialist at the University of Texas Law
School. "The answer to the allocation question right now in the courts is no,
you can't do it."

A professor at the Cardozo Law School, Marci Hamilton, said that it might be
difficult for government lawyers to argue that they can truly separate a
religious and social functions in a building and that many religious groups
might not even want to try to do so.

"Once religious entities start arguing that any portion of their building is for
nonreligious purposes," Professor Hamilton said, "they start opening themselves
up to all sorts of problems like their tax-exempt status as religious
institutions. It's a whole Pandora's box."

Billy Terry, who oversees religious issues for the National Congress for
Community Economic Development, said that the change sent "an important message,
and it denotes the tenor of this administration."

Although many religion-based groups do a good job of distinguishing between
religious and social service components, Mr. Terry said, separating them can
prove messy.

"It's like trying to take the sugar out of cupcakes," he said. "The line can get
blurred."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%);
CHURCH & STATE (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); GRANTS & GIFTS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRUCTION (78%);
BUDGETS (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); TRENDS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%);
APPROVALS (76%); HOMELESS SHELTERS (73%); TEMPORARY SHELTERS (73%); AIDS & HIV
(72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CITIES (71%); HOMELESSNESS (67%);
LAWYERS (66%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (63%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (61%); INTERVIEWS
(61%); SINGLE PARENTS (50%) SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  CHURCH-STATE
RELATIONS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  RELIGION AND CHURCHES;  FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND
BUDGETING

ORGANIZATION: HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT

PERSON: LICHTBLAU, ERIC; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: UNITED STATES;  UNITED STATES;  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             785 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
Cab Drivers and Guards Detained in a Three-Month Immigration Sweep

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Jan. 24


Federal immigration authorities have rounded up 69 foreign-born cab drivers and
private security guards in San Diego in what they said was an effort to ensure
the security of this weekend's Super Bowl, officials said today.

The three-month sweep apparently did not net any known terrorists, but did find
34 foreigners with prior criminal convictions and dozens of others with visa
violations, Immigration and Naturalization Service officials said. Criminal
charges are pending against six people and others face immediate deportation,
officials said.

The roundup came as the immigration service conducted a nationwide registration
program requiring tens of thousands of temporary residents from mostly Muslim
countries to appear at I.N.S. offices to be interviewed, fingerprinted and
photographed. Hundreds of them have been detained for visa violations and scores
will be deported. That program touched off an outcry from Arab-American groups,
civil libertarians and immigrants' rights groups.

Adele Fasano, the immigration service's San Diego district director, said that
the three-month Super Bowl investigation had identified more than 100 people
with criminal backgrounds or visa violations at the targeted firms. She said 41
remained at large. She said that the program had made the Super Bowl more
secure.

"I would say that public safety has been enhanced as a result of our extensive
screening of individuals who are non-U.S. citizens and are working in activities
related to the Super Bowl, and had access to sensitive areas," Fasano said.

The immigration service said the San Diego program was designed to identify
people who might have access to Qualcomm Stadium, where the Super Bowl will be
played. Officials reviewed 11,000 immigrant employment verification forms (known
as I-9 forms) at 187 security guard companies in San Diego and Imperial
Counties. They also reviewed the licenses of 4,500 taxi, limousine and shuttle
bus drivers working in the two counties.

Authorities arrested 45 security guards, most of them from Latin American
countries, and 24 taxi and limousine drivers, many from countries suspected of
having terrorist cells, officials said. The immigration agency did not release
the names or nationalities of the detainees.

One of those arrested was Efrain Alvarez Jacobo, a Mexican with convictions on
weapons and drug charges. He was deported several years ago but returned to the
country to live with his wife and two children. He was working as a private
security guard when he was picked up last month.

His lawyer, Gerald Singleton, said that his client did not pose any security
risk and called him a victim of racial profiling.

"They went after him because of his ethnicity," Singleton said.

Jordan Budd, legal director for the San Diego chapter of the American Civil
Liberties Union, said that the Super Bowl sweep did not identify any terrorism
risks and served only to further stigmatize immigrants, who have come under
harsh government scrutiny since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

"They just seem to be trying to cull anyone who is out of status and who holds
one of these kinds of jobs so they can declare to the public that they have
taken meaningful action to protect the Super Bowl," Budd said. "That proposition
is farcical. They are just scapegoating the immigrant community while doing
nothing to make the public safer."

He noted that federal authorities had apparently not conducted a similar survey
of American citizens holding similar jobs to assure that no one with a criminal
background could gain access to the stadium.

"With respect to the larger rationale of public safety, if what they're trying
to do is identify people with criminal records, it makes no sense to simply
target the immigrant population," Budd said. "There's no sign they've done
similar background checks of U.S. citizens with the same sorts of jobs --
transportation or security positions."

Fasano said that the I.N.S. did not have authority to investigate American
citizens. She said the San Diego police and federal law enforcement agencies
were responsible for monitoring the majority of workers at the Super Bowl.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: As a Super Bowl security measure, troops from the California
National Guard patrolled fuel tanks across the street from Qualcomm Stadium.
(Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); SECURITY GUARD SERVICES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(90%); AMERICAN FOOTBALL TOURNAMENTS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); TAXICABS & LIMOUSINES (89%); ARRESTS (89%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARAB AMERICANS (78%); RACIAL PROFILING (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); FINGERPRINTING (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); LAWYERS
(73%); REFUGEES (73%); SHUTTLE BUS & VANPOOL SERVICES (73%); STADIUMS & ARENAS
(72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); RACE & RACISM
(68%); ETHNICITY (60%) FOOTBALL;  SUPER BOWL;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;
TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

COMPANY: QUALCOMM INC (54%)

TICKER: QCOM (NASDAQ) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (54%);
NAICS334220 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
MANUFACTURING (54%)

CITY: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); MEXICO (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  SAN DIEGO (CALIF);  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             789 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY;
POWELL, IN EUROPE, NEARLY DISMISSES U.N.'S IRAQ REPORT

BYLINE:  By MARK LANDLER and ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1418 words

DATELINE: DAVOS, Switzerland, Jan. 26


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell came close to dismissing a crucial United
Nations report on Iraq weapons today on the eve of the report's publication, and
said the United States would go to war against Iraq alone if its divided
European allies would not join the fight.

While Mr. Powell promised that the Bush administration would study the findings
of the report when it is submitted on Monday, he indicated that it would be
useless to give the weapons inspectors more time.

Bringing the case for military action to a deeply skeptical audience of
political, business and religious leaders at a conference in the Swiss Alps, Mr.
Powell said Saddam Hussein of Iraq had "repeatedly violated the trust of the
United Nations, his people and his neighbors." He renewed an administration
contention that Mr. Hussein had ties to Al Qaeda terrorists.  Excerpts, Page A8.

His remarks at the conference, the annual World Economic Forum, deepened a sense
of inevitability among people here about a conflict. Speaking after Mr. Powell,
King Abdullah of Jordan said the prospects for a peaceful resolution were
fading.

"We are a bit 'too little, too late' to see a diplomatic solution," said the
king, whose land borders Iraq. "Let us hope that whatever happens between Iraq
and the international community is as quick and painless as possible."

Though the United States had hoped to forge a consensus among its allies, Mr.
Powell said, the lack of a coalition would not deter the Bush administration.
"When we feel strongly about something, we will lead, we will act, even if
others are not prepared to join us," he said.

By promising to study the report and consult with other members of the Security
Council before acting, the secretary made a modest concession to the qualms of
Europeans about what many here describe as Washington's stampede toward war.

But he also recited a litany of failures and unanswered questions in Iraq's
cooperation with the inspectors, who have been looking for biological, chemical
and nuclear weapons in Iraq for two months.

"To those who say, why not give the inspection process more time, I ask, how
much more time does Iraq need to answer these questions?" Mr. Powell said.

"We're in no great rush to judgment tomorrow or the day after, but clearly time
is running out," he said. "We will not shrink from war if that is the only way
to rid Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction."

Mr. Powell's speech is part of a campaign by the White House, culminating in
President Bush's State of the Union address on Tuesday, to rally public opinion
at home and abroad. While the secretary did not produce new evidence of Iraqi
weapons, he insisted that the burden of proof was on Mr. Hussein, not the
inspectors, to give an accounting of Baghdad's munitions.

Administration officials declined to say what time line they have in mind for a
decision about any invasion.

European diplomats suggested that they would continue to press for more time for
the inspectors. Speaking on the ABC News program "This Week," Javier Solana, the
European Union's foreign policy chief, said that if Hans Blix, the head of the
chemical and biological weapons inspection team, asked the Security Council for
more time when he submitted his report on Monday, he should get it.

"I don't think that we are talking about an infinite amount of time," Mr. Solana
said. "Time has been given to Saddam Hussein before. So we are talking about a
question of weeks, perhaps months."

Speaking on French television, the French foreign minister, Dominique de
Villepin, called for an extension of the inspections for "several weeks, or for
a few months."

Asked for evidence to back up Mr. Powell's assertion that Mr. Hussein has "clear
ties" to Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups, Andrew H. Card Jr., the White
House chief of staff, said on "Fox News Sunday" that the Iraqi leader "has had a
history of a relationship with terrorist organizations in the past, and it would
be horrible if his weapons of mass destruction got into the hands of
terrorists."

Mr. Card was asked on another program, the NBC News "Meet the Press," about
reports that the United States was prepared to use nuclear weapons if need be
against Iraq. He answered, "Should Saddam Hussein have any thought that he would
use a weapon of mass destruction, he should anticipate that the United States
will use whatever means necessary to protect us and the world from a holocaust."

Even as the administration struggles with its allies, it is also facing pressure
at home to go slow in confronting Iraq.

Mr. Powell's speech did little to change the view of the Democratic leadership
in Congress that Mr. Bush is acting in "a very precipitous way," as Senator Tom
Daschle, the minority leader, put it today on the CBS News program "Face the
Nation."

There was little indication that Mr. Powell had changed the minds of people at
the World Economic Forum, which assembles a rarefied fraternity of government
leaders, business executives and other notables. The audience applauded the
loudest for those who rose to condemn American policy.

Still, at a meeting marked by relentless antagonism toward Washington, Mr.
Powell offered a muscular, unapologetic and at times emotional defense of the
nation's exercise of power.

"I don't think I have anything to be ashamed of, or apologize for, with respect
to what America has done for the world," he said in response to a question
asking why the United States always falls back on the use of "hard power"
instead of the "soft power" of diplomacy.

Mr. Powell noted that the United States had sent its soldiers into foreign wars
over the last century, most recently in Afghanistan, without having imperial
designs on the territories it secured.

"We've put wonderful young men and women at risk, many of whom have lost their
lives," he said, his voice growing hoarse. "We've asked for nothing but enough
land to bury them in."

At other moments, his tone was more conciliatory. He acknowledged the split
between the United States and two key European allies, France and Germany, which
last week said they would oppose military action now. Mr. Powell likened it to
the bumps in a marriage.

"One or two of our friends, we have been in marriage counseling with for over
225 years nonstop," he said. "And yet the marriage is intact, remains strong,
will weather any differences that come along."

Still, the speech laid bare stark differences in how Europe, Arab nations and
the United States view the threat from Iraq.

King Abdullah said he was "concerned that we are being diverted onto another
track" by the crisis in Iraq, distracting attention from the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict as the main hurdle to regional peace.

That theme was taken up by Prince Turki al-Faisal al-Saud, a member of the Saudi
royal house, who said American policy -- seen in the Arab world as pro-Israel --
was the principal reason for Arab hostility toward Washington.

A poll of the audience conducted during a panel debate found that 81 percent
believed a war with Iraq was inevitable. Fifty-six percent said it would drag on
for six months and ignite urban warfare in Baghdad.

Earlier, the former archbishop of Canterbury, George Carey, confronted Mr.
Powell, saying the American insistence on military power had created "a
credibility gap of trust in American politicians, and it's a very grave
problem."

A Dutch banker, Hubertus Heemskerk, seemed to speak for many in the audience
when he challenged Mr. Powell to produce evidence of Iraq's transgressions
before going to war.

"I think the evidence is there, the evidence is clear," Mr. Powell replied. He
said the United States would present more evidence of Iraqi weapons programs "in
the days and weeks ahead."

The White House may not be helped by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
which assisted in weapons inspections in Iraq, and said today that it would not
produce a "smoking gun" in its report.

Mr. Powell, however, argued that Security Council Resolution 1441 placed the
onus on Iraq to "come clean" by disclosing its weapons, rather than obliging the
inspectors to root out arms in a country "the size of California."

"This is not about inspectors finding smoking guns," he said.

The British head of Amnesty International, Irene Khan, was applauded when she
questioned whether the Iraq threat "risks provoking a massive humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe."

Mr. Powell said the United States was "sensitive to the plight of the Iraqi
people, not only in case of conflict but also right now."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: King Abdullah of Jordan speaking at the Davos forum yesterday.;
Iraqi soldiers guarded United Nations headquarters in Baghdad yesterday as
inspectors inside prepared to head out for visits to possible arms sites.
(Photographs by Associated Press)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (78%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (78%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (78%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (76%); ACCOUNTING (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); BURDENS OF PROOF (63%);
EVIDENCE (61%); RELIGION (55%); MOUNTAINS (55%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND
CHEMICAL WARFARE;  PUBLIC OPINION;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AL-QAEDA (83%); WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (56%)
UNITED NATIONS; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%) LANDLER, MARK; COWELL, ALAN;
POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); ABDULLAH
(KING)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

STATE: GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (79%); ALPS (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%); EUROPE (95%); JORDAN (93%);
SWITZERLAND (92%)

REGION: IRAQ;  JORDAN;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             792 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serb Denies Guilt

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 27


Milan Milutinovic, the former president of Serbia, appeared at the United
Nations war crimes tribunal for the first time today and pleaded not guilty to
charges of deportation, murder, persecution and other crimes against ethnic
Albanian civilians in Kosovo in 1999.

Mr. Milutinovic, who surrendered to the tribunal in The Hague last week, became
president of Serbia in 1997. Prosecutors have indicted him on four counts of
crimes against humanity and one count of war crimes during the crackdown by
Serbian forces in Kosovo. He pleaded not guilty to all counts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); DEPORTATION
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); MURDER
(57%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MILUTINOVIC, MILAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             794 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 29, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

STATE OF THE UNION: THE OVERVIEW;
CALLING IRAQ A SERIOUS THREAT, BUSH VOWS THAT HE'LL DISARM IT, AND ALSO REBUILD
U.S. ECONOMY

BYLINE:  By RICHARD W. STEVENSON and DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1665 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


In an assertive speech that covered the main themes of his administration,
President Bush tonight combined an unflinching threat of military action against
Saddam Hussein with sweeping proposals on the key domestic issues of health care
and tax relief.

Mr. Bush, delivering his second State of the Union message before Congress,
sought to assure Americans that he could deal with their economic troubles and
foreign crises simultaneously and with compassion and resolve.

He spoke forcefully, purposefully and in somber tones of an America unafraid to
take unilateral action, if necessary, against an Iraqi leader he portrayed as
the personification of evil.

"Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and
it is not an option," Mr. Bush said.  Transcript, Page A12.

He defended his doctrine of pre-emption as the necessary response to terrorism
and sought to increase the pressure on his hesitant allies by announcing that he
was sending Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to the United Nations on Feb. 5.

Moving to control the next part of the decision-making calendar, Mr. Bush said
Mr. Powell would "present information and intelligence" to buttress White House
contentions that Mr. Hussein had deceived United Nations inspectors and that he
had secret links to Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups.

But the president tempered that message with a new agenda of international
humanitarianism, built on a major new intitiative against AIDS in Africa.

He promised his American audience tax relief for ordinary families and for
investors in the stock market.

Addressing his determination to deal once and for all with Mr. Hussein, the
president made it clear that while he would seek the world's support in
confronting Iraq -- and in liberating it -- he would not wait. "We will consult,
but let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does not fully disarm,
for the safety of our people, and for the peace of the world, we will lead a
coalition to disarm him," Mr. Bush said.

In an effort to answer his critics around the world, Mr. Bush described America
as a benign superpower, one that planned to "bring to the Iraqi people food, and
medicines and supplies." He paused for emphasis, and added: "And freedom."

"We exercise power without conquest," he said, "and sacrifice for the liberty of
strangers."

He described Mr. Hussein as showing "utter contempt" for the United Nations, and
he sent a message to the armed forces he has dispatched to the Persian Gulf,
telling them that "crucial hours" lie ahead.

"In those hours, the success of our cause will depend on you," Mr. Bush said,
sounding as if he assumed military conflict was coming. "Your training has
prepared you. Your honor will guide you. You believe in America and America
believes in you."

Mr. Bush used the speech to lay out his rationale for taking pre-emptive action
against Iraq, saying that Mr. Hussein had used chemical weapons on his own
people and had routinely resorted to torture against his opponents.

"If this is not evil, then evil has no meaning," he said.

In calm and measured tones that sometimes dropped almost to a whisper, Mr. Bush
pivoted from the weak economy, tax cuts, health care and volunteerism to AIDS,
terrorism and the likelihood of war. He linked the troubles at home to the
threats from abroad by suggesting that they collectively posed a challenge that
could not be deferred.

"We will not deny, we will not ignore, we will not pass along our problems to
other Congresses, other presidents and other generations," the president said.
"We will confront them with focus, and clarity, and courage."

Without providing any details, the president cited evidence "from intelligence
sources, secret communications and statements by people now in custody" in
asserting that Mr. Hussein is currently tied to Al Qaeda.

And he described what Sept. 11, 2001, might have been like if the hijackers that
day had had access to chemical and biological weapons of the sort that the
United States says Mr. Hussein has stockpiled.

"It would take just one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country
to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known," Mr. Bush said. "We will
do everything in our power to make sure that day never comes."

The White House had signaled for days that this would not be Mr. Bush's final
word on Iraq, and the president stopped short of declaring war. But he left
little doubt that he intended to disarm Mr. Hussein by force, with whatever
allies he could assemble, if the Iraqi leader did not give up his weapons
voluntarily.

Mr. Bush left open the possibility that Mr. Hussein could avoid war by
immediately complying with the demands by the United Nations that he disarm, but
seemed to hold out little hope that the Iraqi leader would do so.

"The dictator of Iraq is not disarming," Mr. Bush said. "To the contrary, he is
deceiving."

Mr. Bush also stressed efforts he was taking to protect the nation from another
terrorist attack, announcing that the Central Intelligence Agency and the F.B.I.
would pool foreign and domestic intelligence through a new joint operation
intended to improve their cooperation and better identify threats.

In devoting the first third of his address to the economy and domestic issues,
he displayed a determination not to be seen as overly absorbed by those crises
or inattentive to domestic problems. It was that image that hobbled his father's
unsuccessful re-election campaign 11 years ago.

His address had a number of surprises, among them a call for a $15 billion
program -- including $10 billion in new money -- to fight AIDS in Africa and the
Caribbean.

The initiative fit into two major themes of Mr. Bush's administration: its
efforts to be seen as "compassionate" in its conservatism and its efforts to
show the rest of the world that its foreign policy goal is not hegemony but to
foster peace, stability and prosperity.

Mr. Bush said his "first goal" was to revive the economy, which after showing
signs of recovery last year appears to be stalling again. He said the best way
to do this was passage of his $670 billion tax cut plan, including its provision
to end taxation of most stock dividends.

He also promised to dedicate $400 billion over the next decade to overhauling
the Medicare system and adding to it prescription drug coverage for some
retirees.

And after two years of attacks by environmentalists for his deregulatory
policies, Mr. Bush called for $1.2 billion in research into cleaner-burning
hydrogen-powered automobiles.

He proposed a $450 million plan to provide mentors for children whose parents
are in prison and a $600 million program to help an additional 300,000 people
get treatment for substance abuse.

He said his budget plan for next year, which he will submit to Congress on
Monday, would ask for $6 billion for a new program to produce more and better
vaccines and treatments against bioterrorism from agents like anthrax, botulinum
toxin, Ebola and plague.

Addressing an issue that ranks high among the concerns of social conservatives,
Mr. Bush pledged to push for a ban on the procedure that its opponents call
partial-birth abortion.

But Mr. Bush's task tonight was to mobilize the American public and the nation's
allies to the cause of disarming Iraq and trusting America's motives. The
president asserted that there was little distinction between fighting terrorism
and confronting "outlaw regimes" that stockpile or seek to develop chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons.

"These regimes could use such weapons for blackmail, terror and mass murder," he
said. "They could also give or sell those weapons to their terrorist allies, who
would use them without the least hesitation."

Mr. Bush's mission tonight was to add urgency to the confrontation with Iraq,
and he did so by alleging -- in what White House officials noted was the present
tense -- that "Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of
Al Qaeda." But when asked today for the evidence to back up his assertion, a
senior administration official said simply "we'll deal with Al Qaeda and Iraq in
the next few days."

The heart of Mr. Bush's argument, however, is that America and the world cannot
afford to wait until it is clear that Iraq will attack America, or its allies.

"Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent," he said, a clear
reference to European nations that argue that Mr. Hussein is contained. "Since
when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us
on notice before they strike?"

Mr. Bush offered little new evidence about Iraq's actions today, but he
described Mr. Hussein's methods of torture and intimidation in stark terms, and
at one point he clearly compared the Iraqi leader to Hitler.

He talked of forced confessions, extracted "by torturing children while their
parents are made to watch." He detailed electric shocks, dripping acid, and
mutilation with electric drills -- not the usual discourse for State of the
Union addresses.

The core of his argument, however, rested on the questions that Hans Blix, the
co-leader of the United Nations inspection team, said on Monday were still
unanswered. He spoke of 25,000 liters of anthrax -- "enough doses to kill
several million people" -- that remains unaccounted for. He asked for evidence
that 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin, which causes respiratory failure, has
been destroyed.

In dwelling for so long on Mr. Hussein's abuses, he quite deliberately isolated
Iraq from the other two nations that make up what, in last year's address 364
nights ago, he memorably called an "Axis of Evil."

There was no such turn of phrase tonight. Instead, he argued that "different
threats require different strategies." Iran, he said, continued to repress
freedom and seek weapons of mass destruction, but he argued that Iranians
themselves were the greatest hope for change. They are, he said, "risking
intimidation and dealth as they speak out for liberty, human rights and
democracy."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush made it clear that he would seek the support of
the world in confronting Iraq, but would not wait. (Doug Mills/The New York
Times)(pg. A1); Applause greeted President Bush's State of the Union address
last night. He defended his doctrine of pre-emptive response to terrorism. (Doug
Mills/The New York Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TAXES & TAXATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); TAX LAW (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (76%); TERRORISM (73%); AL-QAEDA (68%); AIDS & HIV (67%); DISARMAMENT
(67%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (91%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (51%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%); AFRICA (79%); GULF STATES (57%)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             798 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MIDDLE EAST;
Arabs Say Bush Shows He Is Intent On a War

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Jan. 29


To Middle Eastern ears, the case President Bush made on Tuesday for removing
Saddam Hussein from power sounded more like a domestic pep rally for war than a
convincing argument.

Of those Arabs paying attention to Mr. Bush's State of the Union message, many
were troubled by the lack of damning evidence against Baghdad and the lack of
any articulated plan for postwar Iraq. It left them bracing for yet another
United States misadventure in a region they think has seen far too many.

"So far, any evidence presented has not made a case for war," said Hesham
Youssef, the spokesman for the Arab League. "The international community is not
convinced, so they need to make a better case if they want support."

Arab governments in general, especially moderate ones with close ties to
Washington, prefer avoiding the topic of an American-led war against Iraq
whenever possible. So there was little official reaction.

The speech came too late to make the newspapers in the Arab world, and in
countries like Syria, where the government also controls broadcasting, it was
virtually ignored.

"It was a rallying speech, a speech by an unbalanced man preparing the Americans
for war, not for peace," said Imad Fawzi Shueibi, a Damascus University
professor and political commentator. "Bush as usual has his own double standard,
accusing Iraq of flouting the United Nations while the United States despises
the U.N. and all Security Council resolutions" about Israel.

Only Iraq and Iran, the two countries that were specifically mentioned,
responded directly to the speech.

Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq denied the resurrected charge that his
government had any connection with Al Qaeda or other terrorist networks. "Until
now this false accusation was repeated many times and no evidence was
presented," Mr. Aziz told ABC News from Baghdad. "Everybody in the region and in
the world knows Iraq has no connection with Al Qaeda."

Iran, also accused by Mr. Bush of trying to develop weapons of mass destruction
and of suppressing human rights, said the president was interfering in the
Islamic republic's internal affairs.

"Bush's statement shows that the United States is continuing its erroneous
policies by wanting to create an atmosphere of security tension, both
domestically and abroad, especially in the Middle East," Foreign Minister Kamal
Kharazi told reporters in Tehran. He denied any attempt by Iran to develop such
weapons.

Those hoping to stave off war were at least heartened by the idea that Mr. Bush
had promised to send Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to the United Nations on
Wednesday with the promise of disclosing new evidence concerning Iraq's
development of prohibited weapons.

"We are not in complete opposition with the United States," said Muhammad
Abdella, a university professor and former chairman of the foreign affairs
committee of Egypt's Parliament, "but think it should respect the U.N. role,
because this is the only safety valve for stability and security in the world."

Some Arab governments, especially Egypt's, began to switch diplomatic tacks this
week, rolling out accusations that President Hussein's intransigence toward the
weapons inspectors was to blame for any catastrophe. But there are also signs of
fatigue with Washington's habit of asserting that it has evidence while failing
to produce any. "We have been listening to this story for the past six months:
'Evidence is coming, evidence is coming,' " said Mr. Youssef of the Arab League.

What many also find troubling is that Mr. Bush, in addressing the Iraqis, said
that the day Mr. Hussein was removed from power would be the day of their
liberation, while again failing to present what the United States has in mind
afterward.

"I doubt you could find one person who would agree that the Americans are coming
just for the sake of the region and they want to bring democracy," said Khaled
M. Batarfi, the managing editor of the newspaper Al Madina in Jidda, Saudi
Arabia. "We think it's oil. We think it's Israel. We think it's control. They
want a police station in Baghdad like they have in Kabul."

Even those who support the removal of Mr. Hussein find troubling the idea that
the United States, especially if it goes alone, would be the one to do it.
Sawsan Shair, a columnist in the Bahrain daily Al Ayam, compared Washington's
Middle East policy in general to the work of a surgeon who always leaves before
the job is done. "They open the abdomen, remove the diseased organ and then they
leave the abdomen open and walk away," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%); AL-QAEDA (86%); TERRORISM
(86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); IRAQ WAR
(73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (65%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (63%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (61%);
RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (57%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (88%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (94%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             799 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

WOMEN'S ATHLETICS;
Title IX Panel Favors Lifting Antitrust Laws

BYLINE:  By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


A panel examining Title IX, the law that expanded opportunities in sports for a
generation of female students, is urging the secretary of education to support
exempting college athletics from federal antitrust laws as a way of reducing
expenses and the pressure to eliminate men's teams.

While the recommendation does not directly address the panel's central charge --
to evaluate whether enforcement of Title IX unfairly penalizes men's sports --
it was seen as a bid to ease the financial strains on universities that juggle
the demand for sports within limited budgets.

The Commission on Opportunity in Athletics enters the decisive stage of its work
here Thursday. There were signs that the panel -- which has come under fire from
women's rights and civil rights groups -- would not make a single set of
recommendations to the education secretary, Rod Paige, but would present him
with a range of competing, even conflicting, ideas for altering the enforcement
of Title IX.

Under discussion Thursday will be eight formulas for judging whether colleges
and universities are satisfying Title IX under a common standard known as
proportionality, in which schools show that the number of female athletes
matches their share of student enrollment. The proposals would all relax the
proportionality standard to varying degrees, with the most forgiving allowing
campuses to meet the law if women represented 43 percent of the players on
sports teams.

"There's a feeling among many that we want to give the secretary of education
ideas and options," Ted Leland, the Stanford University athletic director, who
is co-chairman of the commission, said tonight. "If we present five or six ways
on to him for him to think about, I think we'd be doing our job. I don't think
our job is to paint anyone in a corner."

Title IX has come under criticism from athletic directors and others who say
they have been forced to cut men's teams to satisfy demands for equal access to
sports for boys and girls. Rights groups, however, blame economics and shifting
fashions in sports for the drop-off in men's wrestling and gymnastics and other
men's sports. They are urging the panel to leave Title IX alone.

In its 12-to-1 vote on the antitrust laws this afternoon, the commissioners
urged the education secretary to support an "antitrust exemption for college
athletics."

Graham Spanier, the president of Penn State, described antitrust laws as "a very
important barrier to cost containment" in college athletics programs.

But Thomas B. Griffith, the general counsel at Brigham Young University and lone
dissenter, said he did not think it fitting that the education secretary should
"request an antitrust exemption on behalf of the N.C.A.A."

Under the law, schools have three options for showing they are following Title
IX. Aside from the proportionality standard, they may also show that they are
making steady progress toward expanding opportunities for women to play sports,
or that they are "fully and effectively" meeting the interest for playing sports
among women at the high school and college level.

The 15-member panel, 10 of whose members hail from N.C.A.A. Division I-A
institutions, foreshadowed its intention to punt on some difficult issues in its
final votes today, involving competing proposals over private endowments for
men's sports.

One proposal calls upon the Department of Education to advise schools on
accepting donations for men's sports without running afoul of Title IX, while
the other urges the department to "re-examine its regulations" on private
donations to sports teams.

The panel rejected, 8 to 6, a proposal to eliminate the requirement that
colleges report participation by women in sports, which has opened them to
scrutiny and criticism.

Spanier derided the disclosures as "a prime example of a wasteful and
time-consuming report." He said the information, once reported, was never used.

His position was supported by Gerald Reynolds, who heads the Education
Department's Office of Civil Rights. He said the reports have "been used in ways
that haven't been helpful."

But Julie Foudy, captain of the United States national women's soccer team and
president of the Women's Sports Foundation, countered that there was no way for
Spanier to know how many people may have looked up the information on the
Education Department's Web site.

Under an alternative, the panel will recommend that schools choose from the
three possible methods to show their compliance with Title IX, and then report
supporting information under that standard alone.

Women's groups held a lunchtime demonstration critical of the commission, saying
that the alternative formulas would essentially freeze women's participation at
its current levels. While women account for 56 percent of students in higher
education, their presence on sports teams stands at 42 percent.

Eleanor Smeal, president of Feminist Majority, called the commission's work the
opening salvo in a broader attack on women's access to traditionally male
professions, like law and medicine, that were opened by Title IX. "This is not
about sports," she said. "This is about jobs."

Kay Hoflander, a former basketball player and mother whose son is training to be
an Olympic swimmer, disagreed. Hoflander, who found no college where she could
play basketball in the 1960's, before Title IX became law, said she now worried
that her son, a high school senior in Higginsville, Mo., would have trouble
finding a college with a strong swimming team because the law had gone too far.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPORTS & RECREATION (91%); SPORTS (91%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (90%); EXTRA CURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (90%);
COLLEGIATE SPORTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); ATHLETES (78%); LAW
SCHOOLS (78%); WOMEN (78%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); BUDGETS (77%);
SCHOOL ATHLETIC STAFF (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(74%); WRESTLING (73%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS
(73%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (71%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY (50%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8299 SCHOOLS & EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, NEC (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             801 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

COLLEGES;
Advisory Panel Backs Easing Rules For Title IX

BYLINE:  By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section D; Column 5; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1491 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


In a final meeting today marked by exasperation and confusion, a Bush
administration commission recommended easing some standards for satisfying Title
IX, the law that expanded opportunities for girls and women in sports.

The Commission on Opportunity in Athletics pulled back from several more
explosive options under debate today. But it adopted a series of smaller
recommendations that, taken together, could spell major changes in the way
access to sports is divided between boys and girls at high schools and colleges
across the country.

The meeting was not without difficulties. Some commission members said they did
not have enough information to make informed votes. Others said their proposals
had been hastily offered. And one key vote wound up tied when a commission
member missed it because she was at the meeting of another committee.

The 15-member commission will forward its report to Education Secretary Rod
Paige, who has already indicated his interest in an approach to enforcing Title
IX that would not penalize men's teams. Critics of the administration say the
report could provide Dr. Paige with political cover for making changes in the
way Title IX is enforced, even if they were only incremental.

Once the commission delivers its final report in February, Dr. Paige will
consider its recommendations. The changes the commission has proposed could, by
and large, be accomplished without any changes to the law, but instead by
rewriting the Education Department's regulations enforcing the law or the
guidance it offers high schools and colleges. Those elements would be subject to
public comment before they become final.

Today's outcome drew mixed reaction.

Michael Moyer, executive director of the National Wrestling Coaches Association,
whose lawsuit against the Department of Education over Title IX prompted
creation of the panel eight months ago, called the recommendations "a great
first step" that would "certainly stem further loss of programs."

Women's and civil rights groups opposed the process and outcome. "It's as bad as
we thought it would be," said Lisa Maatz, director for public policy and
government relations at the American Association of University Women.

Title IX, which was passed in 1972, prohibits discrimination based on sex in
public and private schools that receive federal funding, as almost all do. It
covers many areas, but the commission looked only at athletics.

The commission recommended calculating opportunities in sports by counting
positions available on sports teams, rather than actual players.

It also approved expanding the role of surveys of students' interest in
participating in sports in judging schools' compliance with Title IX. That
approach has come under attack by civil rights and women's groups, who have won
some court rulings on the matter.

The commission rejected a proposal to eliminate the use of numerical formulas
altogether in measuring whether a school was discriminating.

Thanks to the one member's scheduling conflict, the commission tied on a vote
that would have changed the way equal access to sports was gauged. The proposal,
on a standard known as proportionality, would have changed the basis from the
current requirement -- that the percentage of women in athletics mirrors the
enrollment, which at colleges nationally is 56 percent -- to 50-50. Women
currently make up 42 percent of college athletes.

In a statement tonight, Dr. Paige praised the commission and emphasized the
areas in which there was unanimity. These included votes reaffirming the
importance of a commitment to equal opportunity by the Education Department and
urging it to enforce Title IX uniformly and aggressively.

The Education Department should also advise schools that cutting men's teams to
achieve equality, as many do, is "not a favored practice," the commission said.

But behind the issues on which there was consensus, the lines were sharply
drawn.

The National Wrestling Coaches Association contends that colleges have cut men's
teams in wrestling, gymnastics and other sports solely to satisfy the
proportionality standard under Title IX. While he was generally pleased with
today's recommendations, Moyer, the group's executive director, said there was
"still more opportunity for flexibility."

"We're confident that there'll be a more fair and reasonable interpretation of
the law," Moyer said.

Jocelyn Samuels, vice president for education at the National Women's Law
Center, expressed alarm. "The kinds of proposals the commission made today
authorize the secretary to make radical and very damaging changes to existing
Title IX policies," she said, "and undermine fundamental principles of civil
rights laws."

The commission was first convened in June, when Dr. Paige charged it to examine
ways "to strengthen enforcement and expand opportunities to ensure fairness for
all college athletes." Women's and civil rights groups saw the charge as a
threat to Title IX, which was originally designed to expand opportunities for
women, noted Birch Bayh, the Indiana Democrat who was one of its original
sponsors when he was in the Senate.

The commission voted today on some 24 recommendations. Several panel members
distanced themselves from proposals that carried their names, saying the request
for ideas on policy at their last meeting in December in Philadelphia took them
by surprise. The results, they said, were little more than spur-of-the-moment
thoughts.

Debbie Yow, the athletic director at the University of Maryland, had suggested
in Philadelphia that schools split the spots on sports teams 50-50 between men
and women, with a margin of 5 to 7 percentage points. Today, however, she said
that margin seemed "too large" and scaled it back to 2 to 3 percentage points.
"I did the best I could" at the time, she said.

Several commission members complained that they could not make informed votes
because they had not received any independent or government analysis of the
probable results of various suggestions to alter the proportionality standard.
They also complained that they needed additional discussion and information as
the co-leaders strained to keep the votes moving along. Frustration bubbled over
on all sides.

"We've got to move forward," Ted Leland, the Stanford University athletic
director, who is a co-leader of the commission, said in exasperation. "I'm about
ready to hit my forehead on the table. I feel like this is the Central Committee
of the Communist Party."

Other commission members countered, however, that today's decisions represented
the heart of the panel's work and would influence future policy.

Yow's suggestion for setting proportionality with a range around 50-50 came
under fire from advocates for female athletes. Yow defended an even split as a
simple and logical way of dividing spots.

Her measure ended in a 7-7 vote because of the absence of one member, Lisa
Graham Keegan, a former education commissioner in Arizona. Keegan was serving on
another panel, on teacher quality, this morning. Keegan's office said she later
told Yow that she would have supported the recommendation.

As it is, the proposal will still reach Dr. Paige, but without the commission's
formal backing.

Robert Bowlsby, athletic director at the University of Iowa, said his proposal,
basing targets for women's participation in college sports on interest at the
high school level, was hastily offered as well, and he volunteered to withdraw
it altogether. It was voted on anyway, but rejected.

Current law allows schools to choose one of three avenues for demonstrating
compliance with Title IX:

*Adopting proportionality, under which the number of women in athletics matches
their share of student enrollment;

*Having a history of expanding opportunities in sports for women; or

*Meeting women's interests in playing sports "fully and effectively."

The panel rejected a proposal today by its other co-leader, Cynthia Cooper, a
former professional basketball player who is now chief executive of a sports
marketing company, that would have made interest surveys, rather than
enrollment, the basis for setting participation targets under the
proportionality test.

But it passed a similar measure, on 10-5 vote, that would allow, rather than
require, the Education Department to extend the use of interest surveys to two
of Title IX's two bases for proving fairness, through proportionality and by
showing a history of steady progress.

Asked if she thought her measure would replace the proportionality standard,
Rita Simon, the sponsor of the recommendation, said, "I certainly hope so."

As the commission members headed home and Leland left the ballroom where they
met, he said he was satisfied with the commission's work, despite its rocky
beginning and end and despite what he called the inelegant proceedings of the
day.

"All's we are is the first shot out of the cannon," Leland said. "We've made it
O.K. to talk about Title IX enforcement. That's all we've done."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lisa Graham Keegan; Ted Leland; Cynthia Cooper (Photographs by
Associated Press)(pg. D2)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION
(90%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(90%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (90%); SPORTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
WOMEN (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); APPROVALS
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); SCHOOL SPORTS (77%);
PRIVATE SCHOOLS (76%); HIGH SCHOOLS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); WRESTLING
(72%); COACHES & TRAINERS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); LITIGATION (68%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (65%); EXECUTIVES (64%) ATHLETICS AND SPORTS;  WOMEN;
DISCRIMINATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: SCHEMO, DIANA JEAN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             803 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

COLLEGES;
Title IX Plans Assailed As Broad and Harmful

BYLINE:  By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section D; Column 5; Sports Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


Women's rights groups disputed reports today that a federal commission examining
Title IX had recommended only modest changes in the way it is enforced, saying
the commission's proposals would spell major losses of opportunities in sports
for girls and women if adopted.

The Commission on Opportunity in Athletics, appointed by Education Secretary Rod
Paige last June, approved proposals on Thursday that would, in a variety of
ways, change the way schools, colleges and universities are judged in how they
offer chances for women to play sports.

"While some have characterized the Title IX changes as minor and moderate, their
true impact would be to devastate women's and girls' opportunities to
participate in athletics and receive scholarships," Marcia Greenberger,
co-president of the National Women's Law Center, said.

Susan Aspey, a spokeswoman for Dr. Paige, said he had confidence that the public
hearings and discussions were "fair and inclusive" and would not comment on
specific criticisms. The commission's final report to him is due at the end of
February.

Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority Foundation, labeled the
recommendations a "stealth attack" on Title IX, reminiscent of a Reagan
administration directive that Title IX applied only to sports programs, not
institutions, that received federal money.

During that period, Smeal noted, women's admissions to law schools declined
substantially. They rose again only after Congress passed the Civil Rights
Restoration Act in 1986, spelling out that Title IX applied to all educational
institutions that accept federal money.

As currently enforced, the law permits schools to prove they are following Title
IX in one of three ways. The first method is proportionality, by which a school
shows that the opportunities for women to play team sports match their share of
campus enrollment. The second method allows schools to demonstrate a history of
consistently expanding sports offerings for women. The third requires them to
show they are "fully and effectively" meeting the interests of women on campus
in sports.

One recommendation by the commission would allow schools to use interest surveys
under either of the first two methods in determining how many opportunities to
offer women. Surveys are already used for the third method.

Women's groups say surveys tend to "freeze discrimination in place" and women
take opportunities to play sports and earn athletic scholarships as they become
available.

Another proposal that could cost women access to sports would calculate the
spots available on teams for women, rather than the actual number of female
players, in judging a school's compliance. The commission also suggested not
counting walk-ons, students who receive no scholarship to play sports, a measure
that critics said would favor men at the expense of women.

"They're counting women who aren't there and not counting the men who are
there," Greenberger said.

In a separate development, one commission member, Lisa Graham Keegan, said
tonight that she would not have voted for a recommendation to change the basis
for judging proportionality to a 50-50 division of available sports slots, with
a margin of 2 to 3 percentage points. Keegan missed the vote because she was
attending another meeting, and the vote wound up in a 7-7 tie.

Given the tie vote, the measure will go to Dr. Paige, but not as a
recommendation with the commission's backing.

Deborah Yow, the University of Maryland athletic director, who sponsored the
measure, said Keegan had told her she would have voted in favor of the measure
had she been present. Keegan's office had also said she would have supported the
recommendation.

Keegan said in a telephone interview that she opposed numerical measures on
principle and would not have voted for the proposal. She noted that she had
voted in favor of another proposal, which ultimately failed, to eliminate
proportionality as a standard altogether.

"I did not want a specific number," Keegan said.

Yow could not be reached for comment tonight.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION (90%); WOMEN (90%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); SPORTS (90%); SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (79%); LEGISLATION (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (78%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
(77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); LAW SCHOOLS
(76%); ACADEMIC ADMISSIONS (76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (73%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); LAWYERS (70%); MEN (60%) ATHLETICS AND SPORTS;
WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION;  COLLEGE ATHLETICS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER (83%); FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION
(82%) NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER; FEMINIST MAJORITY FOUNDATION; COMMISSION ON
OPPORTUNITY IN ATHLETICS

PERSON: SCHEMO, DIANA JEAN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             811 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
A Whisper Of Terrorism, And Its Echo

BYLINE:  By MATTHEW PURDY

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: PATERSON, N.J.


The raid last July on the offices of All Services Plus here was a lot less than
advertised. The owner of the company that sold official-looking documents to
illegal immigrants, including two Sept. 11 hijackers, was nowhere to be found,
having left for vacation in Egypt two weeks before.

This was particularly embarrassing for the local sheriff, Gerald Speziale, who
had invited reporters to the anticipated collaring of Mohamed el-Atriss.

But Mr. Speziale's raid snowballed into what the American Civil Liberties Union
says is the sole criminal case to emerge from the Sept. 11 attacks that used
evidence kept secret even from the defendant.

Mr. el-Atriss has been jailed since returning from Egypt in August. His bail was
doubled to half a million dollars in November after county prosecutors presented
a judge with evidence they said was so potentially damaging that if disclosed,
even to Mr. el-Atriss, "the safety of the general population at large could
conceivably be jeopardized."

Yesterday, the prosecution, like the raid, also turned out to be a lot less than
advertised.

Mr. el-Atriss was released after pleading guilty to one count of selling
documents that were supposed to be official, but were not. Racketeering charges
were dropped, and his bail was cut to $50,000.

The secret evidence remains secret.

But the el-Atriss case is yet another example of how a whisper of terrorism can
echo so loudly, and deceptively. The case was propelled by competition between
law enforcement agencies and by an aggressive Passaic County sheriff, who has
turned his drug-fighting exploits as an undercover New York police officer into
a book and a movie.

Mr. el-Atriss is not writing a book, not yet, anyway, but he has had a
pulp-quality adventure in the criminal justice system.

Mr. el-Atriss had the bad luck of coming to the attention of two police
agencies. Shortly after the terror attacks, the F.B.I. discovered that Mr.
el-Atriss sold documents to two Sept. 11 hijackers, presumably while they lived
in Paterson. Last spring, sheriff's officers began investigating his sale of
international driver's licenses and other fake official documents.

The F.B.I. decided that Mr. el-Atriss had unwittingly helped the terrorists,
according to law enforcement officials, and was worth watching as a useful
source of information.

Mr. Speziale is not a wait-and-see kind of guy.

"He's fanatical about what he does," said Bernard Kerik, the former New York
police commissioner who was Mr. Speziale's partner in globe-trotting adventures
fighting drug cartels.

In his autobiography, Mr. Kerik described him as "probably the most successful
drug agent in America." But he wrote that Mr. Speziale worked himself to
exhaustion, and that in one sleep-deprived period, he had wandered into the
Meadowlands, "dug a foxhole, covered himself with leaves, and gone to sleep."

Mr. Speziale would not comment, but his spokesman, Bill Maer, did not dispute
the incident.

Mr. Speziale retired from the department but bounced back. In 2001 he was
elected sheriff as a Democrat in his native Passaic County, where he is
attacking gangs and building a politician's reputation. "Jerry likes notoriety,"
said Michael Mecca, a Republican county freeholder. "Before he does a raid, he
calls the press."

That's what he did in the el-Atriss raid. But federal officials said they were
not informed and that the raid hurt their strategy for Mr. el-Atriss.

County prosecutors, saying they were investigating Mr. el-Atriss's possible
connection to terrorists, presented secret evidence to Superior Court Judge
Marilyn Clark. The federal government has held closed hearings for people
detained after Sept. 11, but it has not used secret evidence. Also, national
security is not the usual domain of county prosecutors.

Last month, an appeals judge told the local court that if national security is
at issue the federal government should have "an invitation to participate."

Before invitations could go out, prosecutors agreed to drop charges, slash bail
and spring Mr. el-Atriss. At yesterday's hearing, Mr. el-Atriss said "never in
my life did I have anything to do with any terrorist," and prosecutors did not
argue. Whatever the secret evidence is, or was, Mr. el-Atriss was suddenly just
another common criminal.

And the court appearance of common criminals does not warrant the presence of
Sheriff Speziale, who yesterday was nowhere to be found.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SHERIFFS (89%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); IMMIGRATION
(77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%);
WRITERS (76%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); CRIMINAL LAW
(75%); GUILTY PLEAS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (72%); DRUG POLICY (69%); CARTELS
(64%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (63%); DRIVERS LICENSES (50%); PROFILES &
BIOGRAPHIES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); EGYPT (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             816 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Begins Choosing The Judges For New Court

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


As the Bush administration sought to muster backing for a strike against Iraq in
the Security Council, the United Nations moved forward this week toward creating
an International Criminal Court -- a project that America's allies hope the
United States will support over time.

In successive rounds of voting, 85 nations began to elect the 18 judges who will
serve on the new court, the first permanent venue for prosecuting cases of
genocide and other atrocities when national governments fail to act.

The court will formally open in The Hague on March 11.

American rejection of the court has meant that other nations, led by Germany,
France and Britain, will have to pick up a greater part of its costs than United
Nations formulas would normally require, and it could damage the court's
credibility.

Eight judges have been elected so far this week, with six women and two men
named. They come from Ireland, Mali, South Korea, Brazil, Ghana, Costa Rica,
South Africa and Trinidad and Tobago. European candidates are expected to
dominate in the last round of voting.

The court has been delayed in the crucial task of naming a prosecutor, who will
set the agenda for the court.

The Bush administration withdrew its support from the court last year after
failing to win what it said were safeguards necessary to protect American troops
and officials from prosecution. Administration officials voiced concerns that
the court could become a venue for politicized attacks against the United
States, and could even result in charges against American policymakers.

The administration is not alone in opposing the court; other holdouts include
China, India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Iraq and Turkey. But 137 nations have
supported it, and 87 of those have ratified its creation, viewing it as a way to
ensure that war criminals anywhere in the world do not go unpunished.

Marie-Christine Lilkoff, a spokeswoman for Canada's Foreign Ministry, said,
"International support for the I.C.C. continues to grow, and Canada hopes the
U.S. will ultimately join in the process and support the court."

A senior Swedish Foreign Ministry official, Carl-Henrik Ehrenkrona, predicted
that American opposition could soften as the court proved itself. "It's a
gigantic legal experiment, and the United States is interested in seeing how it
turns out," he said.

Some critics of the court questioned its legality, in the context of an American
legal system that guarantees constitutional protections like jury trials and a
ban against double jeopardy.

"It's a flawed institution that is not consistent with American law," said Brett
Schaefer, a policy analyst at the Heritage Foundation, a research center that is
close to the Bush administration.

Administration officials say there are already adequate mechanisms to prosecute
war crimes and other atrocities. The Security Council set up ad hoc tribunals to
try suspects from the Balkans and Rwanda, a senior official noted. If there is a
need in the future to try war criminals from Iraq, "that will be the model we
will use," the official said.

John R. Bolton, the under secretary of State for arms control and international
security, has managed American opposition to the court. After tense negotiations
last summer, the United States won a year's exemption for all peacekeepers by
threatening to withhold financing for the operations.

Since then, State Department officials have sought to negotiate commitments from
other nations that they will not send Americans to the court for prosecution.
Such deals are allowed under Article 98 of the treaty that established the
court. An administration official said deals had been signed with 20 nations,
which he declined to identify beyond saying Tuvalu, the world's fourth-smallest
country, was the latest to sign.

"We're not trying to undermine the court," the official said. "We're trying to
protect American citizens from an unaccountable prosecutor."

Richard Dicker, the director of the international justice program of Human
Rights Watch, said the administration had looked to "small and vulnerable
countries" for side deals.

"By any reasonable measure, the U.S. effort to date has been a good deal less
than a success," Mr. Dicker said. "For all its huffing and puffing, the U.S. has
not been able to blow the house down."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); PUBLIC
POLICY (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (72%); JURY
TRIALS (72%); DOUBLE JEOPARDY (72%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

COMPANY: AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS

INDUSTRY: SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (51%)

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (93%); CANADA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); CHINA
(79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); INDIA (79%); TRINIDAD & TOBAGO (79%); RWANDA (79%);
MALI (79%); GHANA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); TURKEY (79%); SWEDEN (79%); BRAZIL
(79%); GERMANY (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             819 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2003 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DOMESTIC SECURITY;
Justice Dept. Draft on Wider Powers Draws Quick Criticism

BYLINE:   By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


A storm of liberal criticism erupted today over a Justice Department draft of
legislation to increase the law enforcement powers it won in 2001 in the U.S.A.
Patriot Act.

Although a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, Barbara Comstock, insisted
that the draft represented nothing more than staff discussions, copies were sent
to House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert and to Vice President Dick Cheney in his
capacity as president of the Senate.

The 80-page draft, marked "Confidential -- Not for Distribution Draft Jan. 9,
2003," was posted in midafternoon on the Web site of the Center for Public
Integrity, www. publicintegrity.org/dtaweb/home.asp. It was quickly scrutinized
and denounced by the American Civil Liberties Union and Representative John
Conyers Jr. of Michigan, senior Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee.

These are some of the major proposals in the draft:

*Invalidate state legal consent decrees that seek to curb police spying. The
authors argued such orders could hinder terrorism investigations.

*Eliminate the requirement that the attorney general personally has to authorize
using certain intelligence evidence in a criminal case, permitting him to
designate an assistant attorney general to make such authorizations.

*Allow the collection of DNA samples by "such means as are reasonably necessary"
from suspected terrorists being held by federal authorities. Failing to
cooperate would be a crime.

*Flatly bar Freedom of Information Act efforts to gain information about
detainees, because litigation over such issues costs the Justice Department
resources.

*Allow citizenship to be stripped from people who support groups that the United
States considers terrorist organizations.

Mr. Conyers said: "This draft bill constitutes yet another egregious blow to our
citizens' civil liberties. Among other things, the Bush administration now wants
to imprison suspects before they are tried and create DNA databases of lawful
residents who have committed no crime."

The associate director of the national office of the A.C.L.U., Gregory T.
Nojeim, said:

"The initial U.S.A. Patriot Act undercut many of the traditional checks and
balances on government power. The new Ashcroft proposal threatens to
fundamentally alter the constitutional protections that allow us to be both safe
and free."

Ms. Comstock's statement did not disavow the document, though she said no final
proposals had even been sent to the attorney general.

"We are continually considering antiterrorism measures and would be derelict if
we were not doing so," she said. "The department's deliberations are always
undertaken with the strongest commitment to our Constitution and civil
liberties."

Exactly how receptive Congress will be to whatever proposal the administration
makes is uncertain. Democrats and Republicans on both Judiciary Committees have
complained that the Justice Department was withholding information on how the
2001 law was being applied and whether changes were needed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 10, 2003



CORRECTION: An article on Saturday about draft legislation to give the Justice
Department broader powers to fight terrorism referred incorrectly to the
distribution of copies of the proposal. A spokeswoman for the department, which
prepared the document, said copies had not been sent to House Speaker J. Dennis
Hastert or to Vice President Dick Cheney.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US PATRIOT ACT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING (89%); TERRORISM
(87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(78%); CONSENT DECREES & ORDERS (78%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (77%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); ESPIONAGE (72%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); DNA (72%); LITIGATION (72%); WEB SITES (71%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); EVIDENCE (67%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(83%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: JOHN CONYERS (77%); DICK CHENEY (72%) CONYERS, JOHN JR (REP); HASTERT, J
DENNIS (SPEAKER); CHENEY, DICK (VICE PRES); CLYMER, ADAM

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             822 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NYC;
Normal, But Not Too Normal

BYLINE:  By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 746 words


MORE times than anyone can possibly count, political leaders have pleaded since
Sept. 11, 2001, that we have to go about our lives as usual, or else the bad
guys will have won. But for them, it turns out, "normal" is confined to benign
activities like shopping or eating out.

In this city, it no longer includes something with more grit, like a protest
march through Manhattan. Never mind that large political demonstrations have
always qualified as "normal" in New York, a local tradition many decades older
than the Statue of Liberty.

It seems that mass marches have been banned in the heart of Manhattan except for
traditional parades like the ones on St. Patrick's Day, Columbus Day and
National Puerto Rican Day. Any other march, especially one with a political
message, has gotten a thumbs-down from City Hall and the police. Security
reasons, they explain. Sept. 11, they explain.

This official policy had been in place with little fanfare until it was detailed
in a courtroom the other day by Assistant Chief Michael D. Esposito, the Police
Department's commander for Manhattan south of 59th Street.

Chief Esposito was explaining to Judge Barbara S. Jones of Federal District
Court in Manhattan why the city did not want to let antiwar protesters march
past the United Nations, or anywhere else, during a large demonstration planned
for Saturday. While testifying, he disclosed that he had issued not one permit
for a protest march in months. It's now the department's policy, he said.

The demonstrators, rallying under the banner of a coalition called United for
Peace and Justice, will join a worldwide protest on Saturday against the brewing
war in Iraq. They want to file past the United Nations, said Leslie Cagan, the
group's leader, because it is "a central player in this whole crisis."

Her lawyers from the New York Civil Liberties Union reminded Judge Jones that
this would not be the first huge political march past the United Nations
headquarters on First Avenue. One in 1982, demanding nuclear disarmament, drew
500,000 people by police estimates. It went off without a hitch. So did other
marches in that part of town in 1988 and 1994.

The same, the lawyers noted, can hardly be said of some of the so-called
traditional parades. No offense, but the St. Patrick's Day Parade has had more
than its share of scuffles and arrests. And surely you remember how in 2000 some
men went straight from the Puerto Rican Day Parade to Central Park, where they
sexually assaulted one woman after another.

Not only that, but Chief Esposito acknowledged on the witness stand that he had
no reason to expect violence on Saturday from the expected tens of thousands of
demonstrators. Nor, he said, was he aware of any "terror threat with respect to
this event."

All the same, times have changed, he said. Post-Sept. 11, security concerns are
considerable, and the ability of the police to deal with all of them is
questionable. Yesterday, Judge Jones agreed. "The court," she said, "will not
second-guess or substitute its judgment for that of the N.Y.P.D."

None of this means that a large antiwar protest is about to be prohibited.
Despite some hyperventilating yesterday from a few of the organizers -- one
union official called the judge's ruling "an atrocity" -- the city has no
problem with a "stationary rally" on the streets near the United Nations. There
will be no restrictions on the number of protesters or the inevitable anti-Bush
speeches. They can say whatever they want. They just can't march.

"The police can more effectively monitor crowds for terror threats at stationary
rallies than they can crowds moving in a procession," Judge Jones said.

BUT even granting that we live in difficult times, a question remains for some
people: How long does Sept. 11 last? Will it be endlessly invoked to restrict
the kind of political activity that is practically part of the New York DNA?

The judge herself acknowledged "the distinct importance of marching." From Selma
to South Africa, marching is how millions have expressed opinions and outrage,
and brought about change.

"The City of New York has imposed an outright ban on one of the most important
forms of protest, and that's the right to speak with your feet, the right to
march," said Donna Lieberman, executive director of the civil liberties union.

"In times of crisis," she said, "our commitment to fundamental freedoms is put
to the test." Agree with her or not, she feels this is one test the city has
flunked.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (90%); PARADES & MARCHES (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); LAWYERS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); SEX OFFENSES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); WITNESSES (73%); LITIGATION (72%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (70%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (69%); RIOTS (68%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(67%); HIJACKING (66%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (63%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(63%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  DEMONSTRATIONS
AND RIOTS;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  SECURITY AND WARNING
SYSTEMS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) ;UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: HABERMAN, CLYDE

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (98%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (98%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: IRAQ;  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             823 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Will Tie Aid Request to Terror

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 10


Colombia's defense minister flew to Washington today to seek yet more aid from
the Bush administration as the six-month-old government of President Alvaro
Uribe signaled that it would use the bombing of an exclusive Bogota club on
Friday to press for renewed assistance in battling terrorism.

The trip of Defense Minister Marta Lucia Ramirez was planned months ago. But
Colombian officials said the bombing on Friday, which killed 32 people, would be
central to talks as Mr. Uribe's government tries to combat what it sees as
potential urban terrorism by the group blamed for the bombing, the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia.

"They have unleashed a new kind of terrorism that was not seen in Colombia
before and Colombia must be prepared to react to this," Luis Alberto Moreno,
Colombia's ambassador to Washington, said today by phone. "The war on terrorism
needs international support, since this is not just Colombia's problem, it is a
problem of the world."

The government has suggested, without presenting evidence, that the bombing on
Friday was on too large a scale for the rebel group to have planned alone. Mr.
Uribe and his ministers have stepped up a crusade aimed at casting Colombia's
insurgents as terrorists with worldwide ties and the drug-fueled conflict as one
in which the rest of the world should have a stake.

Ms. Ramirez said she planned to strengthen Colombia's ties to the United
States-led fight against global terrorism. Colombia has argued that the Irish
Republican Army and Basque separatists from Spain have helped rebels in
bomb-making techniques and that other countries should do more to isolate
Colombian terrorists, like freezing their assets abroad.

Washington has given Colombia aid totaling $2 billion since 1997, mostly for the
military and police. Military assistance this year is expected to total $500
million, with $98 million used to train Colombian troops in counterguerrilla
tactics in an important break from a past policy that restricted aid solely to
antidrug programs.

Colombia's government has been clamoring for more varied assistance and fewer
human rights restrictions on the future aid.

In recent speeches, the president has proposed that a military deployment
similar to the one being mounted against Iraq be used here.

He has also called for a multinational force to patrol the waters off Colombia
to stem drug trafficking, prodded Colombia's neighbors to become more involved
and scolded European nations for what he has characterized as tolerance for
rebel groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Demonstrators in Bogota raised flowers yesterday in front of the
nightclub Nogal, where a car bomb killed 32 people on Friday. (Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); NARCOTERRORISM (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); URBAN TRANSIT
SYSTEMS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); DRUG POLICY (70%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (65%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (65%) TERRORISM;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (90%) FORERO, JUAN; RAMIREZ, MARTA LUCIA (MIN); URIBE,
ALVARO (PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (94%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); SPAIN (92%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BOGOTA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             829 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DESERT TARGETS;
Pro-Qaeda Oil Workers A Sabotage Risk for Saudis

BYLINE:  By JEFF GERTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1309 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


The government of Saudi Arabia has increased security around its oil fields and
processing centers after the discovery that employees of the state-owned oil
company sympathetic to Al Qaeda were discussing sabotage plans late last summer,
American and Saudi officials say.

American intelligence officials discovered the conversations and alerted the
Saudi authorities, who quickly arrested and interrogated the suspects, the
officials added.

The quiet thwarting of the potentially disastrous sabotage, disclosed in October
by ABC News, is seen by officials here and in Washington as a model of
cooperation for a relationship that has been under strain since the disclosure
of the role of Saudis in the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

Still, the sabotage case and the response to it underscore the deep anxieties
about the security of Saudi oil when a war with Iraq could make it more
valuable, but also more vulnerable, than ever.

Intelligence officials say the discovery of Qaeda sympathizers inside Saudi
Aramco is part of a worrisome trend: Al Qaeda's leadership appears to be
increasingly focused on economic targets, especially the oil industry.

A few weeks after the sabotage suspects were detained, a French supertanker
carrying oil from Saudi Arabia was attacked off the coast of Yemen, in a plot
that American and Arab officials say was orchestrated by Al Qaeda. About the
same time, a Qaeda videotape surfaced showing Osama bin Laden's deputy, Ayman
al-Zawahiri, calling for attacks on economic targets.

The tanker attack had little impact on oil markets, but oil experts say any
disruption of Saudi Arabia's oil production could be an economic disaster. Not
only are the Saudis the world's largest oil suppliers, but they are the only
ones with enough spare capacity to make up for large shortages from producers
like Iraq or strike-plagued Venezuela. That is a role they have filled
repeatedly in the last two decades.

"To inflict economic damage, Al Qaeda doesn't have to hit the twin towers," said
one senior intelligence official. "They can do it in their own backyard, where
all the oil is."

"Saudi Arabia's oil facilities are a target-rich environment," said one American
intelligence official. He and other officials said the terror tactics that most
worried them were computer-aided sabotage and the use of airplanes as missiles.

During the Persian Gulf war 12 years ago, Iraq launched more than three dozen
missiles into the oil-rich Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia. Some Saudis thought
that was part of an unsuccessful effort to damage the Ras Tanura shipping and
refining complex near the Persian Gulf, the gateway for most of the eight
million barrels of oil that Saudi Arabia produces each day.

"If you blew up Ras Tanura, you can't imagine the damage that would do to the
United States," said an American oil executive active in the Middle East.

Now, though, the concern has shifted somewhat.

"The Saudis are more concerned about the threat from inside the country than
from Iraq," said one Saudi oil executive who has been briefed on security
measures.

The ABC News report briefly noted that dozens of Saudi citizens had been
arrested, but did not say how the discussions had been uncovered. Nor did it
mention any of the suspects' connections to Saudi Aramco or Al Qaeda --
information that has been closely held within the Saudi and American
governments.

Officials said the saboteurs' discussions had been more preliminary planning
than a firm plot. They said some of the suspects had been released, though
others remained in detention. Some are not Saudis, they said, while a small
number worked for Saudi Aramco. American officials say they believe that Qaeda
sympathizers are sprinkled throughout the Saudi government.

The nexus of terrorism, oil and Saudi Arabia dates back three decades.

In 1973 terrorists attacked oil tanks in Lebanon owned by Aramco, the joint
venture between American oil companies and Saudi Arabia. The Saudis took control
of the company in the 1980's and renamed it Saudi Aramco. Today it is the
world's largest oil company, with 55,000 workers, most of them Saudis.

During the 1980's, according to a former American intelligence official, the
United States government did a secret study of the vulnerability of Aramco's
installation at Abqaiq, the world's largest oil and gas processing center.
Investigators found that the chemical reactions from a well-placed explosion
could cripple Abqaiq's gas-oil separation plant for months, the former official
said.

Today Saudi Aramco has 58 separation plants, which are crucial to the
transportation of oil.

Saudi Aramco officials said they were unaware of the American study but had
further tightened safeguards at their sites, which are guarded by a vast
industrial security force.

"Our people are well prepared security-wise," said Abdullah al-Saif, a senior
vice president of Saudi Aramco.

A senior Bush administration official agreed.

"The Saudis deserve credit for having a very robust surveillance and detection
system on their oil assets," the official said.

Ali al-Naimi, the company chairman and Saudi Arabia's minister of petroleum and
natural resources, said separation plants could be secured quickly and shut down
in an emergency. But he added that "terminals and power systems could be a
problem."

One indication of the heightened security is an Interior Ministry directive,
issued several weeks after the sabotage case came to light, instructing Saudi
Aramco's security force to post "no photos allowed" signs at oil installations.

During a recent visit to the country's newest and most sophisticated oil
installation, at Shaybah in the red-duned desert known as the Empty Quarter,
security was tight, especially at the main separation plant.

Workers are flown in and out on company planes. Despite the remoteness of the
site, buildings are surrounded by fences, their entrances watched by several
guards.

A control room was manned by only a handful of technical employees.
Increasingly, Saudi Aramco's oil installations, including its separation plants,
are run by computers.

With a new war looming, American officials say Qaeda sympathizers do not
represent the only potential threat to the Saudi oil supply. They also worry
about the large Shiite Muslim population in the Eastern Province. Shiites make
up 10 percent of Saudi Arabia's population and are generally treated as
second-class citizens by the country's Sunni Muslim establishment.

In 1996, Shiite terrorists planted the truck bomb that killed 19 American Air
Force personnel at the Khobar Towers housing complex near Dhahran, home of Saudi
Aramco.

Mr. Saif, the Saudi Aramco executive, said the treatment of Shiites at the
company was "not an issue." But American oil executives and government officials
said the Saudi oil company tried to keep Shiites out of sensitive jobs like
computer operations.

Thomas Stauffer, a Washington lawyer who has worked for Saudi Aramco, said a
United States-led war against Iraq could provoke anti-American and anti-Israeli
feelings among Saudi Aramco workers, making it harder to produce extra oil. "A
strike or a shutdown is a very real risk if the U.S. goes to war in Iraq," Mr.
Stauffer said, adding that "Aramco's staff is well aware of the risk."

American officials say their security concerns have been heightened by a
spontaneous and rowdy demonstration by 6,000 to 10,000 people last spring
outside the American Consulate in Dhahran, near the oil fields.

Ibrahim al-Mugaiteeb, a Saudi dissident who says he went on Al Jazeera
television to report on the demonstration, said, "Shiite oppression and
discrimination is not as bad as it used to be, because the 1979 revolution in
Iran gave a lot of hope."

But he said he was announcing the formation of an activist group, Human Rights
First, because the Saudi authorities continued to block free expression.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Saudi Arabia highlighting Ras Tanura and locations of oil and
gas fields.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (91%); TERRORISM (90%); OIL &
GAS MARINE TANKERS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (78%); TRENDS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); DESERT STORM (73%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(71%); EXECUTIVES (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: SAUDI ARAMCO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (56%); SIC1311
CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (56%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%)

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (78%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (93%); GULF STATES (92%);
YEMEN (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             833 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Serbia: War Crime Indictment

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 58 words


Prosecutors at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague said the court had indicted
Vojislav Seselj for crimes against humanity in Bosnia and Croatia from 1991 to
1993. Mr. Seselj, who came second in December's presidential election in Serbia,
has been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes for his alleged
role in "ethnic cleansing."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (86%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL

PERSON: SESELJ, VOJISLAV

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); CROATIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             836 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Arabs and America;
Looking at the Enemy as a Liberator

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan


EVERY day now, a flood of battered cars and buses arrives in this city, bearing
migrants from Iraq. Many are men of military age who have driven across the open
desert, or paid bribes to Iraqi guards at the border crossing 250 miles east of
Amman, to escape being drafted into Saddam Hussein's battalions. Crowding into
lodgings on the hillsides of Amman's old city, the Iraqis become wanderers in a
no-man's land, emerging by day to look for casual work, staying indoors after
dark, all the time fearing Jordanian police patrols that hunt illegal immigrants
and return them to the border.

Gathered around kerosene heaters in their tenements, the Iraqi men talk of a
coming conflict, and what it will mean for them and their families. Since all
gatherings inside Iraq take place in the shadow of Mr. Hussein's terror, with
police spies lurking in every neighborhood, the talk in Amman offers a chance to
discover what at least some Iraqis really think, and what they hope for now.

Almost to a man, these Iraqis said they wanted the Iraqi dictator removed.
Better still, they said -- and it was a point made again and again -- they
wanted him dead. The men, some in their teens, some in their 50's, told of
grotesque repression, of relatives and friends tortured, raped and murdered or,
as often, arrested and "disappeared."

But their hatred of Mr. Hussein had an equally potent counterpoint: for them,
the country that would rid them of their leader was not at all a bastion of
freedom, dispatching its legions across the seas to defend liberty, but a
greedy, menacing imperial power.

This America, in the migrants' telling, has enabled the humiliation of
Palestinians by arming Israel; craves control of Iraq's oil fields; supported
Mr. Hussein in the 1980's and cared not a fig for his brutality then, and
grieved for seven lost astronauts even as its forces prepared to use "smart"
weapons that, the migrants said, threatened to kill thousands of innocent
Iraqis.

The men refused to accept that their image of the United States might be
distorted by the rigidly controlled Iraqi news media, which offer as unreal a
picture of America as they do of Iraq. But when it was suggested that they could
hardly wish to be liberated by a country they distrusted so much -- that they
might prefer President Bush to extend the United Nations weapons inspections and
stand down the armada he has massed on Iraq's frontiers -- they erupted in
dismay.

"No, no, no!" one man said excitedly, and he seemed to speak for all. Iraqis,
they said, wanted their freedom, and wanted it now. The message for Mr. Bush,
they said, was that he should press ahead with war, but on conditions that
spared ordinary Iraqis.

The conflict should be short. American bombs and missiles should fall on Mr.
Hussein's palaces and Republican Guards and secret police headquarters, not on
civilians. Care should be taken not to obliterate the bridges and power stations
and water-pumping plants that were bombed in 1991. And America should know that
it would become the enemy of all Iraqis -- and Muslims -- if it prolonged its
military dominion in Iraq beyond the time necessary to dismantle the old regime.

Although these Iraqis may represent a small sector of opinion -- they fled their
country in terror, after all -- the conversations offered powerful clues as to
how a war might play out across the wider Arab world. While polls in Europe and
Asia show deep opposition to a war against Mr. Hussein, the mood among the 350
million people of the Arab states has been even more critical. Polls alone don't
capture how visceral anti-American feelings have become, spreading beyond
traditional centers of hostility -- mosques and other strongholds of
conservative Islamists, Arab nationalists and others -- across the spectrum of
Arab society.

For years, mainstream politicians and other Arab leaders have conceded, at least
privately, that Mr. Hussein is a monstrous tyrant whose ambition to acquire the
most powerful weapons has made him, potentially at least, more of a threat to
his neighbors than to Europe and the United States.

Two years ago, an Egyptian editor told a traveler back from Iraq that Mr.
Hussein was "Israel's best friend" in the Arab world, because the Arab failure
to isolate and condemn him had the effect of blackening all Arab states in the
eyes of the West.

But as the United States has ratcheted up pressure on Baghdad, Arab voices --
politicians, intellectuals, businessmen and students -- have remained largely
silent about the miseries Mr. Hussein has inflicted on his people and the threat
his weapons might pose. Instead, condemnation has been mostly reserved for the
United States. How vitriolic it has become was clear in the way many newspapers
treated the shuttle loss.

Along with militant imams who proclaimed the Columbia disaster to be God's
punishment for America's "curses" on Muslims, there was this, typically, from a
columnist in the Saudi newspaper Al Yaum: "The American view of the world
crashed even before the Columbia. America, which sees itself as the symbol of
freedom and justice, has become an arsenal of weapons in advance of a military
campaign across the entire world. The world has become a map of targets for the
American arrows represented by the trinity of war -- Bush, Rumsfeld and
Condoleezza, and behind them the famous 'quiet' man, Dick Cheney."

On its face, the hostility promises only deeper trouble ahead for the United
States. But there is another possibility, one that Arab leaders who are
cooperating with the Americans are relying on as Mr. Bush's moment of decision
draws closer. These nations include Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar and Saudi Arabia,
which allow American military bases, as well as Jordan, where American troops
would man Patriot missiles against missiles Iraq might fire at Israel and mount
pilot rescue missions into Iraq.

The leaders of these nations, all monarchies, know that if an American war
bogged down, with heavy casualties on both sides, their own legitimacy, never
strong, would be challenged by their own people in ways they might not survive.
For these rulers, it is crucial that any conflict be short and inflict minimal
casualties on Iraq's civilians.

At least one of the rulers, discussing American war plans with his advisers, has
concluded that Mr. Hussein's regime is apt to collapse quickly as non-elite army
units surrender or change sides.

But it is not the rapidity of an American victory alone that sustains the hopes
of these Arab rulers. The pro-American Arab leaders are confident of something
that invites mockery among the Europeans and Americans who oppose any war: that
American troops would arrive in Iraq's major cities as liberators.

When Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the American commander in the Middle East, visited
one Arab palace in recent weeks, Western diplomats reported, the Arab ruler
quieted his restive courtiers by predicting that American forces would be met in
Baghdad by Iraqis lining the street in celebration.

If that happens, anti-American opinions in the Arab world might swing, these
rulers hope. There would then be revelations about the extent of what Mr.
Hussein has inflicted on his people in 23 years. Just as the worst abuses of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda were revealed after they were chased from Kabul and
Kandahar, the full horrors of Mr. Hussein may be known only after his downfall.

That, America's friends in the Arab world believe, might yet be enough to remake
Mr. Bush's image in places where he is now vilified, as if Iraq's miseries were
his fault more than they have been Mr. Hussein's.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Iraqi refugees have flooded Amman, Jordan. Some survive by
selling cigarettes. (Tyler Hicks/the New York Times)(pg. 1); Palestinians in
Jordan sell roses with Saddam Hussein's image. (Reuters)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (78%); INSPECTIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); BRIBERY (77%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (73%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); DESERTS (72%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); SEX OFFENSES (70%); MURDER (70%); NEWS BRIEFS
(65%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (65%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (64%) BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL
WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); BURNS,
JOHN F

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (96%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); JORDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  MIDDLE EAST

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             842 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Yes-But Parade

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After his resounding re-election in 1936, Franklin D. Roosevelt turned on the
right wing of his Democratic Party. "He invented a new word," recalled his
speechwriter, Samuel Rosenman, "to describe the congressman who publicly
approved a progressive objective but who always found something wrong with any
specific proposal to gain that objective -- a yes-but fellow."

In gaining the progressive objective of stripping a genocidal maniac of weapons
capable of murdering millions, today's U.S. president is half-supported,
half-obstructed by a new parade of politicians and pundits who applaud the goal
but deplore the means necessary to achieve it. Count the banners of today's
yes-butters:

1. Yes, Saddam Hussein is evil, a monster in power, but is it for us to assume
the power to crush every cruel tyrant in the world?

2. Yes, only the threat of U.S. force enabled the U.N. inspectors to get back
into Iraq, but now that they're there, why not let them poke around until they
find something?

3. Yes, Saddam is probably working on germs and poison gases and maybe even
nukes, but he hasn't used them lately, and what's the rush to stop him now --
why not wait until inspectors find proof positive or he demonstrates his
possession?

4. Yes, Iraqi weapons could someday obliterate New York, but what's the use of
stopping them when North Korean missiles could even sooner take out Los Angeles?

5. Yes, Saddam has defied 17 U.N. Security Council resolutions over a dozen
years to disarm, but aren't we his moral equivalent by threatening to get it
done despite a French veto?

6. Yes, we have credible testimony from captives that Saddam harbors in Baghdad
terrorists trained by and affiliated with Al Qaeda, but where's the smoking gun
that shows the ultimate nexus -- that he personally ordered the attacks of Sept.
11?

7. Yes, ending Saddam's rewards to families of suicide bombers would remove an
incentive to kill innocents, but wouldn't the exercise of coalition power to
curtail the financing of terror create a thousand new Osama bin Ladens?

8. Yes, the liberation of 23 million oppressed and brutalized Iraqis would
spread realistic hope for democratic change throughout the Arab world, but
wouldn't that destabilize the Saudi monarchy and drive up oil prices?

9. Yes, we could win, and perhaps quickly, but what if we have to fight in the
streets of Baghdad or have to watch scenes of civilians dying on TV?

10. Yes, cost is no object in maintaining U.S. national security, but exactly
how much is war going to cost and why not break your tax-cut promises in
advance?

11. Yes, the democratic nation most easily targeted by Saddam's missiles is
willing to brave that risk, but doesn't such silent support prove that American
foreign policy is manipulated by the elders of Zion?

12. Yes, liberation and human rights and the promotion of democracy and the
example to North Korea and Iran are all fine Wilsonian concepts, but such
idealism has no place in realpolitik -- and can you guarantee that our
servicemembers will be home for Christmas?

This is the dirty dozen of doubt, the non-rallying cry of the half-hearted. The
yes-butters never forthrightly oppose, as principled pacifists do. Rather than
challenge the ends, they demean the means. Rather than go up against a grand
design, they play the devil with the details. Afflicted by doubt created by the
potential cost of action, they flinch at calculating the far greater cost of
inaction.

Haughty statesmen felt for years that "poorly brought up" Bosnians and Kosovars
were unworthy of outside military defense -- until hundreds of thousands of
innocent Muslims embarrassingly died. Iraqi Kurds by the thousands were
poison-gassed as well, their cries and exodus ignored by European leaders in the
name of preserving the sovereignty of despots. These local crowd-pleasers are
ready to again embrace peace at any price so long as others pay the price.

The firm opponents of a just war draw succor from the yes-butters, whose fears
are expressed in dwelling on the uncertainty of great enterprises. Their fears
are neither unreasoning or unjustified, but, in the words of a president who
rose above paralysis, "paralyze needed efforts to turn retreat into advance."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); VETO (78%);
INSPECTIONS (77%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (76%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (73%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (72%); TAX LAW (72%); BOMBINGS (72%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); AL-QAEDA (67%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (62%); OIL & GAS PRICES (60%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC
WEAPONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES);
SAFIRE, WILLIAM

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
(79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); FRANCE (78%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             844 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 21, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD;
Human Shields, No Resume Needed

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Feb. 20


A rather jaunty sign advertising the grimmest of tasks was pinned up on a small
notice board labeled "Human Shields" in the airy lobby of the Andalus Hotel
Apartments here this morning.

It sought three additional volunteers to join the 13 already committed to living
at the Baghdad South Power Plant to try to prevent its being bombed in the event
of war. "There is no more important place for a shield to be," the notice read.

Volunteers from half a dozen nations expect to move into a large, collective
dormitory room on Sunday at the power plant, a site they said was suggested to
them by the Iraqi government. Since arriving earlier this month they have been
touring hospitals, water treatment plants and other installations critical to
the civilian population.

"They have shown us a number of sites and one of them was this power station,"
said Godfrey Meynell, a 68-year-old antiwar activist from Britain. "I have been
pushing for this site because it seems to me that if the electricity is cut,
then water treatment suffers, hospitals suffer. Of course America appears to
have become so immoral now that there are few chances of it making it the
slightest bit of difference."

Like much of the current confrontation with Iraq, the issue of human shields
carries an echo from the Persian Gulf war of 1991. After its 1990 invasion of
Kuwait, the Iraqis rounded up hundreds of oil workers, bankers and other
expatriates, forcing them to live for months at scores of sites including Iraqi
military bases and industrial plants. They were eventually released, before the
war.

The United States has warned repeatedly that even though the shields this time
are volunteers, their use would still be considered a war crime. "Deploying
human shields is not a military strategy, it's murder, a violation of the laws
of armed conflict and a crime against humanity, and it will be treated as such,"
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said on Wednesday.

The participants took exception. "That is ridiculous," said Ken Nichols O'Keefe,
a 33-year-old gulf war Marine veteran who initiated the idea. "They are not
using me. I am here voluntarily. What is Saddam Hussein supposed to say? 'No,
they can't do it'? "

Earlier this month, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said the foreign volunteers
were welcome. "They should come and set themselves up around places that we need
to survive, to aid civil defense," he said.

The Iraqi government is paying to house the volunteers in a smattering of small
hotels around downtown Baghdad and setting up free international telephone lines
and special Internet access so they can lobby the folks back home.

Western diplomats are unsure, though, that the Iraqi government, once besieged,
will want the public relations headache the shields will undoubtedly carry, and
some of the volunteers themselves have their doubts.

"We fear they will keep us together and then push us out at the last minute,"
Mr. Meynell said.

Others have become aware of the sinister side of what some say they naively
interpreted as a kind of extraordinary war protest. "I think the Iraqi
government is potentially putting us in a dangerous position," said a young
Australian who said he had decided to leave.

The shields stress that they came to protect civilians and not to support the
Iraqi government, but the Iraqis inevitably blur such distinctions.

One American peace advocate recalled a typical march where the Westerners were
chanting antiwar slogans and were suddenly joined by dozens of Iraqis hoisting
pictures of Mr. Hussein. "It changed the spirit of the march," said a recent
college graduate who is one of the volunteers. "That wasn't what we expected."

The number of human shields remains fluid. The count listed on the group's
bulletin board today jumped from about 97 to 132 with new arrivals, but about 60
showed up at a group meeting. Eighteen are believed to be Americans. Organizers
brashly predict that the numbers will catapult to the thousands.

But other peace delegations object to the fact that they are all often lumped
together as shields. "I am certainly not here to become a martyr," said Beate
Malkus, a 33-year old German actress.

One Italian confessed that she really just wanted to come here as a peace
advocate, but found that volunteering as a shield seemed to speed the visa
process.

Besides the shields, there has been an endless tide of peace advocates showing
up from around the world.

The whole human shield effort oozes a spirit somewhere between a socialist
collective and one of those communal college dormitories.

One announcement on the bulletin board proclaimed a drive to donate blood. It
pointed out that taking part would be one easy way to get the certificate
peculiar to Iraq that requires all foreigners to prove they do not have AIDS.
The certificate is presented on departure.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sean Logan, 22, of San Francisco, center, joined other foreign
volunteers in Baghdad to protest plans to attack Iraq. Some of them are planning
to serve as human shields at potential bombing targets. (Farah Nosh for The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DESERT STORM (90%); POWER PLANTS (90%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (90%);
UTILITIES INDUSTRY (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); VOLUNTEERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); WATER SUPPLY
UTILITIES (77%); HOTELS & MOTELS (77%); LAW OF WAR (76%); MILITARY BASES (74%);
LOBBYING (73%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (71%);
INTERNET & WWW (70%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%); WATER QUALITY (67%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (67%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (62%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (59%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
(57%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  PERSIAN GULF WAR;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (54%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (54%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); GULF STATES (90%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  BAGHDAD (IRAQ)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             851 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marbury v. Madison v. Ashcroft

BYLINE:  By Anthony Lewis;  Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Two hundred years ago today Chief Justice John Marshall delivered the judgment
of the Supreme Court in the case of Marbury v. Madison. As a kindness to Justice
Samuel Chase, who was ill, he announced the decision in the Capitol Hill rooming
house where most of the justices lived. In that humble setting Marshall and his
colleagues established the great principle that judges have the power to declare
acts of Congress void because they conflict with the Constitution.

After 200 years Americans are so accustomed to judges having the last word that
alternatives seem unthinkable. We rely on the courts to enforce what the
Constitution promises us.

But in one area the courts have disappointed us. In time of war, actual or
threatened, they have repeatedly abdicated their function, bowing to claims of
national security. A dramatic example in the last century was the internment of
Japanese-Americans during World War II; bowing to government claims that they
were a security threat, the Supreme Court, in the Korematsu case, refused to
interfere.

We are now headed for a profound test of our commitment to the Constitution in
time of war: the war on terrorism, as President Bush has proclaimed it. His
administration has taken steps that radically impinge on the right to counsel
and other fundamental liberties. Will the courts, in the end the Supreme Court,
subject those measures to real constitutional scrutiny, or give way to arguments
of war emergency?

The war on terrorism is an especially dangerous occasion for judges to close
their eyes to violations of our rights. In every other historical case of the
courts yielding to wartime claims, the emergency ended before long and the
country regretted the abandonment of constitutional values. It is extremely
unlikely that the Supreme Court today would follow the Korematsu decision and
uphold the internment of hundreds of thousands of Americans of a particular
ethnic background.

But no one can imagine this war coming to an end any time soon. So every piece
of judicial deference to the power of government in war may crimp the rights of
citizens forever.

Aliens, both visitors and permanent residents, were harshly affected by Bush
administration measures after 9/11. Attorney General John Ashcroft ordered more
than 1,000 aliens detained, keeping their names and places of detention secret.
He also ordered many deportation hearings held in secret. He required visitors
from 25 countries, predominantly Muslim, to register with the government. Those
who failed to do so within 40 days were subject to arrest, detention and
deportation.

But the measure that most gravely menaces constitutional rights is the arrest
and indefinite detention of Americans without trial and without access to a
lawyer. The president has claimed the power to thus seize and hold any American
whom he designates an "enemy combatant." And the basis of the designation,
administration lawyers argue, is not subject to effective review in any court.

Two American citizens are now held in solitary confinement under this asserted
presidential power. One, Yasser Hamdi, was found under unexplained circumstances
on a battlefield in Afghanistan. The other, Jose Padilla, was arrested on
arrival at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago after spending time in Egypt
and Pakistan. Both are totally isolated. They are not allowed to speak to a
lawyer. They may not see their families.

Lawyers appointed to act for Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla challenged their
detention. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in
Richmond, Va., made the first appellate ruling -- against Mr. Hamdi. It held
that the constitutional guarantee of the right to counsel "in all criminal
prosecutions" did not apply because Mr. Hamdi was not being prosecuted.

That reasoning reduced constitutional law to sleight of hand: The government can
impose solitary confinement, perhaps for life, if it simply avoids giving the
prisoner a trial. If what was done to Mr. Hamdi did not technically violate the
Sixth Amendment, it surely deprived him of liberty without due process of law.
James Madison, the principal author of the Bill of Rights, would have been
astounded at the notion. So would the average American today if told he could be
taken off the street and imprisoned forever without being able to call a lawyer.

The Fourth Circuit also agreed with the government that courts must defer to the
president in wartime. It held that the president can detain indefinitely anyone
he calls an enemy combatant. And it said that judges could not look into the
basis of that designation if the president produced any evidence for it, however
slight and untested by cross-examination.

The last point, making it all but impossible to challenge the president's
designation of anyone as an enemy, is crucial. Throughout American history the
courts have accorded conclusive weight to claims of security threats -- claims
that turned out to be hollow after the crisis had passed.

The claim that people of Japanese descent were likely to commit sabotage or
espionage on the West Coast in World War II is a signal example. In 1983 a
government study found that the internments were the result of "race prejudice"
and "war hysteria"; there was no threat. Congress paid survivors modest
compensation. The country similarly regretted the Sedition Act of 1798, passed
to deal with the threat -- a phantom threat -- of French revolutionary terror in
America. Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer's harsh roundup of assertedly
radical aliens after World War I also came to be seen as an outrage.

Justice William J. Brennan Jr., looking back over the record of punitive actions
justified by claimed threats to national security, said in 1987 that the claims
were "so baseless that they would be comical if not for the serious hardship
they caused." He made the point in a lecture at the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem. Israel has had to cope with terrorism since its rebirth in 1948. Yet
its Supreme Court has gradually -- if not always consistently -- developed a
determination not to sacrifice the values of freedom in the fight against
terrorists.

Aharon Barak, president of the Israeli Supreme Court, put his conclusions as
follows: "The real test of judicial independence and impartiality comes in
situations of war and terrorism. . . . Precisely in these times, we judges must
hold fast to fundamental principles and values; we must embrace our supreme
responsibility to protect democracy and the constitution."

American judges are not immune to the sense of vulnerability that Sept. 11 left
in almost all Americans. That must help to explain the decision of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upholding New York City's ban on
a march to protest the planned war on Iraq. The decision's logic would have
justified bans on marches led by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the 1960's.

The terrorist threat in this country is real, and the government naturally wants
a free hand to deal with it. The question is whether judges can treat that
demand with respect without abandoning their highest calling: as guardians of
freedom.

Marbury v. Madison was not a universally popular decision at the time. President
Jefferson, Marshall's cousin and bitter critic, condemned the "twistifications
in the case of Marbury." But the case has become part of the bedrock of our
system.

"It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what
the law is," John Marshall wrote in Marbury v. Madison. It has never been more
important for judges to perform that duty unflinchingly.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Elliott Banfield)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAWYERS (89%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (89%); THIS DAY IN
HISTORY (89%); TERRORISM (87%); US PRESIDENTS (87%); DEPORTATION (85%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); PRISONS (73%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); WORLD WAR II (69%); ASIAN AMERICANS (68%)
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) LEWIS, ANTHONY; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             852 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: KABUL;
U.N. Representative Warns That Afghan Peace Is Fragile

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 20


More than a year into his mission here as United Nations special representative,
Lakhdar Brahimi, the former foreign minister of Algeria and a veteran peacemaker
in Afghanistan, has been warning people that the peace here is not yet
irreversible.

As the prospect of war in Iraq looms, Mr. Brahimi predicts that in its current
weak state, Afghanistan will not be able to withstand the buffeting from all
sides. Activity by the Taliban and Al Qaeda has been increasing in the border
areas and could garner more support as popular unease over a war in Iraq grows,
he said.

"I am very concerned" about the prospect of a war, Mr. Brahimi said in Kabul.
"Just looking at it from the narrow prospective of Afghanistan, we fear that it
will have negative results."

A war could cause unrest in neighboring countries, particularly Pakistan, to
grow, he said. As for Afghanistan, he fears that it will be abandoned once again
just as the fragile peace here is entering its most delicate phase.

Despite assurances from Washington that no matter what happens in Iraq,
Afghanistan will not be forgotten -- including a personal promise from Secretary
of State Colin L. Powell in January -- Mr. Brahimi says his experience leads him
to believe otherwise.

"There are only 24 hours in a day," he said. "If you are forced to spend 20
hours on Iraq, then clearly you are not going to have much time on anything
else, however much you would like to."

Afghanistan is looking much better than it did 14 months ago, when, as the
Taliban fell, Mr. Brahimi helped forge the Bonn agreement for a transitional
government to lead the country up to national elections in 2004. As the United
Nations' special representative here, he took on responsibility for the United
Nations' large-scale civilian aid, human rights and political program.

But he says that the job is only half done and that full international support
is still essential for its survival. Building the state has barely started.
Afghanistan has no functioning national army, police force or judicial system
yet -- all projects that are dependent on foreign aid. A United Nations program
for the disarmament and demobilization of armed fighters has not even begun.
Reconstruction, essential to create jobs, has not yet reached apoint at which it
is having much of an effect.

On the political side, the Taliban have refused to accept defeat and still claim
a right to rule. Other political parties and groups that were left out in the
Bonn agreement are demanding a share of power, and there is interference from
neighboring countries, particularly Pakistan.

Furthermore, this country of more than 20 million, mostly illiterate,
unregistered citizens, is supposed to organize elections and vote 18 months from
now for a new national leadership and constitution.

Mr. Brahimi was considered a good choice his job, with experience of his own
country's upheavals and his work mediating the end to the civil war in Lebanon.

But his situation in Afghanistan is, by his own admission, a peculiar one. The
United States-led coalition is still fighting a war against rebel forces in
various parts of the country, while Mr. Brahimi is trying to manage peace
efforts. This creates, in effect, two parallel outside powers in the country,
and some United Nations officials complain that the aims of the American
military seem to contradict the country's long-term needs for peace and
reconciliation.

Mr. Brahimi's view for the future of Afghanistan remains full of "ifs," and he
warns that without full international backing for the next two years, the
country may not be able to stand on its own feet.

"If the support of the international community is there for another couple of
years, and if our ideas concerning the national army are really moved forward,"
and then if a police force and a judiciary are created, then success is
possible, he said. "And if to put -- as it were -- the roof over the house, we
manage to organize a credible, fair, free election 18 months from now, you will
have your state," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lakhdar Brahimi, United Nations representative in Afghanistan.
(Hiromi Yasui for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); TALIBAN (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (78%); ARMIES (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (78%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (78%);
DISARMAMENT (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(72%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (71%);
TERRORISM (71%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (68%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (64%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (63%); POLITICS (63%); JOB CREATION (62%); POLICE FORCES (50%) UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  BIOLOGICAL
AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AL-QAEDA (57%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BRAHIMI, LAKHDAR; GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: IRAQ;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 26, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: East Timor: Indonesian General Is Charged

BYLINE:  By Jane Perlez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 114 words


United Nations prosecutors have charged the former Indonesian military chief,
Gen.

Wiranto, with crimes against humanity for his role in the violence surrounding
the 1999 referendum on independence for East Timor. The crime unit of the United
Nations Mission in Dili, the East Timorese capital, said the evidence against
General Wiranto was supported by the statements of more than 1,500 witnesses. It
also cited six other military officers and a civilian official in the
indictment, which lists 280 killings and 10 major attacks before and after the
referendum on August 30, 1999. The Indonesian government has refused to
extradite the eight who were accused.   Jane Perlez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); WITNESSES (88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (88%);
EXTRADITION (88%); REFERENDUMS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%) WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; WIRANTO (GEN)

CITY: DILI, TIMOR-LESTE (92%)

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  EAST TIMOR

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             857 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AL QAEDA;
Manhunt for bin Laden And Top Aide, Zawahiri, Continues to Be Fruitless

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER with DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1303 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Feb. 26


For months American troops and covert operatives have combed the rugged outlands
of eastern Afghanistan and western Pakistan in search of Osama bin Laden and his
principal deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri.

The fruitless manhunt serves as a reminder of the Bush administration's
inability to achieve one of the main goals of its antiterror effort, the capture
of Al Qaeda's leaders. Mr. bin Laden and Mr. Zawahiri are not only at large, but
apparently are the sources of recent taped exhortations urging followers to
carry out more violence.

Pakistani officials are now saying Mr. Zawahiri fled Afghanistan in late 2001,
only weeks after the Americans began bombing Qaeda and Taliban strongholds
there, an assertion strongly rejected by American intelligence officials.

In separate interviews in the last week, two Pakistani officials said Mr.
Zawahiri, an Egyptian-born surgeon regarded as the terror network's No. 2
leader, was smuggled across the porous border into Pakistan and escaped by boat
across the Arabian Sea, possibly to the Middle East or North Africa.

The Pakistani officials said the information about Mr. Zawahiri's escape had
come to them only in the last few weeks. They said their sources were diverse:
paid informers as well as Qaeda suspects interrogated after being picked up in
recent raids in Pakistan.

According to the informers and prisoners, Mr. Zawahiri was in the small
southeastern Afghan city of Khost, a main Qaeda training center, in October 2001
when his wife and at least one of his children were killed in the American
bombings, the Pakistani officials said.

The sources said he and three aides had been taken into the Pakistani province
of Baluchistan and then down to the coast, where a boat had been waiting.

The officials also said their information had been shared with American
authorities. The Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation have agents in Pakistan searching for remnants of Al Qaeda while
American troops look on the other side of the border.

American officials in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, declined to comment on
the reports or discuss whether they know anything of Mr. Zawahiri's whereabouts.

In Washington, an American intelligence official said that although Mr.
Zawahiri's location was unknown, Americans believed that he was still in hiding
in the Afghan-Pakistani border region. The official emphasized that the United
States had no evidence that Mr. Zawahiri had left the rugged tribal areas.

Another American official in Washington scoffed at the idea that Mr. Zawahiri
had escaped from the region. The official asserted that it was in the interest
of Pakistani officials to deny that Qaeda leaders were hiding in their country,
but that despite such denials, the American authorities believed Mr. bin Laden
and Mr. Zawahiri to be somewhere in the tribal areas straddling eastern
Afghanistan and western Pakistan.

While not as prominent as Mr. bin Laden, Mr. Zawahiri is deemed notorious enough
to have a $25 million price on his head and to be included on the short list of
people whom President Bush has authorized the C.I.A. to kill.

One American official said Mr. Zawahiri's medical training had helped him
develop an expertise in chemical and biological weapons, making him a greater
danger.

In October an audiotape by a speaker identified as Mr. Zawahiri was broadcast on
Al Jazeera, the Qatar-based television network. In the message, he appeared to
take credit for planning a suicide bombing in April 2002 that killed 14 German
tourists outside a synagogue in Tunisia and a similar bombing in the Pakistani
city of Karachi in which 11 French engineers died.

"The young holy warriors have already sent messages to Germany and France," the
voice on the tape said. "However, if these doses are not enough, we are prepared
with the help of God to increase the dosage."

The possibility that Mr. Zawahiri escaped from Afghanistan first surfaced last
month, during a former Taliban official's interview with Pakistani reporters.
The former official declared that Mr. Zawahiri was no longer in Afghanistan or
Pakistan, according to a Pakistani reporter who was at the meeting.

That assertion was supported in the last week in interviews with two officials
from different Pakistani government agencies. Both men have long experience
monitoring the activities of suspected terrorists.

"I am convinced he is not in the region," one of the officials said of Mr.
Zawahiri, although he added that he did believe that Mr. bin Laden remained in
the tribal areas.

The official said his conclusion about Mr. Zawahiri was based on interrogations
of Qaeda suspects in January. Those prisoners said that Mr. Zawahiri had fled
after the bombing in Khost, but that they did not know where he had gone, the
official said.

The other official said the details of Mr. Zawahiri's flight had been provided
to him recently by an Afghan informer who was not a prisoner and who had a long
history of providing reliable intelligence on other matters. This informer, too,
said that he did not know where Mr. Zawahiri had gone in the boat, but that he
believed it was to the Middle East, the second official recounted.

The official said the talk with the informer had prompted him to seek
corroboration from another source, an Arab who had fought in Afghanistan, who
not only backed the account but asserted that Mr. Zawahiri was in Algeria.

The official acknowledged that it was not possible to know whether the informers
were telling the truth, but he emphasized that they had been reliable in the
past.

Mr. Zawahiri may have had an easier time escaping than Mr. bin Laden. His face
is less well known, and he would blend into a crowd better than the Qaeda
leader, who is well over 6 feet tall. Neither man would lackfor help in the
region; both have spent many years building a network of hundreds of loyalists
on both sides of the mountainous border.

Mr. Zawahiri has been described as the brains of Al Qaeda, the man with the
ideas and theory, while Mr. bin Laden provided the money. He was born in 1951
into a prominent Egyptian family. An uncle was the first secretary general of
the Arab League and his father was a university professor.

He joined the Muslim Brotherhood, a relatively moderate organization, as a
teenager, according to American intelligence. While a medical student in Cairo,
he was a founder of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, which became a more radical
group.

He was charged in the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981,
according to an American intelligence official. He was never convicted, but he
spent three years in prison on an unrelated weapons charge. He said he was
tortured in prison, a claim supported by human rights organizations.

After getting out of prison, the American official said, Mr. Zawahiri went to
Afghanistan during the war against the Soviet occupation and worked as a doctor,
treating refugees. Years later the Russian authorities arrested him as he tried
to enter Chechnya without a visa.

The Russians never learned of his background and released him after six months,
according to a lengthy account of Mr. Zawahiri's career published last year in
The Wall Street Journal.

He returned to Afghanistan, where he aligned himself with Mr. bin Laden, in
1996, American intelligence officials said. In 1998 the two men announced the
formation of the International Islamic Front for Jihad on Jews and Crusaders.
They called on every Muslim "to comply with God's orders to kill Americans."

A few days later, two American embassies in East Africa were bombed in attacks
orchestrated by Al Qaeda. Mr. Zawahiri was indicted by a federal grand jury for
his alleged role.

Terrorism experts say Mr. bin Laden and Mr. Zawahiri do not need to be together
or even in communication with each other to orchestrate terrorist attacks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Pakistan highlighting tribal areas: Pakistani and Afghan tribal
areas have harbored Qaeda leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (94%); AL-QAEDA (92%); TERRORISM (92%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); BORDER CONTROL (74%); SMUGGLING (73%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(69%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%) TERRORISM;  RECORDINGS (AUDIO);  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (93%) BONNER, RAYMOND; JOHNSTON, DAVID; BIN LADEN,
OSAMA; ZAWAHIRI, AYMAN AL-; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (88%); KHOST, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); NORTHERN AFRICA
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             865 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nuremberg, Nasser, Timor, Iraq

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 150 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Lists Iraqis to Punish, or to Work With" (front page, Feb. 26):

President Bush has a unique opportunity to uphold the rule of law.

If the Security Council fails to issue an unambiguous mandate to use force, the
president should respect the will of the world community.

We need a new military objective: upholding the Nuremberg principle that never
again will crimes against humanity go unpunished. Our goal should be to bring to
trial only top Iraqi leaders. Those who become accessories by blocking arrests
will suffer "serious consequences."

No time limits apply to crimes against humanity, and existing courts can be
modified to offer fair trials. Judges for the new International Criminal Court
are being inaugurated on March 11. Isn't law better than war?

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
New Rochelle, N.Y., Feb. 26, 2003

The writer was a prosecutor in the Nuremberg war crimes trials.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); RULE OF LAW (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (70%); TERRORISM
(66%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  TERRORISM;  WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (87%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (87%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             866 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Trial Settles Into Slow but Judicious Routine

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


At first, Slobodan Milosevic seemed determined to sabotage his trial. He called
the United Nations war crimes tribunal unlawful and his indictment "phony" and
he refused to enter a plea. Behind the scenes, there was nervous hand-wringing
over what to do if this former Yugoslav dictator flatly refused to attend the
hearings.

Yet a year into the proceedings, fears that Mr. Milosevic would turn his trial
into a mockery of international justice have largely faded.

On most court days, Mr. Milosevic, the first European leader to be tried on
charges of genocide, arrives in a business suit, opens a worn leather briefcase
and plunges into his role as his own lawyer. The gruff, defiant style is still
there, but he has gradually become a little more civil, a little more
cooperative.

Relieved court officials say he has helped to legitimize the process by fully
engaging with it.

As the prospect of war crimes trials for Iraqi leaders looms ever larger,
experts say that the Milosevic trial, though far from concluded, could be the
test case, probed for its notions of due process under developing international
criminal law and standing out as a successor to the Nuremberg trials of the
1940's.

However, American officials say they want for Iraqi leaders a narrower, faster
and less expensive procedure than that at this tribunal, established to
prosecute the crimes of the Balkan wars of the 1990's, which killed 200,000
people.

Critics of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, even
some who loathe Mr. Milosevic, belittle it as a mere political tool of the West.
Many Serbs still see it as a stage to beat up on Serbia. But a consensus is also
growing that Mr. Milosevic is being treated fairly in the courtroom.

"The proceedings are almost excruciatingly fair," said Geoffrey Robertson, a
London-based lawyer who has just been selected to head the new special court for
war crimes in Sierra Leone. "The court is bending over backward, perhaps even a
little too far. In a serious crime trial in London or any American court, you
would not see so much leeway given to a defendant."

Unlike Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Robertson said, defendants in murder cases would not
be allowed to make speeches or transgress time limits, and once a suspect had
chosen to be his own lawyer, he would not have the benefit of an additional team
of legal experts at public expense.

Early in the trial, the panel of judges appointed a trio of veteran independent
lawyers as "friends of the court" to serve as a safeguard and support system for
both the defendant and the court. The team -- an Australian, a Briton and a Serb
-- do not communicate with Mr. Milosevic, although they sit in the courtroom at
a separate table.

But when Mr. Milosevic overlooks a point he might use in his defense, which
happens regularly, one of them may raise it on his behalf before the court.
Although Mr. Milosevic trained as a lawyer, he has no trial experience.

"Future leaders, even Saddam Hussein, may not receive such leeway and largesse,"
said Mr. Robertson, who is the author of a book on human rights law titled
"Crimes Against Humanity" (Penguin Press, 1999). "The team is costly, the
process slow, but it is the price being paid for a trial with such historic
significance."

Others following the trial concur that, in this phase of international criminal
law, judges are evidently eager to demonstrate that an accused war criminal,
even a widely demonized head of state, can get a fair hearing.

Mr. Milosevic's three judges do this in part by giving him extra time. With the
prosecution still presenting witnesses, Mr. Milosevic insists on equal time for
his cross-examination. Often he gets more: in mid-February, according to the
registrar's office, the prosecution had held the floor for 110 hours, while Mr.
Milosevic had spoken for 160.

Much of that time is spent filibustering. Though calmer now, Mr. Milosevic still
treats the court with disdain, calling the prosecution "the opposite side" and
emphatically addressing Richard May, the chief judge, as "Mr. May." Judges
often, but not always, cut him short when he plays the victim or delves into
politics, and repeatedly advise him how to advance his own cause better.

"Attacking a witness is not a defense," Judge May says repeatedly. "Ask the
witness about his evidence."

Aware that the trial is being televised back in Serbia, Mr. Milosevic repeats
his arguments: He was the peacemaker, not the warmonger; Serbs were the victims
of an international plot to destroy Yugoslavia; yes, there was terrible
bloodshed, but Serbia did not want war; no, he did not know about crimes, he was
never involved with day-to-day military decisions.

Recently, his approach has changed, perhaps because those testifying against him
have included many fellow Serbs.

In the first months, which concerned Kosovo, prosecutors brought in many victims
or enemies of the violent campaign in that Serbian province. Now that the focus
is on Croatia, prosecutors have brought Serbs to the witness stand, including
former politicians, policemen, soldiers and several top insiders.

"With the insiders, he's becoming more focused, and he's getting better at
cross-examination," said Judith Armatta, a lawyer who follows the trial for the
Coalition for International Justice. "He's no longer trying to make a farce of
the trial with his histrionics."

In mid-February, the trial's most senior insider so far, Maj. Gen. Aleksandar
Vasiljevic, a former chief of military intelligence, took the stand. The
general, now retired, provided detailed descriptions of Mr. Milosevic's strategy
to gain control of the Yugoslav military in the early 1990's by purging the
ranks. The general also offered glimpses of direct links between Mr. Milosevic
and paramilitary mercenary groups that became notorious for terrorizing, robbing
and killing civilians.

Such testimony is undermining Mr. Milosevic's claims that he was detached from
day-to-day decisions. To demonstrate Mr. Milosevic's personal criminal
responsibility, prosecutors depend heavily on insider witnesses because they
have few written orders. They have also presented telephone intercepts and
videotapes.

The prosecutors are convinced that they have the evidence to back up their
charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity -- 66 counts in all
-- but their main fear is that they may run out of time. Judges have given them
until May 16 to present their case. Then Mr. Milosevic will begin his defense.

The trial, covering three wars and multiple atrocities, is becoming even harder
to manage because of Mr. Milosevic's health problems. Proceedings have been
suspended six times, driving up costs and requiring complex rescheduling.

"It's been a year on the calendar, but for us it's far from that," said Florence
Hartmann, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor. "There have only been 149 days of
hearings."

For now, the process looks set to go on at least another year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAWYERS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMINAL LAW (73%); POLITICS (64%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (54%)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (86%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); IRAQ (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
SIERRA LEONE (79%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%);
GERMANY (58%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             869 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE TALIBAN QUARRY;
U.S.-Led Afghan Sweep Yields Unclear Results

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: LEJAY, Afghanistan, Feb. 27


Two sharp blasts shattered the afternoon, then minutes later a warplane streaked
overhead, unleashing a third deafening explosion that rolled around the valley
and off the surrounding mountains. A white car skidded round the hillside, the
turbaned farmers packed inside wide-eyed with alarm.

United States and coalition forces were making a show of strength here in
Helmand Province in southern Afghanistan, bombing the remote Baghran Valley,
where pro-Taliban militants are believed to be hiding.

Several hundred American soldiers have been deployed along the length of the
100-mile-long valley, conducting a village-by-village search. It is the kind of
painstaking, narrow operation that occupies much of the American forces' time on
this kind of mission.

As the troops prepared to finish here, however, it remained unclear how
successful the three-week operation had been.

According to one American officer, Special Forces troops did capture their main
prey, Abdul Waheed, a former Taliban commander and the unrivaled boss of
Baghran. Another former Taliban member, Mullah Kabir, was on the run, having
fled with his family three days before the operation began, villagers said. The
United States military has not said officially if either man has been captured.
"My mission is to deny sanctuary to Al Qaeda and Taliban," Col. John F.
Campbell, commander of the task force in southern Afghanistan, said in an
interview. "I am not going after one or two guys. Anytime we go in, we disrupt
their communications and planning, and put people on the run and in hiding."

Troops were sent here after intelligence found increased militant activity in
the region. Militants opposing the coalition were trying to take advantage of
the American military's preparations for war in Iraq, hoping it would lose focus
on its campaign in Afghanistan, Colonel Campbell said.

He said he was acting aggressively to prevent any such chance. Since his arrival
in January, he has launched two major operations in southern Afghanistan,
routing a large group of rebel fighters in Spinbaldak near the Pakistani border,
and now clearing out the Baghran Valley. "By going in, we show we will stay
focused," he said.

American forces estimate that they killed 20 militants in fighting in the first
week of the operation here, and say they detained 20 people and seized 50 rifles
during their searches. There was only one civilian casualty, the military said
-- an 8-year-old boy who was wounded by shrapnel.

Local elders and a government delegation put the casualty figure higher, saying
that at least one civilian was killed and that six were wounded. Eight villagers
are missing, they said.

Colonel Campbell said care had been taken to minimize civilian casualties and to
foster good relations with the local population. He had used the Air Force to
fly in a container of items that included blankets, food and other supplies for
villagers, "so we don't leave a bad taste behind," he said.

But in this village, which bore the brunt of the fighting, and a dozen other
villages around it, the operation has reinforced resentment toward American
troops and the Afghan soldiers who accompanied them. This remains a heartland of
Taliban support and anti-American feeling.

"We hate them for this," said Abdul Wahab, a shopkeeper here who was in a
four-man delegation that traveled to Kabul to protest the operation to President
Hamid Karzai. "In our culture, we hate it when someone enters our house without
our permission.

"President Bush said he wants peace and law and order in Afghanistan," he added.
"This was outside the law and human rights."

The villagers complained particularly that respected elders were rounded up and
handcuffed on the first day of the operation, and that houses had been ransacked
and looted, although they specifically blamed the Afghan soldiers accompanying
the Americans for stealing and destroying their property. They said they had
received no relief aid.

American Special Forces moved on this village just before dawn on Feb. 10. They
landed dozens of troops and vehicles by helicopter just south of the village in
the night, according to Tor Jan, 26, a mechanic who was sent out by the elders
to approach the soldiers and find out what they wanted. More troops came in
vehicles from the north end of the valley in a coordinated two-pronged movement,
villagers said.

Gunmen in a rocky outcrop above the road fired on the Special Forces troops
approaching from the north, disabling one of their vehicles, according to the
American military. Colonel Campbell described the attack as a planned ambush.

American troops returned fire and pursued the gunmen into the foothills of a
mountain ridge that towers over the village, according to the American military
spokesman here, Col. Roger King. The deputy governor of Helmand, Haji Pir
Muhammad, said villagers had also fled to the mountains.

"As people rushed to the mountain, the Americans thought they were fighters, and
the fighters and ordinary people were mixed," he said.

People here described a scene of panic in the village. It was still dark, and
people were at the mosque when the shooting began, they said. Most able-bodied
men fled, some running to the river on the west side, some taking to the hills
to the east. The elders walked to the entrance of the village to try to talk to
the American soldiers.

Shaista Gul, 35, a farmer, ran to the river, but his brother Anar Gul, 25, had
just been setting out with his sheep for the hills, together with their two
younger brothers, Taza Gul, 23, and Muhammad Hasan, 14.

"Everyone was scared and tried to flee," Shaista Gul said. His three brothers
were fired on as they ran into the hills with the sheep, and they took cover in
a cave halfway up the mountain, he said. Then American forces called in
airstrikes, and jets bombed the ridge and the caves. According to the government
delegation, Anar Gul was killed in the bombing.

The people in the nearby area say the gunmen were not from their villages.

"No one fired from our village," said Abdul Ahad, an elder of Robatak, which is
just over the hill from the spot where the Americans were ambushed. "You should
believe me," he added. "No one knew the Americans were coming."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saifullah, a village elder in Lejay, Afghanistan, said American
soldiers had ordered elders to raise their arms and then handcuffed and detained
them on the first day of the military operation in the village. In the black
turban at left is Shaista Gul, whose shepherd brother, Anar, was killed by
American bombing. (Hiromi Yasui for The New York Times) Map of Afghanistan
highlighting Lejay: The village of Lejay is in the heartland of support for the
Taliban.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); IRAQ WAR (72%);
INTERVIEWS (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); AIR FORCES (70%); RELIGION (52%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             875 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovar Pleads Not Guilty

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 84 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, the Netherlands, March 5


A Kosovo Albanian war crimes suspect and prominent politician pleaded not guilty
at The Hague today to charges of murder and torture in the province in 1998.

The suspect, Fatmir Limaj, was identified as the leading member of a group of
former Kosovo guerrillas in the tribunal's first indictment against Kosovo
Albanian separatists who fought Serb forces in 1998-1999. He faced nine counts
of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Arrested last month, he was
transferred to The Hague on Tuesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); TORTURE (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: LIMAJ, FATMIR

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); ALBANIA (94%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing Southwest: Texas: School To Allow Gay-Straight Alliance

BYLINE:  By Steven Greenhouse (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 95 words


The Klein Independent School District has decided to allow Marla Dukler, a high
school junior, to establish a Gay-Straight Alliance in her school to promote
tolerance of gays.

The district, north of Houston, acted to settle a federal lawsuit brought by the
American Civil Liberties Union after the school repeatedly delayed permission
for the club. The A.C.L.U. said school officials violated a federal law that
bars discriminating against clubs based on the content of their speech. Some
parents opposed the club, saying it would promote sex.   Steven Greenhouse (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); HIGH SCHOOLS (88%); EDUCATION
ADMINISTRATION (86%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (84%) EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;
SUITS AND LITIGATION;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; GAY-STRAIGHT ALLIANCE

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; DUKLER, MARLA

CITY: HOUSTON, TX, USA (90%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: TEXAS

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             882 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru's Ex-Leader Is Sought

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, March 8


The worldwide police authority Interpol has issued an international arrest order
Peru's former president, Alberto Fujimori, on charges of murder in connection
with the 1991 massacre of 15 people, the nation's justice minister, Fausto
Alvarado, announced today.

Mr. Fujimori, who ruled Peru for 10 years, fled to Japan in November 2000. He is
a Japanese citizen and Japan's Constitution forbids the extradition of its
citizens.

Peru hopes the arrest order will put pressure on Japan to hand Mr. Fujimori over
for trial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); POLICE FORCES (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); GENOCIDE
(82%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;
EXTRADITION

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL) (91%)
INTERPOL

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: LIMA, PERU (77%)

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); JAPAN (94%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             887 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Judge Indicts 4 Iranian Officials in 1994 Bombing of Jewish Center

BYLINE:  By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, March 9


An Argentine judge has ordered arrest warrants for four Iranian government
officials who he says helped organize and carry out the 1994 bombing of a Jewish
community center in Buenos Aires that left 85 people dead.

But the judge balked at a recommendation by prosecutors that more than a dozen
more senior Iranian officials, including Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's
spiritual leader, also be indicted. He offered no public comment, and the
decision is likely to intensify criticism from a variety of quarters that he has
not pursued the case aggressively enough.

The 400-page ruling, by Judge Juan Jose Galeano, made public on Saturday, was
the first time that Argentina has formally accused Iran of involvement in the
July 18, 1994, blast the deadliest single anti-Semitic incident since World War
II.

The judge also cited evidence from the state intelligence agency that "armed
units of the pro-Iranian armed group Hezbollah" were also involved, though no
Hezbollah member was mentioned in the indictment.

The highest-ranking Iranian official cited is Ali Fallahian, a former minister
of security and intelligence. Mohsen Rabbani, formerly the cultural attache in
the Iranian Embassy in Buenos Aires during the mid-1990's, was named in the
indictment as operational director of the attack.

The other two officials indicted were Ali Balesh Abadi, a diplomatic courier;
and Ali Akbar Parvaresh, a former education minister and a former deputy speaker
of the Iranian Parliament who is currently the leader of an influential
conservative religious group.

None of the officials are now in Argentina, and the indictment was accompanied
by a request that Interpol apprehend the four men. But the likelihood that they
will be arrested, unless they travel outside Iran under their own names, is
remote.

The indictment drew an angry reaction from Iran, where the Foreign Ministry
spokesman, Hamid Reza Asefi, said today that "no evidence of Iranian involvement
has been provided," and dismissed the charges as "made up by Zionist circles" in
Israel and the United States. "If the Argentine government fails to make up for
its mistake, Iran will adopt appropriate measures," he warned.

To a large extent, the accusations echo those contained in secret testimony
offered to Argentine judicial and intelligence officials by an Iranian defector
named Abdolghassem Mesbahi. Once a high-ranking Iranian intelligence official,
Mr. Mesbahi defected to Germany in 1996, reportedly because he was upset at the
agency's involvement in the killing of dissidents in Iran and abroad.

According to a transcript of the testimony he offered in 1998 and 2000, copies
of which were obtained by The New York Times last year, Mr. Mesbahi said senior
Iranian government officials, including Ayatollah Khamenei and then-president
Hashemi Rafsanjani, personally ordered, organized and financed the attack on the
Jewish center, the Argentine Jewish Mutual Aid Association, known as A.M.I.A.

He said they were also behind an earlier attack on the Israeli Embassy in Buenos
Aires in 1992 in which 28 people died.

"The decision for the 1994 attack was taken in Khamenei's office in 1992," Mr.
Mesbahi said, according to the 100-page transcript, "at a meeting presided over
by Rafsanjani" and attended by other senior officials. "The committee that took
the decision for the bombing in 1992 was composed of the guide or leader, the
president of the republic," a former minister of foreign affairs, the
intelligence chief and leaders of Islamic religious groups and militias, his
testimony said.

Mr. Mesbahi also told Argentine investigators that payment for the attack in
1994 came from a $200 million bank account in Switzerland controlled by
Ayatollah Khamenei and a son of the first leader of the Iranian Revolution,
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Mr. Mesbahi also implicated Mr. Rabbani and Hadi Soleimanpour, then the Iranian
ambassador to Argentina, in carrying out the bombing.

In an interview on Friday in Buenos Aires, Eamon Mullen, the chief Argentine
government prosecutor in the case, said the charges against the Iranian
officials are based not only on Mr. Mesbahi's declarations but also "eight years
of analysis" and a recent report filed to Judge Galeano by the Argentine state
intelligence service, known as Side.

Mr. Mullen declined to discuss the contents of the report, which he described as
"secret and confidential."

But Argentine officials have built up a substantial body of evidence, some of
which they have made available to selected journalists.

That material includes immigration records showing Iranian officials leaving and
entering Argentina under false names around the time of the bombing as well as
telephone records of calls between Iranian Embassy officials and suspected
Hezbollah members living in the triple frontier area where Argentina, Brazil and
Paraguay converge.

Since being appointed in 1994 to investigate the case, Judge Galeano has been
criticized by human rights and Jewish community groups, lawyers and the press in
Argentina for what they describe as a lack of diligence in pursuing leads that
could solve the case. He did not respond to requests over the past two weeks for
an interview.

Aware that the investigation was coming to a head and that nearly 20 officials
were suspected, the Iranian Foreign Ministry late last month summoned
Argentina's charge d'affaires in Tehran for what was described as a
tongue-lashing.

The Argentine Foreign Ministry did not respond to repeated requests for
information on that meeting, but the official Iranian news agency said Iranian
officials dismissed the Argentine prosecutor's request for a mass indictment,
saying it was based on "groundless allegations."

On Saturday, the Argentine foreign minister, Carlos Ruckauf, said: "No state of
conflict currently exists with Iran. This is a decision of the judiciary and not
of the Argentine government."

Argentina's interim president, Eduardo Duhalde, expressed concerns about the
country's continued vulnerability to terrorist attacks and the dangers of
standing up to terrorist states.

Argentina was the only country in Latin America to take part in the American-led
coalition that drove Iraq out of Kuwait during the Persian Gulf war, but Mr.
Duhalde indicated that in the event of another war with Iraq, Argentina would
sit on the sidelines.

"We've been through some difficult moments, like the gulf war in 1991," he said
in an interview with a radio station last month, on the same day the prosecutors
made their recommendation. "I don't know if the consequences of that were the
attack on the Israeli Embassy in 1992, the A.M.I.A. bombing in 1994 and an
aborted attack in 1996."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ali Fallahian, a former intelligence minister, was among those
charged. (Reuters); The bombing of a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires in
July 1994 left 85 people dead, the deadliest anti-Semitic incident since World
War II. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); HEZBOLLAH (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); TESTIMONY
(88%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); TERRORISM (78%); RELIGION (78%);
CONSERVATISM (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); VERDICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (74%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); RANKINGS (72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (71%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (68%); TRANSCRIPTS (60%) JEWS;
BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  ARGENTINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-IRAN;
ANTI-SEMITISM;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (83%)

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (92%); HASHEMI RAFSANJANI (58%) ROHTER, LARRY; FALLAHIAN,
ALI; RABBANI, MOHSEN; KHAMENEI, ALI (AYATOLLAH); ABADI, ALI BALESH; PARVARESH,
ALI AKBAR; GALEANO, JUAN JOSE (JUDGE)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (94%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); ISRAEL (92%); UNITED
STATES (79%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: IRAN;  BUENOS AIRES (ARGENTINA);  ARGENTINA;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             891 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TECHNOLOGY;
Software Pioneer QuitsBoard of Groove

BYLINE:  By JOHN MARKOFF

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, March 10


Mitchell D. Kapor, a personal computer industry software pioneer and a civil
liberties activist, has resigned from the board of Groove Networks after
learning that the company's software was being used by the Pentagon as part of
its development of a domestic surveillance system.

Mr. Kapor would say publicly only that it was a "delicate subject" and that he
had resigned to pursue his interests in open source software.

The company acknowledged the resignation last week when it announced that it had
received $38 million in additional financing.

"Mr. Kapor resigned from the board to focus 100 percent of his time on nonprofit
activities," said a spokesman for Groove Networks, whose software has been used
to permit intelligence analysts and law enforcement officials to share data in
tests of the surveillance system, Total Information Awareness.

However, a person close to Mr. Kapor said that he was uncomfortable with the
fact that Groove Networks' desktop collaboration software was a crucial
component of the antiterrorist surveillance software being tested at the Defense
Advanced Research Project Agency's Information Awareness Office, an office
directed by Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter.

The project has generated controversy since it was started early last year by
Admiral Poindexter, the former national security adviser for President Ronald
Reagan, whose felony conviction as part of the Iran-contra scandal was reversed
because of a Congressional grant of immunity.

The project has been trying to build a prototype computer system that would
permit the scanning of hundreds or thousands of databases to look for
information patterns that might alert the authorities to the activities of
potential terrorists.

Civil liberties activists have argued that such a system, if deployed, could
easily be misused in ways that would undercut traditional American privacy
values.

"Mitch cares very much about the social impact of technology," said Shari
Steele, executive director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a civil
liberties group that was co-founded by Mr. Kapor in 1990.

"It's the reason he founded E.F.F.," she said.

Several privacy and security experts said that Mr. Kapor's decision was
significant and was indicative of the kinds of clashes between security and
privacy that could become increasingly common.

"With the dramatic change of funding availability in the high-tech sector, it's
become difficult for companies to turn down the funding opportunities presented
by the federal government," said Marc Rotenberg, director of the Electronic
Privacy Information Center in Washington. "It does show that some people in the
high-tech community, including some of the founders, are not happy with what's
happening."

The debate echoes an earlier one that placed scientists at odds with advancing
technologies. The war on terror is raising ever more difficult civil liberties
issues.

"Computer scientists are going to have the same kinds of battles that physicists
did amidst the fallout of Hiroshima and Nagasaki," said Michael Schrage, a
senior adviser to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Security Studies
Program.

On Feb. 11, House and Senate negotiators agreed that the Total Information
Awareness project could not be used against Americans. Congress also agreed to
restrict additional research on the program without extensive consultation with
Congress.

Congressional negotiators gave the Defense Department 90 days to provide a
report to Congress detailing its costs, impact on privacy and civil liberties
and likelihood of success against terrorists. All further research on the
project would have to stop immediately if the report is not filed by the
deadline.

But President Bush can keep the research alive by certifying to Congress that a
halt "would endanger the national security of the United States."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mitchell Kapor, who resigned from the board of his software
company, Groove Networks. (Kim Kulish)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RESIGNATIONS (92%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (91%); NETWORK SOFTWARE (90%);
DEFENSE INDUSTRY (90%); BOARD CHANGES (90%); PERSONAL COMPUTERS (90%); SOFTWARE
MAKERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (89%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%); INTERNET PRIVACY (89%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY
(88%); TERRORISM (87%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (78%);
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (78%); SPYWARE (78%); DEFENSE RESEARCH (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (74%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (73%); OPEN
SOURCE SOFTWARE (73%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%);
EXECUTIVES (71%); SCANDALS (71%); PHYSICS (67%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (65%); US
PRESIDENTS (65%); IMMUNITY (65%); FELONIES (65%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (51%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (51%) TERRORISM;  COMPUTER SOFTWARE;  COMPUTERS AND THE
INTERNET;  SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY (55%) GROOVE NETWORKS;
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (50%) MARKOFF, JOHN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             895 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbs' Premier Is Assassinated; Led in Reforms

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1640 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 12


A sniper today shot and killed the Serbian prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, a
reformer who helped overthrow Slobodan Milosevic and send him to face trial on
charges of orchestrating genocide in the Balkans.

Within hours, Serbian government officials said they believed the killing was
carried out by a notorious Belgrade underworld group accused of dozens of other
murders and kidnappings.

The leader of that group is a former special police commander, Milorad Lukovic,
whose support helped Mr. Djindjic oust Mr. Milosevic in October 2000.

Officials said Mr. Djindjic had been killed because he had been preparing to
arrest Mr. Lukovic and his associates, some of whom are suspected of committing
war crimes.

The intense pressure on Mr. Djindjic by Western governments to arrest war crimes
suspects, particularly Gen. Ratko Mladic, had forced him to confront holdovers
from the Milosevic era, officials said. Mr. Lukovic had been a backer of the
ousted president before switching sides.

The killing of Mr. Djindjic, 50, who was shot in the parking lot outside his
office and had many political enemies, carried echoes in its portent for the
Balkans of the June 1914 assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand in
Sarajevo. Today's death leaves Serbia, a struggling country at the center of a
conflict-ridden region ravaged by a decade of war, with neither a prime minister
nor an elected president.

"The assassination portends a dark period for Serbia and the region," said
Brenda Pearson, a specialist on Balkan affairs at the Washington-based Public
International Law and Policy Group. "This period will see a resurgence of
nationalism that was never repudiated by much of the Serbian establishment and
continues to be allied with the underworld."

The assassination was the first of a European prime minister since the Swedish
prime minister, Olof Palme, was shot walking home from a movie in 1986.

Mr. Djindjic was shot on the very day that his cabinet was to sign warrants for
the arrests of Mr. Lukovic, who is known throughout Belgrade by his nickname,
Legija, and other leaders of the gang that is believed to be behind today's
assassination and other recent killings, according to a statement issued by the
Serbian government. That statement listed 20 members of the self-styled "Zemun
clan," named after a Belgrade suburb. Among those named was a man arrested two
weeks ago after he tried to drive a truck into Mr. Djindjic's motorcade on the
highway to the Belgrade airport. Despite this recent attempt on his life, the
prime minister was not wearing body armor when he was shot in the chest today as
he got out of his car, moving slowly because of a soccer injury.

The police said his assailant used such high-caliber bullets that they would
probably have penetrated his chest through a flak jacket.

Television film of the ambush showed Mr. Djindjic's bodyguards bundling his
crumpled body into a black Audi sedan that sped off to hospital. Surgeons kept
him alive to operate on him for 40 minutes, but he was dead on arrival.

Although his fractious coalition now only retains power thanks to support from
Mr. Milosevic's old party in Parliament, Mr. Djindjic had been a favored leader
of Western officials since he was in the political opposition. None of the
politicians likely to succeed him has the same backing from international
officials, or a comparable track record on extraditing people accused of war
crimes to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague.

Jailed after protesting against Marshal Tito's Communist in the 1970's, Mr.
Djindjic then spent a decade in Germany, gaining a philosophy doctorate before
returning to Serbia to campaign against Mr. Milosevic. Sonja Biserko of the
Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia, one of many longtime democracy
advocates grieving tonight for Mr. Djindjic, described him as "a young, modern
and dynamic politician, who had been doing his utmost to take out the former
regime's mortgage on this country."

Tributes to Mr. Djindjic poured in from abroad, where officials also praised his
efforts to revive an economy battered by conflict and sanctions. But in Serbia,
where few people yet see the benefits of such reforms, the reaction was more
muted.

A small crowd of several dozen mourners gathered outside the government building
where he was shot, clutching candles and red roses. Some were in tears. But
elsewhere in the city, life went on much as normal and other people were almost
indifferent after a decade of war and the assassination of many other senior
officials. Most of those killings are unsolved, but the murky circle of
businessmen and criminals who gained sway in Serbia in the 13 years Mr.
Milosevic ruled before he was ousted on Oct. 5, 2000 are widely blamed.

"Sure it's a tragedy, but he's not the only one," said a woman who gave her name
only as Branka. "People are dying all the time here and no one seems to do much
about it."

In response to the assassination, the government immediately declared a state of
emergency, handing the army powers to search and detain people without a
warrant, and appointed the deputy prime minister, Nebojsa Covic, as Mr.
Djindjic's temporary replacement.

Like the acting president, Natasa Micic, who took over last year after low voter
turnout invalidated two successive presidential elections, he has no popular
mandate and represents a fringe party. Moreover, any attempt to form a
government of national unity is likely to be undermined by politicians
scrambling to fill the vacuum left by Mr. Djindjic, who effectively centralized
power around himself.

"The main consequence of all of this will probably be elections, but it's
difficult to see any decisive leadership emerging," said Bratislav Grubacic, a
political analyst. "In any case, whoever is in power still has to deal with the
mess this country's now in and the relentless pressure to hand over suspected
war criminals."

In a conversation less than an hour before Mr. Djindjic's death, the American
ambassador at large for war crimes issue, Pierre-Richard Prosper, who was
visiting the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, said that in Belgrade "the
political climate is turning in favor" of the arrest of General Mladic. The
general was indicted for genocide in connection with the 1992-95 siege of
Sarajevo, and the massacre of an estimated 7,500 Muslims at Srebrenica in 1995.

The pressure to hand suspects over to the tribunal had forced Mr. Djindjic into
a corner. Under stern orders from a variety of Western countries and
institutions to extradite General Mladic by June 15, the prime minister had been
trying to buy time by first cracking down on underworld criminals, some of whom
are suspected of committing war crimes. Chief among these is Mr. Lukovic, who
deserted the French Foreign Legion in the early 1990's and returned to the
Balkans, becoming a senior officer in the most feared Serbian police unit under
Mr. Milosevic. He later switched his loyalties to Mr. Djindjic when street
protests forced the former Yugoslavian president from office.

"Many owe their lives to Legija, including me," Mr. Djindjic said after a
peaceful transfer of power that could not have happened without the support of
such senior figures in the security establishment.

Several commentators had warned in recent weeks of the risks inherent in Mr.
Djindjic's efforts to distance himself from Legija and satisfy Western demands
that more be done to arrest organized criminals as well as those responsible for
wartime atrocities.

"The thing is that the foreigners are not asking the Serbian premier only to
deliver some people to The Hague tribunal," declared an editorial in this week's
edition of the magazine Blic News. "They are in fact demanding a playoff between
Mr. Djindjic and Milosevic-era holdovers in the state security services. The
services, the magazine said, had found a new leader in Mr. Djindjic, but
"carried too much baggage from the past to follow him where he was going." The
government said it would not relent in the fight against Mr. Lukovic and his
associates, as well as others who would rather ensure that Serbia remains a
gangster's paradise. But many analysts believe it has few chances of succeeding
where the most outspoken advocate of reform failed.

Despite the prevailing pessimism, some observers in Belgrade contended that the
murder of Mr. Djindjic could unify the quarreling advocates of reform.

"It's crunch time," said Dejan Medic, a 37-year-old graphic designer. "Either
people are going to get serious and take on the criminals trying to undermine
our country or we're doomed."

DEATH IN THE BALKANS
Assassins Leave Grisly Trail in Serbia

Some of the more significant attacks against public figures in Serbia:

FEBRUARY 2003 -- Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic of Serbia survives when a truck
tries to run into his motorcade near Belgrade's airport.

JUNE 2002 -- Gen. Bosko Buha, the deputy chief of Serbian public security, is
shot dead in front of a hotel in Belgrade.

AUGUST 2001 -- Monir Gavrilovic, a former Serbian secret police official, is
shot dead in a suburb of Belgrade.

FEBRUARY 2001 -- Interior Minister Dusan Mihajlovic survives when attackers
shoot at his car in Belgrade.

APRIL 2000 -- Zika Petrovic, head of the state-owned Yugoslav Airlines, is shot
dead while walking his dog near his home in Belgrade.

FEBRUARY 2000 -- Defense Minister Pavle Bulatovic is shot dead in a Belgrade
soccer club.

JANUARY 2000 -- Zeljko Raznatovic, a feared Serbian paramilitary leader under
indictment for war crimes and known as Arkan, is shot dead in a hotel lobby in
Belgrade.

OCTOBER 1999 -- The opposition leader Vuk Draskovic survives when an armored
truck runs into his car in Belgrade. Several others die in the attack.

APRIL 1997 -- Radovan Stojicic Badza, the head of public security for the
Serbian police, is shot dead in a Belgrade restaurant.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A television image shows security officers pushing Prime
Minister Zoran Djindjic, right, into a car after he was fatally shot by snipers
yesterday outside his office in Belgrade. A memorial drew residents last night.
(Getty Images); (Reuters); (Agence France-Presse)(pg. A1); Zoran Djindjic,
right, at a rally in Serbia, in 1997. At left, Mr. Djindjic, seated far right,
during a 1999 protest against Slobodan Milosevic, then Yugoslavias leader. He
played a crucial role in ousting Mr. Milosevic. (Associated Press); (Reuters); A
state of emergency nearly cleared the streets yesterday in Belgrade, Serbia,
after the assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic. (Associated Press)(pg.
A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
SHOOTINGS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ARRESTS
(89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (88%); GENOCIDE (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (69%); PARKING SPACES &
FACILITIES (67%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (62%); FILM (62%); SOCCER
(60%); MURDER (58%); SPORTS INJURIES (50%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%)
ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ORGANIZED CRIME

PERSON: SIMPSON, DANIEL; DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN;
LUKOVIC, MILORAD; MLADIC, RATKO; MLADIC, RATKO (GEN)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (96%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); SERBIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
SWEDEN (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BELGRADE (SERBIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             897 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Must Reject The Use of Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 169 words


To the Editor:

There is no such thing as acceptable torture ("Questioning Terror Suspects in a
Dark and Surreal World," front page, March 9).

The tactics American officials openly admit to -- holding prisoners in prolonged
painful positions and withholding access to food, water and even medical
attention, allegedly even for a prisoner who had been shot -- constitute cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or torture. Torture is a violation of American
and international law.

President Bush should issue a public, unequivocal statement that rejects any
condoning of torture by United States officials, just as his father did in 1992.

There's more than principle at stake: American troops in Iraq may soon be taken
prisoner. Americans would be outraged if United States soldiers were subjected
to illegal and brutal detention or interrogation such as the United States
admits to be practicing. But what could we say then?

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Executive Director
Amnesty International U.S.A.
New York, March 9, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL
PUNISHMENT (88%); IRAQ WAR (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (69%)
TERRORISM;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) SCHULZ, WILLIAM F; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); MOHAMMAD,
KHALED SHAIKH

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             899 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Brazilian Leader Introduces Program to End Slave Labor

BYLINE:  By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: BRASILIA, March 13


Attacking one of Brazil's most shameful but deeply rooted social problems, the
country's new left-wing government has announced a sweeping initiative intended
to eliminate slave labor.

The plan calls for stepping up police raids on ranches, logging operations and
mines that lure poor and often illiterate peasants into servitude, as well as
heavier fines and criminal penalties for offenders.

But the government said it would also seek passage of a constitutional amendment
that would allow the seizure of businesses and properties found to employ slave
labor and to turn those assets over to the former slaves to run.

"Much more than a law, we need determination and the political will of the state
to eradicate slave labor in our country," President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, a
former labor leader, said in announcing the project on Tuesday. "Only in this
way can we earn the right to walk in the world with head held high."

The Roman Catholic Church estimates that at any given moment at least 25,000
Brazilian workers are held in debt slavery, most of them in remote areas of the
Amazon jungle. Typically, recruiters go to poor rural areas and guarantee
peasants good wages and benefits, but renege on those pledges once the laborer
has arrived at the jungle workplace and is guarded by gunmen.

"Slavery remains a severe social and economic problem in this country, the
result of pitiful people without food or land being duped by false promises and
of government policies that have not made the eradication of servitude a
priority," said Eduardo Varandas, a federal prosecutor who has brought slavery
charges against several ranchers. "The worker ends up stuck with financial
obligations he can't ever repay and becomes a slave of his own debt."

Brazil was the last country in the Western Hemisphere to abolish chattel
slavery, in 1888, and forced labor continued to be common in rural areas in
modern times. But government authorities, labor unions and antislavery groups
agree that the problem has intensified in recent years as a result of growing
economic pressure to develop the Amazon's vast agricultural frontier.

In 1995, at the beginning of his first term of office, Mr. da Silva's
predecessor, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, announced "a national effort to truly
comply with the law" that had abolished slavery here. His government created an
enforcement squad that was empowered to punish those who recruit Brazilians into
slavery, and between 1995 and 2002 it freed more than 5,000 enslaved workers.

But government inspectors complained that their efforts were hampered by
weaknesses in Brazil's legal code. While they have the authority to force
employers to pay back wages to enslaved workers, criminal charges have to be
referred to the court system, where they are often ignored by apathetic
prosecutors or shelved by judges sympathetic to business interests.

In some cases, inspectors have raided the same ranch many times, freeing
workers, only to return and find that others have been enslaved. The government
intends to discourage that behavior by publishing a list of offenders, who will
be denied access to any form of government loans, credits, subsidies or tax
benefits, and by prohibiting those found guilty from appealing their convictions
while out on bail.

"This is not to combat slavery, because that has already been tried," Nilmario
Miranda, the government's human rights secretary, told reporters here. "What we
are going to do is do away with slave labor by the end of this government's term
of office," in 2006.

The program also calls for a sharp increase in the number of inspectors. The
Ministry of Labor says that this year it will hire and train more than 650 new
inspectors, who will have good salaries and the untrammeled authority to enforce
the law.

In the past, "people have known that they can bribe a labor inspector or a
police officer, or a mayor or alderman or member of Congress," Mr. da Silva
said. "I want it to be known that those days are over."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); FARM LABOR (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (87%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); LIBERALISM (78%); FORCED LABOR (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); FARMERS &
RANCHERS (77%); CRIMINAL FINES (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); LABOR UNIONS
(72%); BACK PAY (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (71%); RELIGION (67%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (55%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (53%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

PERSON: LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA (58%)

CITY: BRASILIA, BRAZIL (79%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             901 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES;
On Terror, Spying and Guns, Ashcroft Expands Reach

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU with ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


In the bureaucratic reshuffling over domestic security, Attorney General John
Ashcroft came out a winner. Mr. Ashcroft grabbed control of the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and with it an issue dear to his conservative
agenda, guns. And he shucked responsibility for two areas of law enforcement
that had brought ridicule to the Justice Department, the color-coded threat
alert system and immigration.

In recent months, Mr. Ashcroft, once regarded as a peripheral, even clumsy,
player in the Bush administration, has not only honed his skills as a
bureaucratic infighter, he has also patched his tenuous relations with President
Bush, who told Mr. Ashcroft last month that he was doing "a fabulous job."

With the addition of nearly 5,000 law enforcement officials from the firearms
bureau, Mr. Ashcroft has again expanded the policing authority of the Justice
Department, a hallmark of his tenure as attorney general. And with the fight
against terrorism as his soapbox, he has pushed the powers of federal law
enforcement in directions few thought possible before the Sept. 11 attacks. His
reach extends not only to counterterrorism, but also to issues like the death
penalty and gun policy, which he attacks with equal aggressiveness. Despite a
years-long effort as a senator from Missouri to shrink government, Mr. Ashcroft
has significantly broadened the reach of the attorney general, legal scholars
and law enforcement officials agree.

All of which has left his many critics increasingly worried.

Even some of his conservative peers complain that Mr. Ashcroft may have grown
too powerful. To his critics, Mr. Ashcroft is a Big Brother figure: an attorney
general whose expanding scope has allowed the Justice Department to use
wiretaps, backroom decisions, and an expanded street presence to spy on ordinary
Americans, read their e-mail messages, or monitor their library checkouts, all
in the name of fighting terrorism. And the department's consideration of
proposals that could give it still greater, secret counterterrorism authority
has provoked a fresh round of concerns.

The former Republican congressman Dick Armey, on his way out the door last year
as House majority leader, said he thought Mr. Ashcroft and the Justice
Department were "out of control."
And Representative Jose E. Serrano, Democrat of New York, told Mr. Ashcroft at a
hearing last week: "I fear some officials are so intent on fighting against
terror that they forget what we are fighting for. People across the spectrum
fear for our civil liberties."

Talking in his office, Mr. Ashcroft scoffs at the accusation that the department
has become too expansive or that he has secretly tried to usurp authority from
Congress in an effort to expand his burgeoning base. He says he is happy to
defer to Congress.

"I don't want to be in control," he said in an interview last week. "I had a
chance to be a part of that, and enjoyed it while I was there, but I don't
aspire to be legislative."

Mr. Ashcroft has managed to blunt Congressional criticism through the carefully
timed announcements of one major terrorist arrest after another. And he has also
emerged as a useful political foil for President Bush.

While the president has visited mosques to deliver a message of respect for
Muslims, for instance, it was left to Mr. Ashcroft to orchestrate an unpopular
program to register Middle Eastern immigrants. And after Mr. Bushlast year
announced that he wanted to enlist workers for a terrorist "tips" program, Mr.
Ashcroft was dispatched to Capitol Hill to defend the unpopular idea.

"I think Ashcroft understands that he's a lightning rod for this
administration," said a Justice Department official close to the attorney
general who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "He's at the center of so many
different policies -- terrorism, affirmative action, the death penalty -- and
he's no stranger to controversy. He's been living it all his life."

Shifting Philosophies
Evolving Position On Government Size

Mr. Ashcroft is an unlikely figure to lead the Justice Department's expansion: a
politician who sharply attacked big government and privacy intrusions and fought
for states' rights is now orchestrating one of the most sweeping federal
expansions in law enforcement history.

Two years after he was confirmed by the slimmest margin for an attorney general
in 75 years, Mr. Ashcroft has not only survived that bruising fight and a
malaise that seemed to follow it, but is drawing comparisons to Robert F.
Kennedy and Franklin D. Roosevelt's attorney general, Francis Biddle, in the
muscle and ambition he has brought to the job -- for better or worse.

"For Ashcroft, the evils are pervasive," said Nancy Baker, a professor at New
Mexico State University who wrote a history of the attorney general's office.
"The current attorney general sees himself and the Justice Department as engaged
in a systemwide struggle between good and evil, and that therefore requires very
aggressive and comprehensive countermeasures."

Nicholas M. Gess, a senior Justice Department official in the Clinton
administration, said that the powers Mr. Ashcroft had secured "impact the
average law-abiding American much more so than acts of other Justice Departments
in the past" and represent an expanded role for the federal government "that one
would have thought would be anathema to him."

To his supporters, however, Mr. Ashcroft's metamorphosis shows a man willing to
do what it takes to protect American lives.

"Nine-eleven clearly changed his thinking on the nature and role of government
in a very fundamental way," said Don D. Trigg, a former aide who remains close
to Mr. Ashcroft. "He's willing to tolerate a level of government activism that
perhaps he wouldn't have been willing to embrace before those attacks."

The changes have been both structural and ideological.

After years of friction between the Justice Department and the F.B.I., Mr.
Ashcroft has developed a close relationship with the bureau's director, Robert
S. Mueller III, in overseeing the F.B.I.'s heavily scrutinized effort to remake
itself.

He has given agents new powers to spy on possible terrorists, detain suspects
and look for patterns that could predict terrorist attacks. He has centralized
power at the Justice Department among a small inner circle of political
appointees, frustrating some career officials and prosecutors in the field who
complain that the attorney general has undercut their authority in order to
further his own agenda.

And, working with the White House, he and his aides have pushed for a more
conservative ideology on the judiciary and on appellate issues like the Michigan
affirmative action case being considered by the Supreme Court.

There have been exceptions in which Mr. Ashcroft and the Justice Department have
veered toward restraint. Most notably, his settlement of the landmark Microsoft
antitrust case, approved by a federal judge last year, allowed the software
giant to avoid a break-up and was criticized by the company's rivals as weak and
ineffective. Many competitors have now gone to European regulators in hopes of
reviving broader action.

On terrorism and other critical issues, however, Mr. Ashcroft has clearly pushed
for a more aggressive federal posture.

Indeed, civil rights advocates, targeting him in recent newspaper
advertisements, accuse Mr. Ashcroft of using the counterterrorism campaign to
run roughshod over the rights of Americans, while even some conservatives who
support many of his policies say they are concerned that he has become immune to
criticism and insulated from Congressional oversight or input.

Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said in an interview that while
he considers himself a friend of Mr. Ashcroft, he has become increasingly
"frustrated" by the Justice Department's inaccessibility and its refusal to give
Congress timely and accurate information about terrorism issues.

"I believe in transparency, and when I write a letter to Ashcroft, I expect an
answer and I expect complete information," Mr. Grassley said. "If they would
consult me a little bit sooner, I could keep them out of a lot of trouble."

The latest imbroglio flared last month when an 80-page draft of a Justice
Department plan to expand the department's counterterrorism powers was leaked in
the news media. The plan, a proposed sequel to the Patriot Act, would seek
legislative measures to broaden the Justice Department's authority for granting
intelligence warrants and invalidate local consent decrees that curb police
spying, among other ideas discussed.

Justice Department officials say the ideas were only in their early discussion
stages. "Percolating ideas into the system is very important," Mr. Ashcroft said
in the interview.

Still, many lawmakers were incensed because they said the Justice Department
told them repeatedly that no such plan was even in the works. Senator Patrick J.
Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, accused department officials of lying to his staff,
and he said in an interview that the department's secrecy worries him because it
suggests that when a formal proposal is prepared, "we're supposed to roll over
and play dead and just pass it."

Groups like the American Civil Liberties Union, meanwhile, see the document as a
dangerous expansion of powers they believe have already grown too vast.

"John Ashcroft has clearly abused his power," said Laura W. Murphy, director of
the A.C.L.U.'s Washington office. "He is supposed to be the chief enforcer of
the Constitution for the executive branch, but he has given lip service to
constitutional rights and has systematically eroded free speech rights, privacy
rights and due process rights, in the context of fighting the war on terrorism."


Guns and Death Penalty
Expanding a View Of Government's Role

The dominance of the terrorism issue has often obscured the expanded federal
presence that Mr. Ashcroft has brought to other issues as well, legal experts
say. Whether challenging Oregon's assisted-suicide law or prosecuting "medical
marijuana" users in California despite a state initiative legalizing the
practice, he has used the weight of the Justice Department in ways that have
reversed past policies and that some legal scholars say have impinged on the
rights of states.

Perhaps nowhere has Mr. Ashcroft's personal imprimatur on traditional law
enforcement issues been seen more clearly than in the areas of guns and the
death penalty, separate but related areas in which he has pushed for a more
expansive view of the federal government's role. While he has fought to protect
and expand gun owners' rights, he has often pushed for the most severe
punishments available -- draconian measures, death penalty opponents maintain --
against those who use guns or other weapons to commit capital crimes.

After Mr. Ashcroft took office, the National Rifle Association declared him "a
breath of fresh air," and officials there said he has not disappointed them.

Chris W. Cox, the N.R.A.'s chief lobbyist, said that after eight years of what
the group saw as hostile attacks by the Clinton administration, Mr. Ashcroft's
support of the Second Amendment "obviously was a change welcomed by our
country's 80 million gun owners."

In one crucial development, the Justice Department argued before the Supreme
Court last May that the Second Amendment "broadly protects the rights of
individuals." That stance was at odds with decades of official government
positions holding that the Second Amendment ensured only a collective right of
the states to organize militias.

Gun control advocates say that at least 40 people nationwide have now cited Mr.
Ashcroft's interpretation of the Second Amendment to challenge their gun
convictions and that, if adopted by the courts, that view could essentially
invalidate existing laws like assault weapon bans.

Gun control groups have also attacked Mr. Ashcroft for seeking to have records
on gun sales in a federal database destroyed after 24 hours and for barring the
F.B.I. from using those records in its terrorism investigations. The attorney
general further riled some Democrats last week by refusing to support a
reauthorization of the ban on assault weapons, a retreat from the position of
support he took at his confirmation hearing.

"He's the most pro-gun attorney general in American history," said Mathew S.
Nosanchuk, a gun law specialist with the Violence Policy Center. And with the
Justice Department now assuming control of gun enforcement from the Treasury
Department, he said, "It's the fox guarding the henhouse."

Even some officials at the F.B.I. questioned the value of moving the bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to the Justice Department, saying in a draft
report last year that it could undercut the F.B.I.'s authority to investigate
terrorism and bomb cases.

But Mr. Ashcroft said the Justice Department's new oversight of the firearms
bureau is "one of those happy marriages," and he predicted a continued upturn in
gun enforcement -- one of his top priorities. Federal gun prosecutions are up 32
percent in his administration.

No less controversial has been Mr. Ashcroft's pursuit of the death penalty.

A vivid episode came after John Muhammad and Lee Malvo were arrested in last
October's Washington-area sniper shootings. With different jurisdictions vying
to prosecute them, Mr. Ashcroft made the final call based in large part, his
aides acknowledged, on where the two suspects would stand the best chance of
being executed if convicted.

"It is appropriate -- it is imperative -- that the ultimate sanction be
available for those convicted of these crimes," he said in announcing that
Fairfax and Prince William counties in Virginia would get the cases.

Mr. Ashcroft's critics say the exercise was an unseemly effort to impose his
strong personal support for capital punishment.

James Wyda, a lawyer who represented Mr. Mohammad in Maryland, said the death
penalty "is driving the Justice Department's decision-making in unprecedented
ways."

Mr. Ashcroft also surprised many legal observers by seeking the death penalty
against a former Air Force intelligence officer, Brian P. Regan, who was accused
of plotting to sell national secrets to Iraq, Libya and China. A Virginia jury
convicted him last month but spared his life.

Although the Justice Department has not released data on Mr. Ashcroft's death
penalty decisions, lawyers who have tracked the issue say he appears to have
been much more willing than his predecessor, Janet Reno, to override the
recommendations of his own prosecutors and order capital charges in federal
cases.

Of 283 cases before him, Mr. Ashcroft has overruled prosecutors who sought
leniency 30 times and overruled death penalty recommendations 7 times, according
to Kevin McNally of the Federal Death Penalty Resource Counsel Project, which
collects and provides information to lawyers defending in capital cases. In a
Long Island case last month, Mr. Ashcroft made the unusual decision to reject a
proposed plea agreement with a defendant who had agreed to testify against
others tied to a deadly Colombian drug ring in exchange for a life sentence.

Mr. Ashcroft and Assistant Attorney General Michael Chertoff, head of the
criminal division, said the department's main objective in assessing capital
cases is to ensure a fair and consistent national application in keeping with
federal death penalty laws.

But Jamie Orenstein, a former Justice Department official who advised Janet Reno
on capital cases, said: "It's a certain kind of uniformity they are going for.
They are reshaping the entire country in the shape of the most aggressive
jurisdictions."

While the department's strong stance has drawn support from some law enforcement
officials and legal experts, others believe it runs counter to national trends
showing declining public support for the death penalty and an increasing
willingness by some states to consider moratoriums.

"He is certainly the first attorney general in the United States in the last
half-century with any kind of enthusiasm for executions," said Franklin E.
Zimring, a law professor at the University of California in Berkeley who
specializes in law enforcement issues. "He has an affirmative belief in them.
That is far outside the mainstream of recent American thinking about capital
punishment, even among people who support the death penalty."

War on Terrorism
A Change in Mission After Sept. 11

The attorney general was flying on a Cessna jet over Detroit en route to a
Milwaukee appearance that September morning when he got the emergency call and
his face turned ashen.

On the back of the speech he was delivering that day, he scribbled: "Tower has
been hit. Second tower has been hit," recalled Susan Dryden, an aide with him on
the flight.

"He got off the phone and his first words to us were, 'Our world has changed
forever,' " she recounted. "He knew immediately that his department was going to
be at the center of everything that was about to happen."

In Mr. Ashcroft's seven months on the job before the attacks, some associates
said he seemed adrift, almost bored. "He was still trying to find his niche," an
aide said. There was even speculation -- vigorously dismissed by his advisers --
that he might try another run for the Senate.

But the Sept. 11 attacks energized him, some aides said.

Within days, he dispatched a top adviser, Viet D. Dinh, to develop a package of
legislative proposals to give the F.B.I. broadened powers to wiretap suspects,
use intelligence information in criminal cases and trace dirty money, among many
other long-sought changes. After a brief but spirited tussle with some members
of Congress who succeeded in putting in "sunset" provisions that capped the life
of the changes, the package became the historic and controversial U.S.A. Patriot
Act.

In the months that followed, Mr. Ashcroft would become a fixture at the F.B.I.'s
terrorism command center and briefed the president almost daily as the Justice
Department sought to deter the possibility of future attacks. Terrorism has so
dominated his schedule that he even suspended his morning prayer meetings at the
Justice Department -- a practice challenged by some critics as improper --
because they conflicted with his White House terror briefings.

There have been clear stumbles along the way in the counterterrorism campaign.
Some members of Congress remain unconvinced that the F.B.I. is up to the task of
leading counterterrorism operations, the department's terrorist warnings have
prompted confusion and complaints from the public, and the case against Zacarias
Moussaoui, the suspected "20th hijacker," has threatened to derail because of
unforeseen legal problems, among other issues. The department's prosecutions of
terrorist financiers and John Walker Lindh have also been criticized as flawed
and heavy-handed, with convictions obtained on only a small portion of the
original charges filed against the defendants.

But Mr. Ashcroft said last month's capture of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed represents
a significant and potentially crippling blow to Al Qaeda. While "it would be
foolhardy" to underestimate Al Qaeda's ability to regroup, Mr. Mohammed's
capture is "a serious impairment" to the organization, he said.

"I feel like we are winning the war on terror," he said.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the Justice Department says it has doubled the
number of counterterrorism investigations and has issued more than 18,000 search
warrants and subpoenas. Prosecutors have brought terrorism charges in more than
200 criminal terrorism cases, with Mr. Ashcroft often seizing the spotlight --
and sometimes riling administration officials -- by personally announcing the
high-profile ones, like Mr. Lindh, Mr. Moussaoui and suspected "sleeper cells"
around the country. And prosecutors have secured convictions so far in about
half, the department says.

Mr. Ashcroft has worked with the White House and the Pentagon to set up a hotly
debated system for using military tribunals to try "enemy combatants" outside
civilian courts, and he has pushed for closer cooperation with the C.I.A. after
years of mistrust.

He has rewritten the quarter-century-old Justice Department guidelines for the
conduct of agents, lifting restrictions imposed after political abuses by the
F.B.I. and allowing agents to monitor libraries, political groups, religious
facilities and the Internet in seeking out terrorists -- despite protests from
many groups.

And, working closely with Mr. Mueller, he has created dozens of new Joint
Terrorism Task Forces around the country, and he has overseen the reorganization
of the F.B.I. as it moved to pour additional agents and resources into
counterterrorism, hire and train new analysts and linguists, and create "flying
squads" of terrorism specialists to zero in on terrorist hot spots.

"I've never seen agents get as excited about changes as this," Nancy Savage,
president of the F.B.I. Agents Association, said of the recent changes put in
place by Mr. Ashcroft. "It's like 'thank God, we're finally getting some tools
we should have gotten a long time ago.' "

Mr. Chertoff, the criminal chief, said that wholesale changes would likely have
taken place no matter who the attorney general was on Sept. 11, 2001. "I don't
know that it would have been different under anyone else," he said in an
interview.

What Mr. Ashcroft brought to the table, Mr. Chertoff said, was a single-minded
focus. "He made it very clear, very early on, that it was very important to
focus on preventing a future attack, to make sure that no more American lives
should be lost," he said.

Civil Rights
Antiterror Actions Create Odd Alliance

Mr. Ashcroft's legacy will no doubt be determined by his success or failure in
defeating terrorism, political and legal observers agree. But if fighting
terrorism has become his lifeblood, they say, protecting civil rights is clearly
his Achilles heel. Many groups have questioned what price they must pay in civil
liberties for the sake of security.

Even before he became attorney general in February 2001, Mr. Ashcroft was
attacked for his record on civil rights. Opponents of his nomination depicted
him as racially insensitive, pointing to his praise for a neo-Confederate
magazine, his attacks on several minority judicial candidates, and his
acceptance of an honorary degree from Bob Jones University at a time when it
banned interracial dating.

Black civil rights leaders were once the group most critical of Mr. Ashcroft's
record, and they have accused him of adopting a less aggressive posture toward
issues like police misconduct, housing discrimination and workplace bias. But
for all the criticism from blacks, Mr. Ashcroft's newfound pursuit of terrorists
has now created a new and even more vigilant foe -- Arab-Americans -- and it has
recast the debate over civil liberties to include a larger universe of
immigrants and visiting foreigners.

"Since he's been in office, American Muslims have lost many of their civil
rights," Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic
Relations, said in an interview.

"All Muslims are now suspects. We have to assume that every mosque in America is
being bugged by the F.B.I., with the attitude that's prevalent today at the
Justice Department."

Mr. Ashcroft's actions have created an odd alliance of opponents, as
conservative civil libertarians have joined forces with Arab-American groups,
human rights advocates and some members of Congress who say the department's
counterterrorism tactics have threatened the civil liberties and due process
rights of many thousands of people.

Paul Weyrich, a conservative activist who was a senior adviser to Mr. Ashcroft's
short-lived bid for the presidency in 1998, said he "rejoiced" when Mr. Ashcroft
was nominated as attorney general. But he said many conservatives have become
disillusioned by Mr. Ashcroft's disregard for privacy interests and civil
liberties intrusions on the lives of ordinary Americans.

"I don't think he has assessed the long-term constitutional implications of all
of this, and that's a disappointment," Mr. Weyrich said. He noted there has been
speculation that Mr. Ashcroft might be a candidate for vice president if Dick
Cheney bowed out, but he said: "I think there would be some significant
objection from conservatives if that were to be raised at this point."

Civil liberties concerns extend well beyond the Patriot Act. Mr. Ashcroft has
also allowed the F.B.I. to seek voluntary interviews with thousands of Muslims
and tally the number of mosques. He has initiated new measures making it easier
to monitor and detain immigrants and foreign visitors. And he has infuriated the
defense bar by refusing to divulge information about many of those detained
after Sept. 11 and by expanding the Justice Department's authority to monitor
jailhouse conversations between federal inmates and their lawyers in select
cases.

To Arab-Americans and civil rights advocates, such steps and many others like
them amount to ethnic profiling and a violation of the Fourth Amendment. To Mr.
Ashcroft and his aides, however, they reflect smart policing -- a strong but
constitutional response to an unparalleled terrorist threat.

Mr. Ashcroft says he will resort to any means legal and viable to identify and
stop terrorists -- an approach he often likens to Robert Kennedy's pledge as
attorney general to jail mobsters for "spitting on the sidewalks." Even so, Mr.
Ashcroft says that protecting civil rights in the course of that effort is his
"highest priority," and he told lawmakers last week that "we must not abandon
freedom in the pursuit of security."

In the past, Mr. Ashcroft has gone so far as to question the loyalty of those
who challenge the constitutionality of his tactics. In a defining moment in
December 2001 at a Senate hearing, Mr. Ashcroft declared: "To those who scare
peace-loving people with phantoms of lost liberty, my message is this: Your
tactics only aid terrorists, for they erode our national unity and diminish our
resolve. They give ammunition to America's enemies, and pause to America's
friends."

The public baiting angered many Democrats, but the lingering resentments have
not prompted any significant pullback by the Justice Department. Moreover, Mr.
Ashcroft and his aides point out that federal courts have, for the most part,
rejected the due process challenges that the department has faced in its
terrorism campaign.

Mr. Ashcroft said in the interview that the president's "constitutionally
mandated defense of the United States" has demanded extraordinary measures,
including the declaration of enemy combatants and the secrecy surrounding the
detentions of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay and foreign nationals in the United
States after the Sept. 11 attacks.

Justice Department officials said they see no reason to rethink their strategy.
"We have had the ability to sustain the president's decisions over and over in
court," Mr. Ashcroft said.

There have been exceptions, however. One federal judge, ruling last year that
the Justice Department should have to make public the names of detainees in its
terrorism investigations, said that secret arrests "are a concept odious to a
democratic society."

This week saw another round of mixed results for the department in its court
fights. In Washington, a federal appellate court ruled that prisoners from the
Afghanistan war held in Guantanamo Bay may not challenge their detentions in the
courts, but in a separate case heard in New York, a federal judge ruled that
Jose Padilla, the suspect in the "dirty bomber" case, has the right to meet with
a lawyer to challenge his status as an enemy combatant.

With the Supreme Court ultimately likely to rule on the use of secret hearings
and other counterterrorism tactics, Mr. Ashcroft may be walking a fine line
between protecting the public and compromising its rights, legal and political
observers said.

"You don't want the United States to turn into some sort of police state," said
John C. Danforth, the former Missouri senator who has known Mr. Ashcroft for
years, "but the first duty of government is to protect its citizens. It's an
extremely difficult job that he has."

A Growing Power
More on Pages A8-9:

*Shifting Philosophies
*Guns and Death Penalty
*War on Terrorism
*Civil Rights

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Attorney General John Ashcroft scoffs at accusations that his
department has become too expansive and usurped authority from Congress. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. A1); Attorney General John Ashcroft, above, at
a Judiciary Committee meeting this month. At left, his image was shown on
television screens during a news conference last month. (Doug Mills/The New York
Times); (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. A8); (Photographs by Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times Dinh ; Bloomberg News Thompson ; Associated Press
Chertoff, Olson ; Getty Images Mueller ); (Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times Patriot Act signing ; Associated Press Regan, Padilla ; Reuters
Al-Arian )(pg. A9) Chart: "Gathering Power and Influence"Since Sept. 11, 2001,
John Ashcroft and the federal government have pursued broader powers to
investigate terrorism and oversee laws on guns and drugs, sometimes drawing
criticism from advocates for civil rights and state autonomy. Here are some
examples. Expanded Powers Oct. 26, 2001President Bush signs U.S.A. Patriot Act,
a sweeping anti-terrorism bill pushed by Mr. Ashcroft. The act allows all
telephones and e-mail activity by a person to be tapped with a single warrant;
foreigners suspected of terrorism to be held for seven days without charges; and
single warrants in terror investigations to be valid nationwide. May 30, 2002Mr.
Ashcroft announces looser monitoring rules under which F.B.I. agents could
monitor Internet sites, religious and political organizations, libraries and
other public areas, without evidence of suspected criminal activity. Feb. 8,
2003A draft proposal extending the government's powers beyond those granted in
the Patriot Act becomes public. Among other provisions, the proposal would bar
Freedom of Information Act requests about terrorism detainees. Feb. 20,
2003Federal prosecutors bring charges against Prof. Sami Al-Arian and seven
other people, accusing them of financing suicide bombings in Israel. The
indictment relies heavily on expanded powers granted after Sept. 11. Terrorism
Prosecutions March 28, 2002Mr. Ashcroft announces that the government will seek
the death penalty against the alleged 20th Sept. 11 hijacker, Zacarias
Moussaoui. The decision is believed to be the first time in modern U.S. legal
history the death penalty has been sought on conspiracy charges alone. June 10,
2002In a televised announcement from Moscow, Mr. Ashcroft says Jose Padilla, a
U.S. citizen, has been arrested for alleged involvement in a plot to detonate a
radiological "dirty bomb" in the U.S. Mr. Padilla is declared an enemy combatant
by President Bush and later moved to a Navy brig without being charged, and
without access to a lawyer. July 15, 2002John Walker Lindh pleads guilty to two
felonies and the government drops the rest of its charges, allowing the
government to hold Mr. Lindh as an enemy combatant indefinitely after he is
released from prison. Sept. 2002Six men are arrested in Lackawanna, N.Y., and
charged with aiding Al Qaeda. They are part of a handful arrested around the
country, including another group in Portland. Both groups are prosecuted under a
broadly worded 1996 law that makes it illegal to provide material support to
terrorist groups. Death Penalty April 19, 2002Federal prosecutors seek the death
penalty for former Air Force Sergeant Brian P. Regan, who is charged with
attempted espionage. Later, a jury convicts him on charges that do not make him
eligible for death. Assisted Suicide Nov. 6, 2001Mr. Ashcroft effectively seeks
to overturn an Oregon assisted-suicide law by directing the D.E.A. to prevent
doctors from prescribing lethal doses of narcotics to patients who wish to end
their lives. Gun Policy May 6, 2002The Justice Department takes the position
that the Second Amendment protects an individual's right to own guns. The
position is a departure from the usual U.S. government position that firearm
ownership is protected only for militias. (Sources: Department of Justice; News
reports) Ashcroft's Inner Circle Larry D. ThompsonDeputy Attorney General Has
overseen the effort to get tough on corporate crime. He has final say over the
Enron investigation because Mr. Ashcroft has recused himself after accepting
donations as a senator from Enron executives. Mr. Thompson's deputy, Chris Wray,
is a specialist on terrorism and is also considered a key adviser. David T.
AyresChief of Staff The Andy Card of Mr. Ashcroft's operation, Mr. Ayres has
been at Mr. Ashcroft's side since the mid-1990's in the Senate and, though he
keeps a very low public profile, he contributes much of the strategic thinking
and planning for the operation. David IsraeliteDeputy Chief of Staff The second
half of the team that Mr. Ashcroft refers to as the Davids, he is an alumnus of
the Republican National Committee and is the political strategist for his
office; he is with Mr. Ashcroft for virtually all public appearances and most
private meetings as well. Viet D. DinhAssistant Attorney General, Office of
Legal Policy He is credited as the chief architect of the Patriot Act, and is
playing a large role in policy overhauls on terrorism, immigration and guns. He
is often mentioned as a future judicial candidate. Earlier, he served with Mr.
Chertoff on the Senate Whitewater Committee. As a child, he and his family fled
the Vietnam War. Michael ChertoffAssistant Attorney General, Criminal Division A
former mob prosecutor in New Jersey, he is regarded for a deft legal mind and
has overseen the department's transformation to a more preventive mode in
fighting terrorism. He was nominated last week for a spot on the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Third Circuit. Alice Fisher, Mr. Chertoff's top deputy, is a
leading candidate to take his job. Theodore B. OlsonSolicitor General Argued
Bush v. Gore before the Supreme Court. His wife was aboard one of the planes
hijacked on Sept. 11. He is regarded as a legal icon in the conservative
community and has played a critical role on appellate issues like the Michigan
affirmative action case. Robert S. Mueller IIIDirector, Federal Bureau of
Investigation A longtime federal prosecutor, Mr. Mueller served as Mr.
Ashcroft's temporary No. 2 before becoming F.B.I. director just before Sept. 11.
After years of friction between the F.B.I. and the Justice Department, he has
built a strong rapport with Mr. Ashcroft. Close to the Inner Circle Ralph F.
Boyd Jr.Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division Oversees voting rights
and discrimination claims, among other issues. Dan BryantSenior Adviser Headed
the Congressional Affairs Office before being made a special adviser to Mr.
Ashcroft. Adam CiongoliSenior Adviser Advises on Second Amendment issues and
other policy decisions. Barbara ComstockChief Spokeswoman A former Republican
Committee official. Her deputy, Mark Corallo, is also influential. Robert D.
McCallum Jr.Assistant Attorney General,Civil Division Recently made the No. 3
official at the Justice Department and considereda confidante of President Bush.
Paul McNultyU.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia Has overseen the
Lindh and Moussaoui prosecutions. Bruce SwartzDeputy Assistant Attorney General,
Criminal Division Specializes in global law enforcement. Karen TandyDeputy
Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division Has focused on drug enforcement.
(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (92%); TERRORISM (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); FIREARMS (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(78%); GUN CONTROL (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); WAR ON TERROR (75%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(73%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (73%); HIJACKING (73%); WIRETAPPING (64%); IMMIGRATION
(56%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (52%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (96%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(94%); AL-QAEDA (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL POLICY (59%);
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE (59%); BUREAU OF ALCOHOL TOBACCO FIREARMS &
EXPLOSIVES (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION (59%) JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT; BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO AND FIREARMS

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (79%); AL GORE (78%); JOSE E SERRANO (55%) ASHCROFT, JOHN
(ATTY GEN); LICHTBLAU, ERIC; LIPTAK, ADAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PORTLAND, OR, USA (59%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); OREGON, USA (79%);
MISSOURI, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (79%); VIET NAM (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             902 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

If the U.N. Were Being Created Today . . .;
Missed Opportunity

BYLINE:  By ANDREI KOZYREV

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 408 words


The threat of war between the United States and Iraq has deeply shaken the
United Nations. Although feverish diplomacy is still continuing, it looks
increasingly doubtful that the 15-member Security Council will endorse a
resolution authorizing war. President Bush, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain
and Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar of Spain will meet tomorrow to try to devise
a proposal to win United Nations support. But the Bush administration has
already made clear that it is only continuing diplomatic efforts at the request
of Britain and Spain, and that it will go ahead with a military campaign with or
without the permission of the United Nations.

With many people questioning the continuing relevance of the organization, Arts
& Ideas asked scholars and diplomats: if the United Nations were being created
today, what would you want done differently? Patricia Cohen compiled the
responses.

The United Nations is indispensable, though by and large outdated and
ineffective. Created to stop wars between states, it is ill prepared to address
such internal policies of its own members as ethnic cleansing (Milosevic's
Yugoslavia), nurturing and arming terrorism (the Taliban's Afghanistan) or the
strivings of a dictator to acquire weapons of mass destruction (Saddam Hussein's
Iraq, or Kim Jong Il's North Korea).

The task of promoting democracy in the nations, chasing terrorists across the
borders, not to speak of regime change as a last resort to stop a fire-breathing
dictator, is hard to trace in the charter. Yet these seem to be exactly what is
required if we think of nations really united to keep peace in the present
century.

The window of opportunity to reinvent the United Nations as a new coalition of
freedom-loving and action-oriented states, that was open by democratic
revolution in Russia in the early 1990's, has been largely missed. Russia was
too weak to lead the way and met with spectacular shortsightedness in the United
States and the West.

Looking at the present Security Council, I just imagine how many vetoes would've
been cast if someone had proposed to take an action against the Taliban on Sept.
8, 2001!

Much more than threats to use the veto in the Security Council or "go it alone
no matter what others think" is required from world leaders and diplomats if the
opportunity is not to be missed again.   ANDREI KOZYREV

Mr. Kozyrev was the Russian foreign minister under President Boris Yeltsin.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); VETO (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (71%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
(66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); TONY BLAIR (57%); KIM JONG IL
(50%) COHEN, PATRICIA; KOZYREV, ANDREI

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);
IRAQ (93%); SPAIN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

REGION: RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             903 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 650 words


INTERNATIONAL   3-11

List of Iraqi War Criminals Released by White House
The Bush administration has named several top Iraqi officials, including Saddam
Hussein's two sons, who would be tried for war crimes or crimes against humanity
after an American-led attack on Iraq, a senior American official said.   1

The American-led coalition that is preparing to topple Mr. Hussein's government
is planning for a complex invasion of Iraq to begin even as allied troops are
still arriving in the region, senior commanders say.   1


In the United States, Europe and Africa, Al Qaeda and other terror organizations
have intensified their efforts to recruit young Muslim men, tapping into rising
anger about the American campaign for war in Iraq, according to intelligence and
law enforcement officials.   1

Antiwar Demonstrations
There were hundreds of organized protests around the world, from Athens to
Seoul, South Korea, against an Iraq war.   15

Tens of thousands of antiwar protesters marched in Washington, San Francisco and
Los Angeles and other American cities in opposition to United States policy on
Iraq.   15

Thousands of Iraqis demonstrated in a tightly marshaled show of defiance of the
United States.   15

Jiang Steps Down in China
Jiang Zemin, China's former Communist Party chief, stepped down as president,
and Hu Jintao -- the party leader since last fall -- was elected to succeed him.
8

Funeral for Serbian Leader
Hundreds of thousands of Serbs lined the streets of Belgrade to pay their
respects to Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, who was assassinated last week.   4

NATIONAL   20-30

Medicare Changes Sought To Curb Coverage Appeals
The Bush administration says it is planning major changes in the Medicare
program that would make it more difficult for beneficiaries to appeal the denial
of benefits like home health care and skilled nursing home care.   1

Cadets Say Abuse Is Endemic
Former students say that many female cadets are raped or molested at the Air
Force Academy and that most do not report it because they fear an investigation
would expose them to retribution, if not dismissal.   1

Reconstructing Lost Months
Months of missed sightings and missed opportunities by investigators preceded
the recovery of Elizabeth Smart, the Utah girl who spent months with a kidnapper
who considered himself God.   30

Inmate Seeks Clemency
Louis Jones Jr., who is on death row, has pleaded for clemency, saying that
chemicals to which he was exposed in the Persian Gulf war unbalanced his mind
and played a role in the murder he committed.   20

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Alert on Mystery Illness
As a mysterious respiratory illness that has killed nine people spread to more
countries, the World Health Organization issued a rare health alert and urged
all countries to help in seeking its cause and control.   1

Stem Cell Research Supported
At various institutions a scattershot movement is under way to counteract
President Bush's 2001 order sharply limiting federal money for embryonic stem
cell research.   20

NEW YORK/REGION   33-38

Sweeping Security Plan in Place For City in the Event of War
To protect New York City if and when an American-led attack on Iraq begins, the
police have prepared a sweeping security plan that calls for expanding the
patrols on the streets and asking the Defense Department to fly combat aircraft
overhead, a police official said. Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has
briefed Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and other top city officials on the plan,
known as Operation Atlas.   1

Thousands Mourn Detective
James V. Nemorin, one of two detectives shot to death during an undercover
operation last week, was mourned at a funeral attended by thousands of his
colleagues. The funeral for Rodney J. Andrews, the other detective killed, is on
Tuesday.   33

OBITUARIES   31

Jean-Luc Lagardere
The builder of one of France's largest industrial empires was 75.   31

Chess   37
Weather   40
Cong. Vote   37

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
NEWS BRIEFS (90%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
POLITICS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); MEDICARE (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (86%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (79%); DESERT STORM (78%); HEALTH CARE (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); TERRORISM (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); AL-QAEDA (75%); ARMED FORCES (75%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); AIR FORCES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); NURSING HOMES (69%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (67%); NURSING &
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES (67%); HOME HEALTH CARE (65%); DENIAL OF INSURANCE
COVERAGE (64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES
(62%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (62%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (60%);
BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (60%); STEM CELL RESEARCH (60%); MURDER (58%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (88%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); HU JINTAO (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (96%); CHINA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(89%); SERBIA (79%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); GULF STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             904 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES -- AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 15, 2003;
Targets for Trial, a Rolling Invasion and Worldwide Protests

BYLINE:  By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 707 words


With diplomatic moves running out, the Bush administration stepped up its war of
nerves against Saddam Hussein. It identified a dozen top Iraqi officials who
would be tried for war crimes or crimes against humanity after an American-led
war. The culprits, it suggested, could flee now or face the music later.

PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE -- On a day of worldwide antiwar protests and continuing
military preparations in the Persian Gulf, President Bush used graphic language
in his weekly radio broadcast to describe Mr. Hussein's Iraq: a land of torture,
disappearances, rape and other atrocities against dissidents. A senior American
official, naming names for the first time, said those who would be prosecuted,
in addition to Mr. Hussein, included his two sons, Uday, who was accused of
torture and rape, and Qusay, in charge of security and the elite Republican
Guard. About a dozen top a hierarchy of 2,000 members of Mr. Hussein's inner
circle.

MORE TALK -- An aide to Mr. Hussein said that the chief United Nations weapons
inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, had been invited to visit Baghdad
"as quickly as possible" to discuss disarmament. They are to consult with the
Security Council tomorrow on whether to accept, and are to deliver a report on
Iraq's disarmament progress on Tuesday. France, Germany and Russia proposed
setting a new disarmament timetable and appealed again for a peaceful solution.

HUSSEIN'S FATE -- The commander of American forces in Kuwait said the invaders
would not be trying specifically to kill Mr. Hussein, only to destroy his
government. "The regime is the target, not one individual," Lt. Gen. William S.
Wallace said.

INVASION PLANS -- If no peaceful solution is found, allied forces are planning a
"rolling start"to the invasion of Iraq. In the Persian Gulf war in 1991,
American forces stormed into Kuwait after a huge troop and logistical buildup
and a 39-day bombardment of Iraq and its occupation forces. This time, the
invasion could start even as troops continued to arrive in the region.

Ships and aircraft are en route, and three powerful armored units are still in
the United States or Europe and would not reach the region until April, so
fighting and a buildup could go on simultaneously. Staggered arrivals are partly
a result of the limited capacity of Kuwait's ports, but also reflect a Pentagon
view that a decisive campaign would depend less on brawn than improved air
power, weaponry and intelligence.

PROTESTS -- Hundreds of thousands of demonstrators around the world denounced
American war plans. Many caricatured President Bush as a gun-slinging
cowboy-killer, and portrayed the war as a blood-for-oil deal. In Spain, an
estimated 500,000 people marched in Madrid and 300,000 marched in Barcelona.

Protests drew about 250,000 people in Montreal, 100,000 in Berlin and 50,000 in
Paris. About 15,000 people marched in Athens and and 10,000 in Tokyo, and lesser
numbers turned out in London, Moscow, Seoul, Calcutta and Cairo. In the Middle
East, some demonstrators expressed support for Saddam Hussein, and in Iraq
thousands took to the streets in shows of defiance tightly orchestrated by the
government.

SHOW OF UNITY -- While thousands protested at the White House, Mr. Bush was at
Camp David preparing for the summit meeting on Sunday in the Azores with Prime
Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar of Spain. The
meeting was portrayed as a last-ditch diplomatic effort, but it appeared to be
more of a show of unity among allies.

After weeks of tendered and rejected compromises, the United States, Britain and
Spain have only the support of Bulgaria on the 15-member Security Council for
their resolution to impose a tight timetable for Iraq to disarm or face war.
With the measure's defeat virtually certain, diplomats said it might not even be
brought to a vote.

TERRORISTS -- Another certainty: war would stir anger among young Muslims in the
United States, Europe and Africa and could produce recruits for a new generation
of terrorists committed to attacks on America and Israel. In recent weeks,
intelligence and law-enforcement officials say, recruitment has surged.
Traditionally, mosques have been recruitment centers.

ROBERT D. McFADDEN

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); WEAPONS
DECOMMISSIONING (87%); DESERT STORM (78%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL
PROTESTS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(77%); TORTURE (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (73%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY
(71%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  IRAQ-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (54%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (54%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%); MOHAMED ELBARADEI (58%)
MCFADDEN, ROBERT D; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); BARCELONA, SPAIN (79%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);
MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%); CATALONIA, SPAIN (68%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); SPAIN (93%); GULF STATES (93%); KUWAIT
(93%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             905 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hundreds of Thousands Mourn Murdered Serbian Leader

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 15


Hundreds of thousands of Serbs marched through the streets of Belgrade today to
pay their respects to Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, who was assassinated this
week, apparently by an underworld gang.

Mr. Djindjic's coffin, draped in the red, blue and white Serbian flag, made its
way through the capital on a gun carriage, followed by a silent crowd that was
the biggest since the street protests that toppled President Slobodan Milosevic
more than two years ago.

His widow, Ruzica, and their two children joined the procession at the gates of
the city's main cemetery, walking at the head of a procession that included
dignitaries from around the world.

Mr. Djindjic, who was instrumental in the overthrow of Mr. Milosevic, was buried
with full military honors after a funeral unlike any since that of Marshal Tito,
the founder of Communist Yugoslavia, in 1980.

As prime minister, however, Mr. Djindjic was not popular. After decades of
autocratic rule, many people were suspicious of his tendency to centralize
power. But his commitment, under international pressure, to confront the murky
alliances of war criminals and racketeers that took control of Serbia under Mr.
Milosevic earned him respect, particularly abroad. It may also have cost him his
life.

Since Mr. Djindjic was shot outside his office on Wednesday, the police have
detained more than 180 suspects for questioning and destroyed the house of the
leader of a Belgrade gang linked to the assassination. But the leader, Dusan
Spasojevic, and his principal associates remain at large.

In a speech at the graveside, George Papandreou, the Greek foreign minister,
praised Mr. Djindjic's efforts to transform his country from an international
pariah into a candidate for European Union membership and vowed that Greece,
which holds the European Union's rotating presidency, would do everything
possible to give his successor greater support.

"Your death strengthens our will to make your vision a reality," Mr. Papandreou
said.

Mourners also expressed hope that the murder of Mr. Djindjic, linked to a
criminal network that still retains influence in the security forces, would
unite politicians behind an effort to weed out holdovers from the Milosevic era,
whom they blamed for holding back Serbia's development.

"The only good thing about this disaster is that it exposes the utter
pointlessness of any further obsession with Milosevic, the past and
totalitarianism," said Gordana Andjelkovic, a 30-year-old teacher. "Every big
movement in this country's history has been built on death and suffering and I
think this loss will rally people behind serious change."

There are already indications that the government is getting more serious about
taking on the networks of shady businessmen, wartime paramilitary forces and
common criminals who have long held sway here.

Among those detained since the assassination are two of the men who know most
about Mr. Milosevic's links to the Serbian forces and militias that swept
through Bosnia and Croatia in the 1990's.

Under the state of emergency imposed this week, Jovica Stanisic, the former head
of Mr. Milosevic's internal security network, and Franko Simatovic, a onetime
paramilitary commander, could be held for up to 30 days. But it is not yet clear
whether they will be interviewed by intelligence officials who cooperate with
the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague, where Mr. Milosevic is
being tried.

"Stanisic was at the center of the most unpleasant things that characterized
Milosevic's rule," a Western diplomat said. "What happens to him now will tell
us a lot about where the government wants to go from here."

Thoughts will now turn to selecting Mr. Djindjic's successor. His Democratic
Party is expected to name Zoran Zivkovic, a 42-year-old former interior
minister, as its new leader on Sunday. He will face a difficult challenge. The
government is a fractious coalition of 17 parties, and few political analysts
expect Mr. Zivkovic to make much headway with reforms before he is forced into a
general election.

Even so, ordinary people now have renewed expectations of progress after a year
of political infighting between Mr. Djindjic and his rivals that brought the
reform process to an effective standstill.

Many people who watched today's funeral procession waved placards bearing a
picture of Mr. Djindjic and the following quotation, from a speech he made after
an unsuccessful attempt on his life just over two weeks ago: "Anyone who thinks
they can stop the implementation of reforms and the rule of law by having me
killed is seriously mistaken."

He will be difficult to replace, however. Bozidar Djelic, a former partner at
the consulting firm McKinsey & Company whom Mr. Djindjic lured back to Serbia to
become his finance minister, likened the loss to one sustained by Americans 40
years ago.

"Today, everyone is aware that Zoran Djindjic was unique," Mr. Djelic said,
"just like John F. Kennedy."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Many mourners in Belgrade held pictures of Zoran Djindjic, the
assassinated Serbian prime minister, as his funeral cortege passed yesterday.
(Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); RIOTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HISTORY (76%); SHOOTINGS (76%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (67%); EU PRESIDENCY (63%); EUROPEAN
UNION ACCESSION (63%); MURDER (52%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ASSASSINATIONS AND
ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (59%) EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: GEORGE PAPANDREOU (79%) DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); PAPANDREOU, GEORGE
(MIN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; SIMPSON, DANIEL

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); GREECE (93%); EUROPE (93%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  GREECE

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             906 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
Coming to Grips With the Unthinkable in Tulsa

BYLINE:  By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 894 words


Americans tend to think of lawless nations in Africa and Eastern Europe when the
discussion turns to mass murder and crimes against humanity. But a commission
created by the Oklahoma Legislature spent the late 1990's searching for mass
graves in and around Tulsa. The missing dead -- who could number as many as 300
-- were shot, burned, lynched or tied to cars and dragged to death during the
Tulsa Race Riot of 1921. This was a nightmarish disturbance in which an army of
white Tulsans reduced to ashes 35 square blocks of what was then the most
affluent black community in the United States.

The Tulsa Race Riot Commission closed up shop without finding the bodies that
witnesses recall seeing stacked like cordwood along railroad sidings and on
street corners. But the commission report shows without question that the city
encouraged the loss of life and property by deputizing what amounted to a lynch
mob. The state may also have been at fault in failing to protect the community.
Witnesses recall seeing white police officers looting and burning, and in some
cases killing unarmed black citizens without provocation.

The survivors and their families presumed that the ghastly detail in the riot
report would move the city and state to make restitution, especially in cases
where lost property and life could be documented. The Legislature has instead
decided to bury the report and deal with the matter partly by giving the
survivors commemorative medals.

These aging men and women, many in their 90's, have not been content to go
quietly to the grave. Instead, they have filed suit seeking damages, represented
by a legal team including Charles Ogletree, the Harvard law professor, and the
trial lawyers Johnnie Cochran Jr. and Willie Gary. The arrival of the
high-profile legal team sent a shock through sleepy Tulsa. But the most electric
moment came when 88-year-old John Hope Franklin, one of the most important
historians of the 20th century, was found to have joined the suit as a
plaintiff.

Mr. Franklin served as an adviser to the riot commission. His support for the
suit represents a powerful condemnation of the State Legislature. His name
resonates in the black Tulsa community of Greenwood, where a boulevard is named
in his honor. Greenwood, such as it is, might not even exist if not for his
father, the estimable lawyer B. C. Franklin (1879-1960), who was practicing in
the community at the time of the riot. B. C. Franklin somehow managed to avoid
being killed and was briefly held captive after the conflagration. After his
release, he turned immediately to the task of fighting the city in court. The
accounts of this period in his autobiography, "My Life and an Era," published
posthumously, will be quoted often if this newly filed lawsuit comes to trial.

In 1921, The Tulsa Tribune primed its city for the riot with months of race
baiting during which it referred to Greenwood as "niggertown." The immediate
spark for the riot was a now-lost Tribune article that encouraged readers to
lynch a jailed black man who had been accused -- falsely as it turned out -- of
trying to rape a white woman. The mob that showed up to lynch the prisoner
exchanged shots with a group of black men who tried to stop it.

City officials then made the fatal mistake of deputizing the white mob, to which
arms were handed out indiscriminately. As many as 10,000 whites, including the
police and the National Guard, poured across the tracks into Greenwood, burning,
looting and shooting. One white witness reported seeing officers in uniform
robbing unarmed black citizens at gunpoint and shooting those who resisted.
While the police were thus engaged, an execution squad composed of Klansmen
roamed the riot zone, killing black men on sight. Eyewitnesses tell of seeing
corpses piled in the backs of wagons and pickup trucks or stacked along the
street. Those bodies, which were never found, were thought to have been spirited
into secret mass graves.

Greenwood had been a black city within a city that included as many as 15,000
people and supported 191 businesses, including 15 doctors, 2 dentists, a
chiropractor and 3 law offices. After the riot, as B. C. Franklin writes: "As
far as I could see, not a Negro dwelling-house or place of business stood."
Thousands of blacks were confined to makeshift prison camps. Those who worked
for white Tulsans were allowed to go out to their jobs. But blacks were required
under pain of arrest to wear or carry ID tags furnished by the city.

The principal black political leaders fled Greenwood after being indicted by a
Klan-dominated legal system. B. C. Franklin remained, partly because his wife
and children were safe in his hometown, Rentiesville, 65 miles away. His rooming
house and law offices destroyed, he and his partners set up shop in a tent and
commenced the legal battle that prevented the city from annexing Greenwood and
forcing black people completely out of the city.

Echoing his father, John Hope Franklin told me in a recent telephone interview
that he had joined the suit to "turn up the heat on Tulsa and Oklahoma." The
courts will have to decide whether or not the riot survivors have a plausible
case. But in the moral sense at least, Tulsa and Oklahoma have already lost.
They did so by failing to accept responsibility for one of the most
blood-curdling events in American history.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RIOTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (86%); LAWYERS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMANITIES &
SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); VANDALISM (77%); BURN INJURIES
(77%); RACE & RACISM (75%); DAMAGES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); HISTORY (70%);
BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (66%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (62%) BLACKS;
DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  HATE CRIMES;  LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS

PERSON: STAPLES, BRENT

CITY: TULSA, OK, USA (94%)

STATE: OKLAHOMA, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFRICA (90%); EUROPE (90%); EASTERN EUROPE (73%)

REGION: TULSA (OKLA);  OKLAHOMA

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             907 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Murder in Belgrade;
Did Serbia's Leader Do the West's Bidding Too Well?

BYLINE:  By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1076 words


THE assassination on Wednesday of Zoran Djindjic, the Serbian prime minister so
highly praised by Western leaders, is a reminder that half-hearted
nation-building can easily be derailed, especially when outside nations make
heavy political demands on fragile post-tyrannical states like Serbia and,
presumably, Iraq.

In some ways, many Serbs say, the West squeezed Mr. Djindjic to death in a
too-tight embrace of specific demands for reform and extradition of war
criminals, and tied the delivery of desperately needed foreign aid to those
conditions.

Mr. Djindjic, no saint, made deals with various Serbian devils, both war
criminals and ordinary criminals, in organizing the overthrow of Slobodan
Milosevic in October 2000.

The Serbian popular revolt against Mr. Milosevic that year would probably not
have succeeded without Mr. Djindjic and his shadowy relationship with an officer
of Mr. Milosevic's paramilitary police, Milorad Lukovic, known as Legija. And it
was Legija, the next spring, who carried out Mr. Djindjic's orders to arrest Mr.
Milosevic.

Now Mr. Djindjic is dead, with Legija leading a list of various criminals sought
by the panicked authorities for organizing the murder. Serbia's new democrats,
many of them complicit in the old regime, are arresting scores of people under a
state of emergency that has already put restrictions on the news media.

But what could have turned Legija so murderously against Mr. Djindjic? For many
Serbs, the answer is The Hague, where there is a growing list of Serbs wanted by
the international prosecutor to stand trial, along with Mr. Milosevic himself,
before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Mr. Milosevic was arrested because Mr. Djindjic needed millions of dollars in
American aid that was made dependent on an arrest before April 2001. The
following June, just before an international donors' meeting, Mr. Djinjdic sent
Mr. Milosevic off to The Hague in defiance of his country's constitutional court
and without informing the Yugoslav president of the time.

Another such deadline is approaching, and again American and other Western aid
depends on a new list of those who must be arrested and transferred. This list
includes the infamous Bosnian Serb military leader Gen. Ratko Mladic and the
former Bosnian Serb president, Radovan Karadzic.

But the prosecutor in The Hague, Carla Del Ponte, has a longer list, and among
those on it is understood to be Legija himself, who has been accused of war
crimes in Bosnia and Croatia, as well as Franko Simatovic, a legendary
paramilitary figure who led the special operations unit known as Frenki's boys.
The unit is accused of many atrocities in Bosnia and, later, Kosovo.

A shaken Serbian government, now led by an acting prime minister, Nebojsa Covic,
is blaming organized crime, which has long worked hand in hand with the police,
as it did with the old regime -- and, according to the Serbian press, with Mr.
Djindjic too.

Legija is said to have strong connections with an organized crime group based in
Zemun, and Mr. Djindjic had spoken openly about cracking down on the group.

Mr. Djindjic himself had many complicated business interests, with reputed
connections to the Surcin mafia, and many Serbs saw him as an elegant kingpin
turned politician.

Mr. Covic, defending the crackdown, called the Djindjic murder "a clear attempt
by those who have been trying to stop the development of Serbia and its
democratization, to change the course of history, to isolate and turn Serbia
into the kingdom of organized crime again."

But there are larger questions about the price the prosecutors at The Hague --
and behind them, the leaders of the United States and Europe -- are asking from
a shaky democratic leadership of a poor and corrupted state. Western notions of
guilt and innocence, already perceived as "victor's justice" by many in the
Balkans, have put enormous strainon the fledgling democratic governments of
Croatia and Montenegro, too.

And the mess that Serbia remains -- surely to worsen now -- is also a form of
indictment, many Serbs say, of the West and of Washington, which wins its wars
but refuses to engage in sustained nation-building.

The stress of the West's demands, some in Serbia feel, is part of the nexus of
reactions that led to Mr. Djindjic's murder. With his death, however, the West
is much less likely than before to get the alleged war criminals it wants to The
Hague. The achievement of a negotiated independence for Kosovo, which depends on
agreement from Belgrade, will be more difficult. And the career of a tough but
promising politician, a Westernizer who wanted to bring Serbia into Europe and
not sink back into defensive nationalism, has been cut down.

Bratislav Grubacic, a Serbian political analyst, said: "Carla del Ponte comes
every few months waving lists of suspects, and there has been a lot of pressure
on Djindjic and the government from Washington and Brussels to send these
people, like Legija and Frenki, to the Hague. I think that's what this murder is
all about: these guys helped Djindjic and the democrats come to power, but
thought he was betraying them."

The Serbs thought Mr. Milosevic would satisfy The Hague, but there were more and
more investigations and lists, Mr. Grubacic said. "And these guys said to
themselves, 'O.K., we sent Milosevic, but we're not sending ourselves.' "

Mr. Covic himself cited "constant pressure" to send suspects to The Hague as a
possible factor in the murder. "We, of course, know that should be done," he
said in a television interview. "But if one puts too much emphasis on these
kinds of things, then you get counterproductive effects."

AMONG Serbs there is, like it or not, popular distaste for the continued
extraditions in response to Western pressure. Fifty-four percent think the
government should stop extraditing alleged war criminals, only 12 percent think
they should be extradited and the rest claim they do not know, according to the
Strategic Marketing and Media Research Institute.

Ms. Del Ponte, too, embraced Mr. Djindjic, and after he was killed she suggested
that she fly to Belgrade for his funeral. But the Yugoslav foreign minister,
Goran Svilanovic, one of the most Westernized and liberal of all Serbian
politicians, could barely contain his amazement at the idea.

He tried to dissuade her, he said. "I have given my position," he told
Belgrade's Radio B92. "Anything more would exceed the bounds of good taste."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Serbian anger: protests in Belgrade in 2001 when Slobodan
Milosevic was sent to The Hague to face trial. (Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); EXTRADITION (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
PRIME MINISTERS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); ARRESTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (76%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (73%); NEWS BRIEFS (70%); GENOCIDE (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); MURDER (56%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  EXTRADITION

PERSON: DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); ERLANGER, STEVEN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); NETHERLANDS (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CROATIA (79%); MONTENEGRO
(79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             908 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Court: An Absent U.S.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 150 words


To the Editor:

Our country has lost the opportunity for a moral victory with the historic
opening of the International Criminal Court (news article, March 12).

From Eleanor Roosevelt's advocacy for a world court to United States leadership
in the Nuremberg trials for Nazi crimes against humanity, to our championing of
international law and our shaping of the International Criminal Court itself, we
could have had this crowning victory in the eyes of the world.

But President Bush feared the court and erased President Bill Clinton's
signature on the international treaty. The administration did not even send a
representative to the ceremony.

What is becoming of our country? Are we to be a warrior empire, threatening to
become a law unto ourselves, to be feared for our power rather than respected
for our efforts toward enabling peace and justice?

NANCY MILIO
Chapel Hill, N.C., March 14, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (54%); BILL CLINTON (54%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (57%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             909 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush and Iraq: Starting the Countdown to War

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 115 words


To the Editor:

Now that President Bush has given Saddam Hussein a final, 48-hour ultimatum to
leave Iraq or face military attack, the worldwide antiwar movement should change
its focus from pressing President Bush not to wage war to urging Saddam Hussein
to abdicate his position of authority and leave Iraq.

At this point, the war will be avoided only if Saddam Hussein goes into exile.
The antiwar movement should now organize worldwide demonstrations urging the
Iraqi leader, who is responsible for countless crimes against humanity, to
prevent the war and save his people further misery. Saddam Hussein is both the
problem and the solution.

HARRY M. GOLDIN
Skokie, Ill., March 17, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%); TERRORISM (85%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ATOMIC
WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  TERRORISM

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES);
HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); GOLDIN, HARRY M

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (50%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             915 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Helping the New Serbian Prime Minister

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 325 words


The new prime minister of Serbia is a politician the West will be happy to
welcome but whom it must be careful not to endanger. The new leader, Zoran
Zivkovic, takes over from Zoran Djindjic, who was murdered last week. The West
rightly pressured Mr. Djindjic into arresting suspected war criminals but may
have put his life at risk by failing to provide him with the means to do so. Mr.
Zivkovic was interior minister under Mr. Djindjic and has vowed to carry on with
sorely needed reforms and with the war on organized crime. He has declared
himself in favor of extraditing war crimes suspects to the tribunal in The
Hague.

But as the fate of Mr. Djindjic demonstrated, impressing governments in Europe
and the United States is not enough to succeed, or survive. The country, now
called Serbia and Montenegro, is a bitter, impoverished place where the line
between politicians, warlords and war criminals is not clearly drawn. The
assassination of Mr. Djindjic is a case in point: the government says he was
probably the victim of the Zemun gang, one of whose leaders is reported to be
the police officer who arrested Slobodan Milosevic on Mr. Djindjic's orders.

Mr. Zivkovic has cracked down fiercely on Zemun and other gangs. Many of the
warlords are also on the list of war criminals wanted in The Hague. But the West
has tied delivery of aid to the roundup of the lengthening list of war
criminals. While pressure should not be relaxed, nation-building that consists
only of heavy demands is self-defeating, as Mr. Djindjic's fate suggests.

Mr. Zivkovic has demonstrated thecourage to pursue the course plotted by the
West, including the unpopular arrests. That is all the more reason why the West
should give him some breathing room, and something tangible he can show his
dispirited countrymen as evidence that the West is not only about a victor's
justice. This is a lesson that will probably be worth learning for post-Saddam
Hussein Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); PRIME MINISTERS (91%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (91%); POLITICS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(77%); ORGANIZED CRIME (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); GENOCIDE (70%)
EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) ZIVKOVIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME
MIN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); MONTENEGRO
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             933 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Disbands Police Unit of Suspect in Prime Minister's Death

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 26


The Serbian government said today that it had peacefully disbanded a
war-hardened elite police unit whose deputy commander was arrested this week on
suspicion that he killed Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic on March 12.

About 200 members of the feared Unit for Special Operations, which was set up
under the rule of former President Slobodan Milosevic, left their base near the
northern town of Kula in buses and cars, wearing civilian clothes and carrying
personal belongings, a witness said.

"They have been disbanded," the new prime minister, Zoran Zivkovic, said in
Belgrade at his first regular news conference since taking office last week.
"There has been no resistance."

Mr. Zivkovic also said that several police and state security officials were
linked to the powerful crime group accused of planning the killing and that some
of them were involved in the assassination itself. He did not identify them.

The authorities said on Tuesday that the police had arrested the man they
believed gunned down Mr. Djindjic outside government buildings in Belgrade, and
that they also found the murder weapon, a sniper rifle.

The man arrested was identified as Zvezdan Jovanovic, a deputy commander of the
feared unit, which fought in the Balkan wars of the 1990's under Mr. Milosevic,
whom Mr. Djindjic helped to oust from power and then sent to stand trial at the
United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague. Mr. Jovanovic fought against
Kosovo Albanian guerrillas in 1998 and 1999 and was decorated by Mr. Milosevic,
the Belgrade media reported on Tuesday.

The police arrested another member of the unit suspected of involvement in the
killing and detained its commander over links to the crime gang allegedly behind
the murder.

The former commander of the feared unit that is now being disbanded is Milorad
Lukovic, known as Legija, who is among the crime bosses believed to have
masterminded Mr. Djindjic's murder in an effort to spread chaos and avoid
arrest.

Mr. Djindjic enraged nationalists by sending Mr. Milosevic to The Hague in 2001
to face war crimes charges. Mr. Djindjic had vowed in recent weeks to clamp down
on the organized crime that flourished during Mr. Milosevic's turbulent 13 years
in power.

Legija, reportedly close to the suspected assassin, and two other Belgrade crime
gang leaders identified as Dusan Spasojevic and Mile Lukovic, remain at large.
"There is a lot of evidence that they were at the top of the pyramid of evil,"
Mr. Zivkovic said.

He said that most members of the disbanded unit were professionals who would be
redeployed to other units, but that a small number of them were involved in the
assassination and in other crime.

Since Mr. Djindjic was shot, the police have detained more than 1,000 people,
including a Milosevic-era state security chief, in their hunt for the killers
and a growing war on organized crime.

The disbanded unit was in the front lines during the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and
Kosovo, each of them characterized by brutal harassment and killing of civilians
and other atrocities.

"This unit was particularly feared among non-Serbs in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia," Bogdan Ivanisevic of Human Rights Watch said. In late 2001,
the unit mounted a week of protests -- including blocking roads with armored
cars -- complaining that it had been manipulated into arresting two Serbian war
crimes suspects.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (91%); POLICE FORCES (91%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(91%); SHOOTINGS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); ORGANIZED CRIME (89%); WITNESSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); TESTIMONY (76%); EYEWITNESSES (76%);
POLITICS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%);
MURDER (58%); MOTOR VEHICLES (56%) ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATIONS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ORGANIZED CRIME

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: JOVANOVIC, ZVEZDAN; DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN); ZIVKOVIC, ZORAN (PRIME
MIN)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); ALBANIA
(79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             935 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trying to Understand a Heart of Darkness

BYLINE:  By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1404 words

DATELINE: VILLENEUVE-LE-GUYARD, France


On Dec. 26, 1971, Francois Bizot, a 31-year-old French ethnologist, walked away
from a jungle prison in Cambodia after three months of incarceration by Khmer
Rouge guerrillas. He had talked his way to freedom, but he also owed his life to
his captor and interrogator, a math teacher turned Communist revolutionary who
went by the nom de guerre Duch.

During long conversations with his jailer, Mr. Bizot concluded that the young
man's idealism was misguided but sincere. Once Duch had accepted that his
prisoner was not a C.I.A. operative, he convinced the rebel high command to
release him. "I acted according to my conscience," Duch explained. In response,
to underline his scholarly credentials, Mr. Bizot resumed his research into
Khmer-language Buddhist manuscripts.

It would take Mr. Bizot almost 30 years to recount his experience in print. In
2000 his story was published to acclaim in France as "Le Portail"; now it has
been translated into English as "The Gate" (Knopf). What finally prompted Mr.
Bizot to write this book was neither the memory of his near-death nor his status
as the only Westerner known to have survived Khmer Rouge capture. Rather, he
said, it was his need to understand the horror that followed.

In April 1975, when the Khmer Rouge ousted the American-backed regime of Lon
Nol, Mr. Bizot took refuge in the French embassy in Phnom Penh along with
hundreds of foreigners and Cambodians. As a fluent Khmer speaker, he acted as
liaison with the Khmer Rouge until the foreigners were able to leave Cambodia
for Thailand. The Khmer Rouge was already instituting the reign of terror that
would cost more than a million lives.

Mr. Bizot did not return to Phnom Penh until 1988, nine years after Vietnam
invaded and ousted the Khmer Rouge. He visited the former Khmer Rouge prison of
Tuol Sleng, now the Museum of Genocide, where at least 14,000 people had been
killed. Among photographs on the wall he suddenly recognized his former
interrogator. Duch, whose real name is Kang Kek Ieu, had been the prison's
director from 1975 to 1979.

"I was stunned," Mr. Bizot, 63, said in an interview at his home in
Villeneuve-le-Guyard, a village some 50 miles south of Paris, where he lives
with his French wife and two children. "This monstrous torturer of Tuol Seng had
once been a revolutionary idealist who was smitten by the truth. This man whom I
had known youngand somewhat innocent was now surrounded by multitudes of
coffins."

It was not known whether Duch was alive, but in 1999, with the Khmer Rouge no
longer a threat, Duch was identified by foreign journalists in western Cambodia.
He admitted his past but said he was a born-again Christian working for the
American Refugee Committee. Duch was soon arrested and taken to a military
prison in Phnom Penh.

Only then did Mr. Bizot decide to tell his story. He had long been encouraged to
do so by John le Carre, whom he had met in northern Thailand in the 1970's and
who had used Mr. Bizot indirectly as the character Hansen in his novel "The
Secret Pilgrim." (Mr. le Carre has written a foreword to "The Gate.") For Mr.
Bizot, however, the catalyst was the discovery that Duch was still alive.

"I received a telephone call out of the blue from an American journalist, Nate
Thayer," Mr. Bizot recalled. "He said: 'Duch is in front of me. He calls you his
friend. He says: "My friend Bizot will be happy to hear of me. I have changed my
ideas, my ideology." ' That was the trigger. I asked myself, 'How can a man live
with this burden?' Yet I also remembered this fervent ideologue who was not very
different from many young French of my age I had known in Paris."

Mr. Bizot was anything but political when he arrived in Cambodia in 1965. He had
tried his hand at surveying, he had learned pottery, he had played the trombone
in a jazz band, he had done his military service in Algeria, and he had worked
as a waiter. But he had also taken a course in Buddhism, and when the French
archaeological team at Angkor in Cambodia needed help, he jumped at the chance.

By good fortune a professor from the French School of the Far East asked him to
study ancient Buddhist texts. Excited by this, Mr. Bizot learned Khmer and
settled in a peasant village, where he met a young Cambodian woman, Chhoeung,
with whom he had a daughter, Helene. Then in 1970, with the Vietnam War spilling
into Cambodia and bringing American troops with it and with North Vietnamese
forces in control of the Angkor temple complex, he moved his family to Phnom
Penh.

He nonetheless continued to travel. And it was during a trip to a Buddhist
monastery on Oct. 10, 1971, that Khmer soldiers captured him and his two
Cambodian assistants, Lay and Son. They were taken to the jungle camp commanded
by Duch. Mr. Bizot was chained to a tree. The camp was full of Cambodian
peasants, many already condemned to die. The Frenchman was the only Westerner.

"The Gate" recounts his fear and discomfort, but Mr. Bizot also relates how,
from his first encounter with Duch, he insistently denied that he was part of
the C.I.A. Duch, it seems, could not believe a Frenchman would risk his life in
a war-torn country to study dusty Buddhist texts. Mr. Bizot responded by writing
a long essay explaining their importance.

He also discussed politics with his captor. Duch spoke of the poverty suffered
by peasants and of his confidence that "we can manage and organize ourselves on
our own to bring radiant happiness to our beloved country." Mr. Bizot responded
that Duch's "pure and generous" ideas frightened him. "You are dreaming of a
system intended to make man happy in spite of himself," he said.

In his book Mr. Bizot skips over the period between his release and the Khmer
Rouge's arrival in Phnom Penh in 1975. But during that period, Mr. Bizot
explained over a glass of white Burgundy, he continued his research and
reprinted many ancient Buddhist texts. In 1974, as the Cambodian war escalated,
he sent his daughter, Helene, to live with his sister in France. Then, when
Phnom Penh fell, Chhoeung and her family were obliged to evacuate the city along
with tens of thousands of other Cambodians.

The worst moments of his weeks at the French embassy, he writes, were seeing
Cambodian refugees trying to enter the property and later watching others forced
to leave on orders of the Khmer Rouge. The gate of the book's title is to the
embassy grounds: it became a symbol of despair for some, of survival for others.
When Mr. Bizot entered Thailand in May 1975, he had lost all contact with
Chhoeung.

In 1979, with the Khmer Rouge ousted from Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese, Mr.
Bizot learned that Chhoeung had survived years of forced labor. He paid a group
of Cambodian commandos to rescue her, and the couple were married in the French
embassy in Bangkok. Their relationship, however, did not survive. Now holding a
French passport, Chhoeung was able to join Helene in France.

In 1988 Mr. Bizot returned to Phnom Penh, but he had no desire to settle there
again. Instead, he continued his work in Thailand and Laos. Then, after Duch's
arrest in 1999, Mr. Bizot made contact with his former captor; learned that his
assistants, Lay and Son, had been killed; and thanks to Duch he also found the
now overgrown prison camp where he was held.

Yet, as much as a memoir, "The Gate" is an elegy to Cambodia: a country trampled
by United States soldiers; a country that leftist intellectuals in Paris
imagined would be better off under Communism; a country tortured by the Khmer
Rouge, then conquered and pacified by its historic foe, Vietnam.

At the end of his book Mr. Bizot feels release. "I am purged of my ghosts," he
writes. "I have emptied my memory. I close 'The Gate' behind me."

Yet since writing those lines Mr. Bizot has not found peace. "My story was in my
hidden depths, but it has now returned, cold and muddy," he said. More than
ever, he added, he thinks of Duch, not only what punishment he deserves, but
also what turned a man he came to like into a mass murderer.

"When I met Duch, he was not predestined to be a killer," Mr. Bizot said. "He
did not know where the revolution would lead him. It's like young Nazis in the
1930's who put on brown uniforms with swastikas: they didn't know what the
uniform would come to symbolize. I think the only answer is to look inside
ourselves, not others. The Nazi, the Khmer Rouge, the Rwandan killer is a man
who looks like us. That's my only conclusion."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: GATE, THE (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Photos: The French ethnologist Francois Bizot, author of "The Gate."
(Alan Riding/The New York Times); Mr. Bizot in the late 1960's at work in the
ruins of Angkor Wat. (Courtesy of Francois Bizot)(pg. E1); The author Francois
Bizot in 2000 with a picture of Duch, his captor and interrogator in 1971, at
the Museum of Genocide in Phnom Penh. (Benoit Gysembergh)(pg. E9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); CHILDREN (77%); WAR CRIMES (75%); TORTURE (75%); LITERATURE (74%); BOOK
REVIEWS (73%); WRITERS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%);
RELIGION (69%); JOURNALISM (68%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(66%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); REFUGEES (60%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: BIZOT, FRANCOIS; RIDING, ALAN

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%); PARIS, FRANCE (73%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%); FRANCE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); THAILAND (79%);
SWITZERLAND (76%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             939 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: FOR THE RECORD -- BRIEFING AT THE PENTAGON;
Military Leaders at the Pentagon: 'It's a Bit Early for History to Be Written'

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1259 words


Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday by Secretary of Defense
Donald H. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, at the Pentagon, as recorded by Federal Document Clearing House Inc. A
complete transcript is online at nytimes.com/ international.

Secretary Rumsfeld

Operation Iraqi Freedom is now just a little over one week old. In that brief
period of time, the coalition forces have made solid progress. And,
interestingly, in that short period of a week, we have seen mood swings in the
media from highs to lows to highs and back again, sometimes in a single 24-hour
period.

For some, the massive volume of television -- and it is massive -- and the
breathless reports can seem to be somewhat disorienting. Fortunately, my sense
is that the American people have a very good center of gravity and canabsorb and
balance what they see and hear.

Each day more Iraqi forces surrender. The regime knows this. Already, they have
deployed death squads into Iraqi cities to terrorize civilians and to try to
prevent them from welcoming coalition forces, to try to compel the regular army
to fight by putting guns to their head. . . .

These death squads report to the Hussein family directly. Their ranks are
populated with criminals released from Iraqi prisons. They dress in civilian
clothes and operate from private homes confiscated from innocent people and try
to blend in with the civilian population. . . .

Their name, fedayeen Saddam, is a lie, because their purpose is certainly not to
make martyrs of themselves, but to make martyrs of innocent Iraqis opposed to
Saddam's rule. But we will take them at their words, and if their wish is to die
for Saddam Hussein, they will be accommodated.

Before I turn to General Myers, a few words of caution.

First, to the officials of the Iraqi regime: Your defeat is inevitable and you
will be held accountable for your conduct in this war. The coalition P.O.W.'s
that you are holding must be treated according to the Geneva Conventions. And
any Iraqi officials involved in their mistreatment, humiliation or execution
will pay a severe price.

And to Iraq's neighbor Syria: We have information that shipments of military
supplies have been crossing the border from Syria into Iraq, including night
vision goggles. These deliveries pose a direct threat to the lives of coalition
forces. We consider such trafficking as hostile acts and will hold the Syrian
government accountable. . . .

Last, the entrance into Iraq by military forces, intelligence personnel or
proxies not under the direct operational control of General Franks will be taken
as a potential threat to coalition forces. This includes the Badr Corps. . . .

The Badr Corps is trained, equipped and directed by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary
Guard and we will hold the Iranian government responsible for their actions . .
. Armed Badr Corps members found in Iraq will have to be treated as combatants.

General Myers

 More than 270,000 coalition forces are deployed in support of combat
operations, with approximately one-third of those already inside Iraq. Our
ground operations are continuing to push north with Marine, armored and infantry
forces poised near Baghdad.

The air campaign continues as well. We flew almost 1,000 sorties over Iraq
yesterday, mostly against Iraqi regime, leadership and command-and-control
targets, ballistic missile threats and major communication nodes. We have air
supremacy over approximately 95 percent of Iraq. . . .

Overall, our plans are on track.

Questions and Answers

Q. I'd like to ask you about your statement about military supplies moving
across the border from Syria. You described those as hostile acts. Are they
subject to military action in response if that continues?

MR. RUMSFELD -- There's no question but that to the extent military supplies or
Equipment or people move across borders between Iraq and Syria that it vastly
complicates our situation. And that is why I said what I said.

Q. -- So are you threatening military action against Syria?

MR. RUMSFELD -- I'm saying exactly what I said. It was carefully phrased.

Q. -- General Wallace is prominently quoted today saying that, "This may be a
longer war than the commanders had thought," and that, "This is not the enemy
that we war-gamed against." Seems to contradict some of the statements that have
been made from the podium here and the podium in Doha. Can you reconcile the two
views?

MR. RUMSFELD -- I didn't read the article. I saw the headline. And I've seen a
lot of headlines that don't fit articles.

Someone, coming down here, told me that he also said that we're about where we
expected to be, which is generally what General Franks is saying. I suppose
everyone can have their own view. . . .

Q. -- Mr. Secretary, as you know, there has been some criticism, some by retired
senior officers, some by officers on background in this building, who claim that
the war plan that is in effect is flawed and our number of troops on the ground
is too light, supply lines are too long and spread too thin.

MR. RUMSFELD -- Well, we're one week into this and it seems to me it's a bit
early for history to be written, one would think. The war plan is Tom Franks'
war plan. It was carefully prepared over many months.

GENERAL MYERS -- I think General Franks put together a good plan. I'll give you
a definitive statement: I think it's a brilliant plan. . . . It's being
executed, and it's on track.

Q. -- Last time we met you with you, you were asked if supply lines were
stretched or vulnerable, and actually you both said no. And you also said that
the fedayeen Saddam were onesies and twosies. Do you still stand by both those
statements?

GENERAL MYERS -- I just said that I think the attacks on the lines of
communications inside our forces have not been militarily significant, and we're
dealing with the death squad attacks on those lines of communication. There have
not been regular army forces, I don't think, attacking those lines, unless it's
been close to one of the major population hubs. But they're being dealt with.
There have been some battles that have been bravely fought by our folks, and
they have dispatched the enemy, in many cases quite quickly.

MR. RUMSFELD -- My recollection is we said not that there were only onesies and
twosies in terms of the fedayeen Saddam -- we know of the numbers there, there
are somewhere between probably 5,000 and 25,000 in the country, depending on how
do you characterize them. But what we said was the attacks outside of cities had
been relatively small, as the general said.

Q. -- Is it possible that you've miscalculated the desire of the Iraqi people to
be liberated by an outside force?

MR. RUMSFELD -- Don't you think it's a little premature, the question? We'll
know the answer to that. As portions of the country are liberated, we'll have
people on the ground, embedded with our forces who will have a chance to see
what happens and see how they feel about it. Why do we want to guess? . . .

Q. -- Was there a conversation with General Wallace between any of the high
command in Washington or elsewhere to tell him what he had said was not helpful?
Or do you encourage your major combatant commanders to speak their mind as they
see the tactical battlefield, even though it may be slightly different than
perhaps it is seen in Washington as a more strategic battlefield?

MR. RUMSFELD -- I know of no one in Washington who's said anything to General
Wallace. The other question, I don't have any idea what kind of guidance they
get in terms of what they say.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); TRANSCRIPTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); NIGHT VISION
DEVICES (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); WAR ON TERROR (72%); IRAQ WAR (72%); LAW
OF WAR (71%); POWS & MIAS (71%); CORRECTIONS (70%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (62%); RELIGION (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (84%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); SYRIA (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             951 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: War Crimes Verdict

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 77 words


Two Bosnian Croat paramilitaries were found guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity for persecuting Bosnian Muslims in 1993.

The two men, Mladen Naletilic and Vinko Martinovic, were given prison terms of
20 years and 18 years, respectively. "Neither Mladen Naletilic nor Vinko
Martinovic were the grand architects of this plan," Judge Maureen Clark of
Ireland said at the sentencing. "They each, however, played a role in giving
effect to the plan."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); VERDICTS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (90%); SENTENCING (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (86%); RELIGION (85%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (92%); EUROPE (91%); NETHERLANDS
(74%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             958 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

16 Die in Bombing in Southern Philippines; Rebels Deny Link

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: MANILA, April 2


At least 16 people were killed today when a bomb exploded near a ferry terminal
in the southern Philippines, where the government is fighting Muslim separatist
rebels.

The explosion in Davao City on the island of Mindanao came just half a mile from
an airport where a bomb killed 23 people, including an American missionary, less
than a month ago.

Both bombs were planted in areas where people were gathered to greet arriving
passengers.

American and Australian experts are helping Philippine investigators examine the
airport bombing. They have not ruled out the involvement of Jemaah Islamiyah, a
Southeast Asian group with ties to Al Qaeda that is believed to have a presence
in Mindanao. The same group is suspected of involvement in the bombings on the
Indonesian resort island of Bali in October that took more than 200 lives,
nearly half of them Australian tourists.

Witnesses said a nun, four policemen, several vendors and a number of children
were among those killed in the blast today, near a row of food stalls where
passengers board large interisland ferries.

There were unconfirmed reports that vendors, alerted by a boy who had seen the
bomb, tried unsuccessfully to get the attention of the police.

The military said more than 40 people were injured. The Davao City medical
center said five people were killed on the spot, while the others died at
hospitals. More than 150 people were injured in the earlier bombing on March 4.

President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, using words that echoed those she used after
the airport explosion, ordered the military to pursue a crackdown and said,
"These terrorists will be hunted down and be made to face the full force of the
law."

"This is war," she said. "In a state of lawless violence I can empower the
military to do this crackdown."

As it did after the earlier blast, the government blamed the largest of four
Muslim separatist groups, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. As it did before,
the group strongly denied responsibility and called for the killers to be
brought to justice.

"We did not have anything to do with that," said Eid Kabalu, a spokesman for
thegroup. "Like what we said before, we are willing to cooperate in any
investigation. The M.I.L.F. does not hit civilians."

He called the bombing a crime against humanity and said the attacker was "a
lunatic, a crazed man, killing innocent people."

After the earlier blast, the government arrested a number of people it said were
members of the group and issued warrants for the arrest of its leaders,
including the group's chairman, Hashim Salamat, who has called for a Muslim
uprising.

At the same time, the government and the rebels have been talking peace. On
Sunday, they announced that they would work toward resuming stalled peace talks
in the hope of reaching a political settlement to end nearly three decades of
separatist warfare.

Fighting has flared in recent months and the rebels lost a crucial stronghold in
a government military offensive in February.

Security forces in this overwhelmingly Roman Catholic nation are battling four
Muslim separatist groups in the south. One small group, the Abu Sayyaf, is
concentrated on islands off the southern coast of Mindanao and has drawn
attention with mass kidnappings.

The United States has been training the Philippine military in counterinsurgency
in that area. A new deployment of 2,000 American soldiers to confront the Abu
Sayyaf has been put on hold after an outcry here when Pentagon officials said
they would be given a combat role.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Philippines highlighting Davao: Davao suffered its second deadly
bombing in less than a month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); FERRIES
(90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(89%); EYEWITNESSES (88%); PEACE PROCESS (85%); RELIGION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ISLANDS & REEFS (77%); TESTIMONY (76%); INVESTIGATIONS
(75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); ARREST WARRANTS (74%); ARRESTS (74%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (57%) JEMMAH ISLAMIYAH (TERRORIST
GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (58%) MYDANS, SETH

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%)

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (96%); INDONESIA (92%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA
(79%)

REGION: PHILIPPINES;  DAVAO (PHILIPPINES);  AUSTRALIA

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             960 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Latin Sweatshops Pressed by U.S. Campus Power

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: VILLA ALTAGRACIA, Dominican Republic, March 31


When workers first tried unionizing the BJ&B hat factory that is the town's
biggest employer, the streets were abuzz with rumors that the factory would
rather close down than negotiate.

Two years later, not only is the factory still around, but there also is a
union, and it recently negotiated a labor contract that provides raises,
scholarships and other benefits that are unheard of among the country's 500
foreign-owned plants.

The pact, signed last week, was the latest victory for a once unlikely coalition
of United States college students, labor activists and world-class brands like
Nike and Reebok working to improve labor conditions in the factories in
developing countries that make caps and clothing emblazoned with university
names and mascots.

The BJ&B factory, which employs about 1,600 people, was the focus of the first
campaigns on American campuses against sweatshop labor that grew out of the
protests against globalization in the 1990's. Labor leaders here and abroad now
say it is probably the largest factory among the free-trade zones of the
Caribbean, Central America or Mexico to have been unionized.

The zones were set up in recent decades with tax breaks and other incentives to
create jobs by attracting international manufacturers. But only a handful here,
or elsewhere, have unions at all. The union at BJ&B was the first formed in a
free zone in five years.

The success follows a similar victory for labor leaders in Mexico. The
organizers here hope that it may provide incentive to other factories, though
most workers will lack the leverage that came from the coalition of students,
universities and big American brands.

BJ&B itself has made caps for major companies like Nike and Reebok and for
athletic powerhouse schools like Penn State and the University of North
Carolina.

"I never thought a group of students, thousands of them, could put so much
pressure on these brands," said Ignacio Hernandez, the general secretary of the
Federation of Free Trade Zone Unions. "We were determined to win, but without
them it would have taken us five more years. And it would have been more
traumatic without them because all wewould have was the pressure to strike."

Still, the process was not easy -- the factory had to be pressured several times
into rehiring union members who were dismissed on the flimsiest of pretexts. At
one point, the American brands brought in outsiders who spoke about the rights
of workers to choose a union or not. Yet it was accomplished without the kinds
of violent clashes or shutdowns that have marked organizing efforts elsewhere.

The BJ&B factory that opened here in 1987 sits in the shadow of a dilapidated
and long-abandoned sugar mill that once sustained the local economy. Down the
road sits another empty hulk that was once a government-owned paper factory, now
abandoned, in this rural town about an hour north of Santo Domingo, the capital.

Amid such reminders of tough times, the BJ&B factory is the best hope for many
people here to land a job. It occupies most of the buildings in the Free Trade
Zone, which it shares with a smaller dress factory.

Workers said they had tried to form a union about six years ago because managers
were forcing them to work overtime, sometimes dismissing them without reason
when they tried to leave early to attend night school. Other said that
supervisors would often insult workers or threaten to hit them.

"Even if you missed work with an excuse, they would not pay you," said Jenny
Perez, who used to work at the factory. "They would treat you in ways they
should not. They would humiliate you verbally, but you took it because there was
no other place to work."

When a group of 20 workers declared to the company they were organizing a union
in the fall of 2001, they were soon fired, prompting the first of several
interventions from abroad. In time, they were rehired, only to be assigned to
collecting trash. More pressure ensued, workers said, after supervisors told
them that the union was a bunch of "terrorists" who would lead them to economic
ruin.

The stateside groups began to lobby the brands that had contracts with the
factory. United Students Against Sweatshops, a group that at one point sent
thousands of letters to the factory, also sent a student volunteer for most of
last year to help the union organize. University officials, brand executives and
officials from a consortium of campuses, unions and students visited with the
union and factory managers.

"We were trying to convince the factory managers through ongoing pressure from
Nike and Reebok that it was not in their interest to allow this to continue,"
said Scott Nova, the executive director of the Worker Rights Consortium.
"Gradually, the factory came to recognize that, and we eventually persuaded them
to produce a public letter signed by managers pledging neutrality, no
intimidation and that the workers had the right to make their own choice."

Yet even after the union eked out a majority late last year, the factory began
layoffs that labor leaders said singled out union members. Factory managers said
the dismissals, which were based on productivity, involved mostly workers who
had not supported the union.

Rehiring those workers -- about 10 of whom remain unemployed -- became one of
the first points of the contract talks, which began earlier this year.

Alberto Yang, the factory administrator, said that while the company had always
met or exceeded local labor laws, it agreed to the union's demands. He said that
the contract only codified practices that the company had followed, although
labor leaders said the company had been inconsistent at best in the past.

"Our company is not hidden, it is famous and all the international brands work
with us," he said. "With global companies, you have to accept global standards,
not just local ones."

The campus groups said that the large American brands had to be pushed several
times to be more aggressive in responding to concerns over the treatment of
workers.

Today executives with the American brands said that they were pleased with the
outcome, saying the process allowed both the union and the factory to learn how
to negotiate.

"This is an excellent example of the limits of individual parties acting alone
and the strength of many parties acting synergistically," said Doug Cahn, vice
president for human rights programs at Reebok International Ltd. "There are few
other examples like this where difficult issues were resolved."

Within that process, the universities and students were able to bring to the
table a certain influence usually absent during such negotiations: the
reputation of the school whose name is on the cap or the student who is eagerly
courted by the athletic wear companies.

"We are the target market of a lot of these brands and they want a positive
image on campus because they want consumers for life," said Molly McGrath,
development director at United Students Against Sweatshops. "We also have the
moral and ethical argument being on the side of a university, so we can pressure
the university to use their leverage in society to change the policies of the
brands."

She would like to see the brands act a little faster in the future, she said, to
avoid the kinds of repeated firings that marred the BJ&B negotiations. Union
leaders said the average wage now for workers was about $31 a week.

That a pact was reached at all was perhaps the most surprising and gratifying
turn of events for Rut Tufts, who manages the licensing program for the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, which nets some $4 million
annually. He had gone to Villa Altagracia to visit with workers last year.

"I have been in their houses and see how they are trying to hold things
together, and this collective bargaining agreement has got to make a difference
in their lives," he said. "I hope it's what they need or a step to what they
need."

So does Patricia Graterox, a factory worker and single mother who looks forward
to the 10 percent raise. She hopes to be able to study nursing with help from
the factory's scholarship fund.

"Before, you could not do that," she said. "Now you can. At least, I think I
can."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fredy de los Santos, a labor leader, speaking on Wednesday at an
assembly of workers in Villa Altagracia. (Andres Leighton/Associated Press, for
The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LABOR UNIONS (91%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (91%); GARMENT WORKERS
(90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (89%); STUDENTS
& STUDENT LIFE (89%); JOB CREATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); HAT CAP &
MILLINERY MFG (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); NEW MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%);
EMPLOYMENT (78%); LABOR DISPUTES & NEGOTIATIONS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES
(76%); GLOBALIZATION (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(74%); PAPER MILLS (73%); TAX INCENTIVES (72%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (72%);
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (68%); SUGAR MFG (65%) APPAREL;
LABOR;  ORGANIZED LABOR;  SWEATSHOPS;  LABOR;  MASCOTS;  NAMES, ORGANIZATIONAL;
LOBBYING AND LOBBYISTS;  FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANTS;  SUSPENSIONS,
DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  VOLUNTEERS;  COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

COMPANY: NIKE INC (85%)

ORGANIZATION: NIKE INC; REEBOK INTERNATIONAL LTD; UNITED STUDENTS AGAINST
SWEATSHOPS

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (85%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS'
& INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT
& SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (85%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (85%);
SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (85%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (85%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (85%)

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (93%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%);
CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: VILLA ALTAGRACIA (DOMINICAN REPUBLIC);  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             965 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Racial Quotas in Brazil Touch Off Fierce Debate

BYLINE:  By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, April 4


The Brazilian government, responding to demands to improve the lot of the black
population, has begun imposing racial quotas for government jobs, contracts and
university admissions. But that has unleashed an acrimonious debate in a country
that traditionally prides itself on being a harmonious "racial democracy."

The initial battleground is a pair of public universities here, which have just
accepted a freshman class that is 40 percent black. As in the United States,
though, white students who were not admitted despite scoring higher on entrance
examinations have challenged that action in courts. They contend that they are
being denied the "equality of access to schooling" guaranteed by Brazil's 1988
Constitution.

Civil rights advocates in this nation of 175 million, which has the largest
black population of any nation outside of Africa, predict that the debate is
likely to intensify even further as a result of a sweeping Racial Equality
Statute now before Congress. That bill, supported by the left-wing government
that took power here on Jan. 1, would make racial quotas obligatory at all
levels of government and require them even in casting television programs and
commercials.

"This policy is absolutely correct in terms of philosophy and ethics," Justice
Minister Marcio Thomaz Bastos said at a news conference with foreign reporters
here this week. "I have no doubt of it. After all, this country has an enormous
debt because of the iniquity that was slavery in Brazil."

As a byproduct of the debate, Brazilians are also being forced to define who is
black, a process they find puzzling and alien. More than 300 terms are used to
designate skin color -- from the dark-skinned crioulo to the light-skinned
brancarao -- and racially mixed relationships are the norm rather than the
exception. As a result, racial categories have never been defined as they were
in more segregated countries.

College admission in Brazil is highly competitive, with many more applicants
than places available, especially for prestigious public universities, and
entrance examination scores count for everything. Of the 1.4 million students
admitted to universities in Brazil each year, only 3 percent identify themselves
as black, and only 18 percent come from the public schools, where most black
Brazilians study.

Because of the university admissions dispute here, the Supreme Court has been
asked to rule on the constitutionality of racial quotas, and has indicated that
it will do so quite soon. Since the chief justice himself imposed a hiring quota
for court employees last year, civil rights advocates are expecting a favorable
decision, which they say could have an impact here comparable to that of Brown
v. Board of Education in the United States.

"This is a historic moment, and the court has a historic opportunity to undo the
terrible injustice that was committed in 1888," when slavery was legally
abolished but no government support was provided to newly freed blacks, said
Zulu Araujo, a director of the Palmares Foundation, a government agency that
addresses the interests of black Brazilians. "I have no doubt that the justices
will vote in favor of quotas and establish the new paradigm of racial equality
that this country needs."

But critics of the measures say the government is merely making a difficult
problem worse by turning to what they consider to be a solution imported from
the United States, a country in which racial definitions and relations are very
different.

"Do they want racial war in Brazil?" said a recent article in the daily O Estado
de Sao Paulo, which also complained in an editorial that the government was
"officializing racial discrimination."

Some opponents of racial quotas also argue that racism is not a feature of
Brazilian society and that conditions for blacks will improve as poverty is
gradually eliminated. But civil rights advocates point to statistics showing
that white Brazilians earn more, live longer, receive more education and are
less likely to be arrested than black citizens.

"This is not merely a social problem," said Jose Vicente, a lawyer and
sociologist in Sao Paulo who is president of Afrobras, a black advocacy group.
"We have to recognize that this is a racist society and that people with dark
skin have been systematically excluded from space in that society for more than
400 years."

Under the new system for college admissions adopted here, all applicants
declaring themselves to be of "African descent" on admission forms are
considered to be black and given preferential treatment. But that has led to
complaints of abuses, in which students who do not have dark skin or features
considered African -- including some of Asian or Jewish descent -- have
designated themselves as black to improve their chances of being admitted.

No one can agree, however, on a better system. In a televised campaign debate
last year, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, now the country's president, was widely
criticized when he maintained that "scientific criteria" could be used to
determine who is black.

"A black person," Mr. Bastos said this week, "is someone who feels black and
lives as a black. I don't believe there is any objective, scientific criteria."

Since assuming office three months ago, Mr. da Silva has taken a number of
steps, both practical and symbolic, to stress his commitment to racial equality.
His cabinet includes four black members, among them the minister of a newly
created Secretariat for the Promotion of Racial Equality, and he has made clear
his intention to name the first black justice to the Supreme Court.

Among advocates of quotas, the government's sympathy to their position is
stimulating a parallel debate over what percentage should be set aside for
blacks. According to census figures, about 45 percent of Brazil's 175 million
people consider themselves to be black or "pardo," a broad and deliberately
vague designation that can be applied both to those who are of mixed race and
people of Indian descent.

But many of those pushing hardest for quotas argue that the ceiling should be
set, at least for the moment, at 20 percent. "Anything more than that is doomed
to failure and would lead to a social convulsion," said Mr. Vicente, the leader
of the black advocacy group.

Others contend that quotas should vary from state to state and be based on the
percentage of the population that is black or brown. More than 80 percent of
people in the northeastern state of Bahia fall into that category, while fewer
than 10 percent of the population in states in the far south bordering Argentina
describe themselves as Afro-Brazilians.

"This whole debate about quotas and who is black is just a diversion that masks
more serious issues that we haven't addressed yet," Mr. Araujo said, somewhat
impatiently. "Any doorman knows who is black and should be sent to the service
entrance, just as any cop knows who is black and should be stopped on the street
and ordered to produce identification."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Students in Rio de Janeiro, where two public universities have
accepted a freshman class that is 40 percent black. White students who were not
admitted despite higher scores have challenged the action in the courts. (John
Maier/Image Works, for The New York Times) Chart: "Earning Power in BrazilPER
CAPITA INCOME BRAZIL'S POPULATIONOTHER/UNDECLARED: 2%BLACK: 6%WHITE: 54%MIXED:
38% WHAT THEY EARN: Less than half of minimum wageLESS THAN $36.92 WHITE:
13%BLACK: 26%MIXED: 30% WHAT THEY EARN: Half to one times minimum $36wage.92 TO
$73.84 WHITE: 20%BLACK: 29%MIXED: 28% WHAT THEY EARN: One to three times minimum
$73wage.84 TO $221.52 WHITE: 37%BLACK: 31%MIXED: 28% WHAT THEY EARN: Three to
five times minimum $221wage.52 TO $369.20 WHITE: 11%BLACK: 4%MIXED: 4% WHAT THEY
EARN: More than five times minimum wageMORE THAN $369.20 WHITE: 14%BLACK:
3%MIXED: 3% (Source: 2000 Census/IBGE Brazilian Institute for Geography and
Statistics )

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACE & RACISM (93%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); ACADEMIC ADMISSIONS
(90%); CIVIL SERVICES (90%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%);
STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SCHOOL
DESEGREGATION (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); SCHOOL ENTRANCE
EXAMS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); ACADEMIC TESTING (76%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (75%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (75%); SUPREME COURTS (75%); ETHICS (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); PHILOSOPHY (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (65%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (65%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (52%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (90%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             968 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: LEGAL ISSUES;
1996 Statute Becomes the Justice Department's Antiterror Weapon of Choice

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


The Justice Department, buoyed by a series of court victories, appears to be
gaining traction in prosecuting Americans linked to terrorism by using a
once-obscure law that predates the Sept. 11 attacks.

Federal prosecutors in recent weeks have secured their first convictions under
the 1996 law, which makes it a crime to offer "material support" to any group
designated by the United States as a terrorist organization. The statute has
become so useful that the Justice Department is exploring ways to cast an even
wider legal net, despite objections from civil rights groups.

In several dozen cases both high profile and little noticed, the law has become
the Justice Department's main weapon in pursuing people it contends are linked
to terrorists. Part of the appeal for prosecutors is that they do not have to
prove that the defendants actually supported terrorist attacks, only that they
helped a group tied to terrorism.

Civil libertarians and defense lawyers, however, are increasing their criticism
of the law and the department's aggressive use of it, saying the prosecutions
smack of a McCarthylike notion of guilt by association. Critics say the law is
so overly broad that people with no intention of helping terrorists are being
prosecuted. Moreover, they accuse authorities of using strong-arm tactics to
force pleas.

But prosecutors have used the law to score convictions in two closely watched
cases that officials said offered an important validation of the legal strategy
they developed after the Sept. 11 attacks.

In Lackawanna, N.Y., two Yemeni-Americans who were part of what authorities said
was a terrorist "sleeper cell" pleaded guilty two weeks ago to material support
charges and admitted that they had spent time at a training camp run by Al Qaeda
in Afghanistan months before the Sept. 11 attacks. Each man now faces up to 10
years in prison.

In Charlotte, N.C., a local man was sentenced on Feb. 28 to 155 years in prison
after a jury found him guilty under the same statute of running a
cigarette-smuggling ring that laundered money to Hezbollah, the Lebanese
terrorist group.

"The fact that we've now gotten these convictions certainly underscores the
feeling that it was appropriate for us to bring these charges in the first
place," Barry Sabin, the Justice Department's chief counterterrorism prosecutor,
said in an interview this week. "When you have defendants admitting to their
criminal culpability, that confirms that this was a just and proper way for us
to proceed."

The convictions followed several apparent stumbles by the Justice Department in
trying to establish terrorist connections in court.

Most notably, legal observers said, John Walker Lindh, the so-called American
Taliban, and Enaam M. Arnaout, a Muslim fund-raiser in Chicago, were charged
with supporting Al Qaeda in separate cases under the 1996 statute. Both were
ultimately allowed to plead guilty to lesser charges including no claims that
they directly supported terrorists. Some defense lawyers said the pleas revealed
weaknesses in the Justice Department's efforts to use the material support law
as a heavy hammer against a range of activities.

How broadly prosecutors are permitted to define "material support" may
ultimately have to be resolved by the Supreme Court, lawyers say. But meanwhile,
prosecutors say the recent results in Lackawanna and North Carolina have
bolstered their confidence about using the strategy in future cases, and they
are looking at legislative proposals that would refine the law and give them
still greater legal flexibility.

To be sure, other legal tactics employed by the Bush administration have
attracted more criticism, including the indefinite incarceration of two men
designated as enemy combatants by the military and the detention of several
dozen material witnesses. But Justice Department officials acknowledge that
prosecutors have generally relied on the 1996 law for their most serious cases.

Among 15 to 20 prosecutions brought publicly under the statute and others
brought under seal, two of the most visible came in the last six weeks. The
Justice Department charged that a Florida professor provided logistical and
financial support to Palestinian suicide bombers and that a Yemeni cleric, using
a Brooklyn mosque, funneled money to Al Qaeda.

In another high-profile case, prosecutors are using the statute to accuse a
prominent New York defense lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, of helping an imprisoned
sheik pass messages to terrorist followers in Egypt. Ms. Stewart's lawyers
maintain that the Justice Department is suppressing the "pure speech" protected
by the First Amendment.

In seeking to broaden its use of the ban, the Justice Department is also working
on internal changes to increase cooperation between lawyers in Washington and
prosecutors in the field, and to facilitate the use of intelligence information
in court.

Mr. Sabin pointed to two cases brought last November in which he said the
department's expanded counterterrorism training and cooperation helped lead to
prosecutions.

In San Diego, prosecutors charged that three men schemed to trade drugs for
Stinger missiles, which they then planned to sell to Al Qaeda. In Houston,
authorities said that four men linked to a Colombian paramilitary group plotted
to trade cocaine for thousands of assault weapons, grenades and munitions. Mr.
Sabin said that if not for the department's more aggressive approach, those
cases might have been prosecuted as simple drug crimes.

Attorney General John Ashcroft "wants us to think outside the box but inside the
parameters of the Constitution," Mr. Sabin said.

But Mr. Ashcroft's detractors insist that prosecutors have already crossed the
line.

The 1996 ban on material support to terrorists includes specific exemptions only
for medical and religious materials. Civil libertarians say it is so broadly
worded that prosecutors could abuse it by labeling a range of benign activities
material support.

In a pending case, a judge on the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled
that parts of the law were so vague as to be unconstitutional.

David Cole, a Georgetown law professor who represents a group challenging the
law, argued in a brief in the appeal that the law made it a crime for a Quaker
to send a book by Gandhi to a terrorist to persuade him to forgo violence, or
for a person to write an op-ed article advocating on behalf of a "banned" group.

"This smacks of the cold war era and Communist lists," Mr. Cole said in an
interview. "And there's been an extremely broad chilling effect."

In Lackawanna, Patrick Brown, a lawyer for one of the men who pleaded guilty,
said he, too, had doubts about the law's application.

His client, Shafal Mosed, admitted to staying at a Qaeda camp in Afghanistan for
several months in 2001, receiving weapons training, serving as a guard and
listening to Osama bin Laden discuss suicide missions.

Prosecutors offered no evidence that Mr. Mosed was involved in terrorist
plotting after returning home. "He knows he shouldn't have gone to the camp,"
Mr. Brown said in an interview. "But after he got there, he realized these guys
are for real and he got the hell out of there."

Mr. Brown said his client had decided to plead guilty after prosecutors
suggested that Mr. Mosed could be declared an enemy combatant and be held
indefinitely without a lawyer, or be charged with treason and face execution.

Prosecutors denied exerting undue pressure. But, Mr. Brown said, "It's difficult
to test the law if you have to run the gantlet with these other potential
charges."

Lee A. Albert, a law professor at the University of Buffalo who has followed the
case, said that the use of the material support ban against the Lackawanna
defendants was "a reach," and that prosecutors might have been worried that
their case would not hold up at trial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (94%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); GUILTY PLEAS (89%); PRISONS (86%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); PLEA
AGREEMENTS (77%); ARAB AMERICANS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); SMUGGLING (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); MONEY LAUNDERING (73%); FUNDRAISING (71%);
INTERVIEWS (64%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (63%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: LICHTBLAU, ERIC

CITY: CHARLOTTE, NC, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             970 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgium Eases Law on Trial of Foreigners

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 6


Modifications to a law that allowed Belgium's courts wide freedom to try
foreigners for war crimes and crimes against humanity will permit the government
to dismiss complaints against foreign leaders, including one against Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel and one filed last month against the first
President Bush.

On Saturday, the upper house approved "filters" that will allow the judiciary to
reject complaints in which there are no victims of Belgian nationality or in
which the plaintiffs have lived in Belgium for less than three years. The
government will also be able to reject cases in which the accused person comes
from a democratic country, where the issue presumably could be brought in its
own courts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); DESERT STORM (88%);
LEGISLATION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  LAW
AND LEGISLATION;  PALESTINIANS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PERSIAN GULF WAR

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN); BUSH, GEORGE (FORMER
PRES)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); BELGIUM (92%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); IRAQ (79%); GULF STATES (59%)

REGION: BELGIUM;  ISRAEL;  IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             972 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1270 words


INTERNATIONAL   A2-10

War News Summary   B2

The Human Cost of Progress In China's Capitalist Culture
Workplace casualties in China have become endemic. Nationally, 140,000 people
died in work-related accidents last year -- up from about 109,000 in 2000,
according to the State Administration of Work Safety. Safety officials call this
alarming, but the steps the government has taken to address the issue have done
little to solve fundamental problems.   A3


966 Killed in Congo Attacks
At least 966 people were killed in attacks on more than a dozen villages in
northeastern Congo last week, United Nations officials said after a preliminary
investigation. It is not clear who carried out the attacks.   A6

Palestinian's Trial Begins
Israel's trial of Marwan Barghouti, the most prominent Palestinian politician in
its custody, began with the defendant refusing to address the murder charges
against him and Palestinian witnesses refusing to testify. Mr. Barghouti says he
is a politician being tried illegally.   A4

Bosnian Fugitive Arrested
The Croatian police have arrested a Bosnian Croat long sought by the United
Nations war crimes tribunal who is suspected of carrying out atrocities against
Muslim civilians during the Bosnian war, a police official said. The suspect,
Ivica Rajic, was arrested Saturday in the Croatian capital, Zagreb, the police
said.   A2

Ulster Welcomes Bush Visit
The visit of President Bush to Northern Ireland today comes at the most critical
moment for the province's peace plan, which was signed five years ago this week,
and is expected to give added impetus to the new push for a resolution in
Northern Ireland.   A2

France Tackles Dirty Ships
France, alarmed by a series of oil tanker disasters, has created a new maritime
ecological zone in the Mediterranean reaching up to 90 miles from its coast, to
clamp down on pollution from shipping. France is the first country in the area
to adopt such a measure.   A8

Belgium Eases War Crimes Law
Belgium has narrowed the scope of a contentious law that allowed its courts
almost unlimited freedom to try foreigners for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Amendments will require future complaints to have more connections
with Belgium.   A8

Comeback for a Russian Airline
Aeroflot, like Russia itself, is staking a claim after a decade of malaise as a
global force to be recognized, if not reckoned with. Its 110-plane fleet will be
updated inside and out, from a new coat of paint to new meal trays.   A6

NATIONAL   A12-17

Librarians Shred Papers In Opposition to F.B.I.
Librarians in Santa Cruz, Calif., are demonstrating their opposition to the
Patriot Act by shredding discarded paperwork daily rather than weekly. The law,
passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, allows the F.B.I. to review certain
business records of people under suspicion, which has been interpreted to
include the borrowing or purchase of books and the use of the Internet at
libraries, bookstores and cafes.   A12

Prison Rates Peak
An estimated 12 percent of African-American men ages 20 to 34 are in jail or
prison, the Justice Department reported. The proportion of young black men who
are incarcerated has been rising in recent years. By comparison, 1.6 percent of
white men in the same age group are incarcerated.   A12

Insider Becomes an Outsider
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has sued the gun
industry, contending that handgun violence disproportionately harms poor, urban
blacks and that gun companies have contributed to this by the way they
distribute their products. A former leader of the American Shooting Sports
Council, now the first major gun industry whistle-blower, will testify.   A17

Price Tag of War
It is too early to know how expensive the war in Iraq will be, but when members
of the House and Senate finished their initial votes on legislation to pay for
the war, the bill had risen to nearly $80 billion.   A17

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Tracing an Ailment
Scientists say a Chinese businessman appears to have had the earliest known case
of SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome, which has since become an
international epidemic. More than 2,400 people in 20 countries are reported to
have the disease, and 89 have died.   A1

Vitamin D Recommended
The American Academy of Pediatrics says infants who are breast-fed exclusively
should receive vitamin D supplements to prevent rickets, a bone-weakening
disease that doctors say may be increasing.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   F1-6

Fiscal Troubles Increasing At Mount Sinai Hospital
Mount Sinai Medical Center, one of a handful of elite teaching hospitals in New
York City, continues to spiral ever deeper into debt. Despite one executive
shakeup, hundreds of layoffs and an array of program cuts, Mount Sinai's budget
deficit had actually grown to $72 million last year from $14 million in 2001.
F1

Catskills Casino Plans Proceed
Robert A. Berman's dream of building a $500 million casino at the Monticello
Raceway seemed to die three years ago when he lost his American Indian partners,
but he recently signed an agreement to build a casino there in partnership with
the Cayuga Nation, a tribe that has traditionally opposed gambling.   F1

City's Partisan Elections
Mayor Bloomberg, who has pushed to eliminate partisan elections in New York
City, announced the members of a commission he hopes will recommend that change.
F3

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-8

UConn vs. Tennessee in Final
The Huskies beat the Texas Longhorns, 71-69, to advance to the N.C.A.A. women's
basketball finals; the Lady Vols advanced after beating the Duke Blue Devils,
66-56.   D1

ARTS   E1-8

Hemingway Letters Donated
Thirty letters that Ernest Hemingway wrote to Marlene Dietrich have been donated
to the John F. Kennedy Library and Museum in Boston. The letters, never made
public, will remain sealed for four years, according to the wishes of her heirs.
E1

Auction for Beethoven's Ninth
Sotheby's London is set to auction on May 22 the nearly complete original score
to "Ode to Joy."   E1

OBITUARIES   F7

Dr. Frederic Lawrence Holmes
An authority on the history of medicine and science who wrote detailed accounts
of the processes behind landmark discoveries, he was 70.   F7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

War Shows Murdoch's Reach
The war has illuminated anew the exceptional power in the hands of Rupert
Murdoch, 72, the chairman of the News Corporation. He was already well known for
his unusual willingness to personally shape the editorial policies of his
newspapers, but in the last few years, he has become even more influential.   C1


Cablevision Abandons Bid
Cablevision Systems has abandoned its plan to bid for Hughes Electronics and its
DirecTV satellite television operation, people close to the company said,
leaving Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation as the sole suitor for Hughes.   C2

Complications in Vivendi Sale
Few of the media moguls and their bankers who are sizing up the American
entertainment holdings of Vivendi Universal are interested in the whole bundle.
The prospective buyers are discovering potential tax liabilities that could
complicate a deal.   C1

No Ads on Masters
The debate over the Augusta National Golf Club's men-only membership policy is
forcing the network to do without advertisers.   C1

Wireless Computing Gains
As wireless telephony and computing combine, the center of gravity in digital
technology is clearly shifting.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: A global catalog of wrongs; no hush for the masters; an ominous
attack on judges; Brent Staples on New York gardeners.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E6
TV Listings   E6-7
Crossword   E4
Weather   F8
Metro Diary   F2

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (91%); ARRESTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%);
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY AGENCIES (78%); WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS (78%);
WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (77%); POLICE FORCES (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%);
ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); WITNESSES
(74%); TESTIMONY (74%); CRIMINAL LAW (73%); TERRORISM (72%); OIL & GAS ACCIDENTS
(72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(69%); MARINE TANKERS (68%); OIL & GAS MARINE TANKERS (68%); LEGISLATION (61%);
US PATRIOT ACT (61%); MURDER (56%); PEACE PROCESS (52%); OIL SPILLS (50%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: AEROFLOT RUSSIAN AIRLINES OAO (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

TICKER: AFLT (RTS) (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (52%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (52%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); ZAGREB, CROATIA (75%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); CROATIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); FRANCE (86%); BELGIUM (85%);
UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); MEDITERRANEAN (76%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             976 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 9, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bombing Baghdad: The Target Is Hussein

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 95 words


To the Editor:

Instead of capturing Saddam Hussein in order to put him before a court, we drop
8,000 pounds of explosives in an attempt to kill him and his family ("U.S.
Blasts Compound in Effort to Kill Hussein," front page, April 8).

Perhaps we have succeeded. If so, I wonder if execution before trial is part of
the model of democracy that we wish to show to our new surrogate state. I hope
that after our war passions have cooled we can reflect on the values we are
demonstrating to the world and to our own families.

STEVEN ZIMMERMAN
Sunnyside, Queens, April 8, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); FAMILY (87%); GENOCIDE (84%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%) ZIMMERMAN, STEVEN; HUSSEIN, SADDAM

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             987 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 11, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Social Equality, But Only When Bosses See Fit

BYLINE:  By SELENA ROBERTS

SECTION: Section S; Column 3; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, April 10


There is Velveeta, and then there is Imitation Big Cheese in the form of each
corporate chief who wears a social conscience in the office but a Green Jacket
for private gatherings.

There is freedom of speech, and then there is the law under Sheriff Ronnie
Strength, who will restrict protesters in pumps to a grassy pit out of earshot
from the gates of Augusta National Golf Club on Saturday.

There is the right to privacy, and then there are the extra sanitation crews and
patrol officers the city will require to maintain an odorless Masters event as
the all-male, all-the-time club rakes in public dollars.

There is an aversion to racism by club members, and then there is sex
discrimination that is as acceptable as ogling at a strip joint.

In Hootie's secret society of the biased, equality is based on location,
location, location. In Janice Mathis's life -- "48 years old and a black woman
all that time," she jokes -- there is no place for one "ism" over another "ism."

"I can't tell the difference when I'm being discriminated against because I'm
black or because I'm female," said Mathis, the vice president of the
Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, who stood by Martha Burk yesterday at a news conference
near the entrance of the Martin Luther King Jr. Center. "They both feel the
same."

Sexism is not treated the same, though. The folks wearing the pro-Hootie buttons
as they walk by the club on Augusta's Washington Road see the acceptance of a
woman as a club member as symbolically trivial. Let boys be boys, you'll hear.
Yet, symbolism is important, not for what it says about Hootie, Augusta National
or golf, but for what it reveals about us.

"I try to remind people that there was a time when it was normal to think women
couldn't vote or hold political office, and to believe they couldn't run a
marathon," said Peter Roby, director of Northeastern University's Center for the
Study of Sport in Society. "We look back at all those things and ask, how did we
ever get to that point? It wasn't until people said, 'This is nonsense because
it's not fair and it's not right,' that things changed. The incremental changes
were symbolic, but very important. Now, even though people will say, 'Augusta
National is not hurting anybody,' it sends a powerful message that exclusion is
still O.K. in some circles."

At Augusta National, those in the inner circle of the circle don't see it as
sexism. They are able to separate discrimination from sacred tradition. Stubborn
as grass stains, almost 60 gray-haired men in Green Jackets stood in support of
Chairman Hootie as he stated, "I do have a reputation for fighting against
discrimination," before he reduced women to the size of a thimble on Wednesday.

Pointing to all the single-gender clubs the ladies can enjoy, he proudly
included "sewing circles." (Hootie, while you're driving that Edsel, can you
drop us at our quilting bee?)

The out-of-touch nature of Augusta National members could be dismissed as cute
or quirky if the Green Jackets were a bunch of cuddly retirees of little
influence. Not that anyone is allowed to view it, but the club photo is
dominated by alpha males at the top of their industries.

But has anyone seen the American Express chief, Kenneth I. Chenault, this week?
How about Bill Gates or Peter Coors?

How quickly the mighty cower. If they were within the sound of Martha Burk's
voice, they were hearing themselves called out as hypocrites today and called
upon to resign.

In front of a microphone, braced against a cold chill in the air, she chided
every Augusta National member, from Louis V. Gerstner Jr., I.B.M.'s retired
chairman, to William Clay Ford Sr., for their inability to reconcile their
rhetoric of inclusion against their choice to exclude.

This is one of many contradictions Burk has encountered, from Augusta National's
claims of privacy despite the $20 million the Masters event draws from the
public to the mayor's embrace of the protesters' rights just before casting the
deciding vote to push their site into a remote field. There are a lot of
Imitation Big Cheeses out there.

"Most have been relatively silent," Martin Luther King III said today at Burk's
news conference. "I say to them, and to the golfers, what my father said to the
supporters of Jim Crow: 'The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in
times of comfort and convenience, but in times of challenge and controversy.' At
this time, I ask them, how will you be measured?"

How can anyone measure those in hiding?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A lot half a mile from Augusta National will be the site of a
protest tomorrow against Augusta's men-only policy. Yesterday, a protest of the
protest. Page S3. (Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times)(pg. S1); Martha Burk
talking to reporters after a news conference in Atlanta in which she criticized
C.E.O.'s who are Augusta National members. (Doug Mills/The New York Times)(pg.
S3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); GOLF (77%); MEN (76%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%); RACE & RACISM (74%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (71%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%); MARATHONS (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

CITY: AUGUSTA, GA, USA (90%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (88%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             991 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Netherlands: Bosnian Muslim To U.N. Tribunal

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 118 words


NATO-led forces arrested Naser Oric, a Bosnian Muslim wartime commander, and
flew him to The Hague to face charges of war crimes against Bosnian Serbs. Mr.
Oric was captured in the Bosnian city of Tuzla.

In the war, he commanded Muslim forces in Srebrenica, a mostly Muslim town,
which in 1995 was the scene of the worst massacre of civilian Muslims in the
war. An estimated 8,000 men and boys were killed. Mr. Oric and his Muslim forces
pillaged 15 villages predominantly inhabited by Serbs, according to his
indictment. Serbs say 2,000 people died in one massacre, in Kravice in 1993. The
main Serb perpetrator of the massacre of the Muslims, Gen. Ratko Mladic, remains
at large.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (NATO)

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; ORIC, NASER

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  TUZLA (BOSNIA);  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);  SERBIA
AND MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             994 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Augusta Golf Protest

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 170 words


To the Editor:

Re "Social Equality, but Only When Bosses See Fit" (Sports of The Times, April
11):

Opponents of gender equity at Augusta National Golf Club may say only a few
wealthy women will benefit if the club admits women.

While the immediate beneficiaries may be high-profile female executives and
media figures, the collateral benefit will be structural and universal.

No club, public or private, may discriminate against a majority of the
population without sending the message that women are not entitled to
participate fully in American life.

If public support is required to produce the famed Masters Tournament, so is
public accountability.

To the extent that the ordinance restricting protesters' access at the
tournament on Saturday represents a legitimate exercise of the state's police
power, we plan to comply with it.

To the extent that it represents interference with exercise of the First
Amendment, we will resist it.

JANICE L. MATHIS
Atlanta Bureau Chief
Rainbow-PUSH Coalition
Atlanta, April 11, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GOLF (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%);
SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); GOLF
TOURNAMENTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (88%); WOMEN
(88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WOMEN WORKERS (73%);
WEALTHY PEOPLE (57%) GOLF;  WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION;  MASTERS GOLF TOURNAMENT

ORGANIZATION: AUGUSTA NATIONAL GOLF CLUB; RAINBOW-PUSH COALITION

PERSON: MATHIS, JANICE L

CITY: AUGUSTA, GA, USA (92%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (90%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1000 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION AT WAR: DOMESTIC SECURITY;
Advocates' Groups to Fight Local Pursuit of Immigrants

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 13


A coalition of immigration advocacy groups is challenging the Justice
Department's decision to allow state and local police departments to pursue
illegal immigrants as part of the war on terror.

Taking on a job traditionally done by federal agents, a small number of police
departments has begun arresting people accused of civil violations of
immigration law, like overstaying visas, since the Justice Department announced
its new interpretation of existing laws last year, officials say.

Officials say the change was necessary to provide assistance to federal
immigration officers and to remove criminals and potential terrorists from the
streets. But the Justice Department has refused to release the documents on
which it based its decision to advocacy groups, who say the decision violates
the law and undermines confidence in local law enforcement.

Police chiefs in states including Texas, California, Florida and Colorado have
warned that allowing local officials to make immigration arrests would
jeopardize relations with immigrants, who might be less willing to report
crimes. On Monday, a coalition of immigrant groups plans to file a lawsuit in
federal court in New York to force the Justice Department to turn over its
records.

"There are serious legal questions about this," said Cecilia Munoz, a vice
president of the National Council of La Raza, one of seven advocacy groups suing
the government. "But it is difficult to raise those concerns in a meaningful way
if you can't hold up the policy and describe what it is."

Jorge Martinez, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said he did not know the
details of the advocacy groups' efforts to obtain the records. Mr. Martinez said
the new policy was intended to protect public safety and emphasized that local
police chiefs who disagreed with the Justice Department were not obliged to
participate.

"We're concentrating on arresting aliens who have violated criminal provisions
of the Immigration and Naturalization Act or civil provisions that render an
alien deportable," he said. "That's the narrow scope."

The Justice Department's decision to revisit the issue caused an outcry last
year when it first became public.

In 1996, the Justice Department's legal counsel decided that local police
officers were precluded from tracking and arresting illegal immigrants. Such
matters were to be handled by federal immigration officials. That decision was
reiterated in a memorandum in November 2001.

White House officials expressed concern last year when the Justice Department
started to revive the issue. But by June, the Justice Department came up with a
policy that appeared to be acceptable to the Bush administration.

In a letter to the National Immigration Forum last month, Attorney General John
Ashcroft said his legal counsel had determined that immigrants who were
deportable under immigration law and posed threats to national security could be
arrested by local law enforcement.

Mr. Ashcroft said the names of such immigrants were being entered into the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's database.

Timothy Danahey, president of the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association,
praised Mr. Ashcroft's decision.

"Immigration law enforcement has been overlooked, and the approximately 2,000
I.N.S. special agents assigned to interior enforcement matters is not adequate,"
he said last week in a Congressional hearing.

But many advocates for immigrants wonder why the government has refused to
release documents describing the policy.

"There is no justification for secret lawmaking," said Lucas Guttentag, a senior
lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union, which is filing the lawsuit on
behalf of the advocacy groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (96%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); POLICE FORCES (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); WAR ON
TERROR (89%); LAWYERS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
DEPORTATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%);
NATURALIZATION (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%)
TERRORISM;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;
LAW AND LEGISLATION;  STATES (US);  POLICE;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(59%); NATIONAL COUNCIL OF LA RAZA (55%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA,
USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1009 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 183 words


To the Editor:

Re "Flawed Khmer Rouge Trial Better Than None" (Letter From Asia, April 16):

I agree that the United Nations should go ahead with the revised formula that
Cambodia offered last month for trying the top leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

Time is running out. The former Khmer Rouge leaders are getting very old.

Twenty-eight years ago this month, the Khmer Rouge took over Cambodia. By the
time the invading Vietnamese soldiers drove the Khmer Rouge back into the
jungle, less than four years later, 1.7 million Cambodians had perished at the
hands of the regime.

Along with millions of other Cambodians, I lost my father, my grandfather, a
brother and a sister. I still wake up at night crying because I miss my father.
I still cry at the sight of starving children in the news because they reminded
me of my brother and sister, who were starved to death.

In a few years, all the former Khmer Rouge leaders will have died. I want to see
justice. We missed the chance with Pol Pot. Please don't let the opportunity go
by again. It will be too late.

REASEY POCH
Woodbridge, Va., April 16, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); STARVATION (77%); WAR CRIMES (75%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%) WAR
CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: POCH, REASEY

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (96%); ASIA (92%); VIET NAM (79%); UNITED STATES (50%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Muslims Protest Monthlong Detention Without a Charge

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., April 18


Behind the metal doors of a federal penitentiary near here, Maher Hawash has
been imprisoned for 29 days without charge, linked to a terrorist plot in ways
that the government refuses to describe.

Mr. Hawash, an American citizen, is considered a material witness in a case
against six people accused of conspiring to join the Taliban and Al Qaeda to
fight against United States forces in Afghanistan, said government officials who
spoke on condition of anonymity. Friends of Mr. Hawash, who is known as Mike,
said that he prayed in the same mosque as two of the terrorism suspects, and
that they fear the federal authorities may be preparing to accuse him in
connection with the case.

But so far, Mr. Hawash has not been indicted. The secrecy surrounding his case
has generated outrage and uncertainty in the Muslim community here, raising many
questions about the government's use of detention of material witnesses as a
weapon in the fight against terrorism.

Since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, more than two dozen people --
including several American citizens -- have been detained without charges as
material witnesses in terrorism cases across the country. Government officials,
who will not disclose how many people have been detained, say the detentions are
necessary to deter attacks.

Critics says that officials are unlawfully rounding up suspects and holding them
as witnesses because they lack enough evidence to prosecute.

Friends of Mr. Hawash, a 38-year-old Palestinian-American who worked as a
software designer at Intel for nearly a decade, said they have known him as a
volunteer soccer coach and a devout Muslim.

Some Muslims say that since his arrest on March 20 they have remained silent
rather than speak up at community meetings, fearful of government retaliation.
Other Muslims who want to support Mr. Hawash have refrained from contributing to
his legal defense fund, saying they are fearful that the donations might draw
unwelcome attention.

"People are saying, if this could happen to him, this could happen to any of
us," said Zaha Hassan, a Palestinian-American lawyer who knows Mr. Hawash. She
and other Muslims argue that if the government believes Mr. Hawash has committed
a crime, it should indict him so he can have an open and public hearing.

"Then we could defend him, or accept that he had done something," Ms. Hassan
said. "All we can do now is support him and say the process is wrong and stand
up against this kind of secret detention."

The judge has barred the public from court hearings on the case and prohibited
Mr. Hawash's lawyers from discussing it. Mr. Hawash is to appear at a closed
hearing on April 29.

Mr. Hawash's wife, Lisa, who has visited Mr. Hawash in prison, has been advised
by lawyers not to discuss the case. Friends say the family has had to mortgage
their home to pay legal fees. Mr. Hawash, who worked on contract for Intel after
being laid off in 2001, was the primary breadwinner.

"It's torture," said Shawn Morrison, who is Lisa Hawash's sister. "My sister is
a wreck. The children are afraid. They can't sleep. They have nightmares."

Several friends of Mr. Hawash's said he prayed at the Bilal Mosque in Portland,
the same mosque attended by two of the suspects in the terrorism case. He also
flew through Hong Kong on his way to visit his family in the Middle East, a
route that law enforcement officials said was used by several of the suspects
who tried to get to Afghanistan. Before 9/11, Mr. Hawash donated money to the
Global Relief Foundation, an Islamic charity whose assets were frozen last year
after federal authorities said it had ties to terrorists.

His friends say that these connections are circumstantial. Many people in the
small Muslim community here pray together and make donations to religious
charities, they said.

In the last two weeks, groups of Mr. Hawash's supporters have rallied on the
steps of the federal courthouse. His family has received offers from people out
of state to help with legal fees, relatives said.

Government officials refuse to discuss the material witness cases. The Justice
Department has appealed a federal judge's decision calling for the release of
the names of people detained after 9/11, arguing that the names might help Al
Qaeda understand the government's antiterrorism strategy.

Several people detained as material witnesses have later been charged with
crimes. James Ujaama, who was detained in Denver in July 2002, was later charged
with trying to set up a terrorist camp. He pleaded guilty in Seattle on April 14
to one felony count of conspiring to aid the Taliban.

Osama Awadallah, a Jordanian student who was detained as a material witness
shortly after 9/11, was subsequently charged with perjury after he denied
knowing the name of one of the hijackers. Last year a federal judge dismissed
the indictment, saying the government's use of the material witness statute was
"illegitimate." (The debate over the use of the statute is still boiling in the
courts; another judge has sided with the government on this issue.)

Ali al-Marri, a student from Qatar, was detained as a material witness and later
charged with credit card fraud and perjury. He has entered plea discussions on
the fraud charges and pleaded not guilty to lying.

Legal analysts at the Center for National Security Studies, a civil liberties
group, said they feared that the government was using the material witness
statute as a form of preventive detention to buy time while officials searched
for evidence, a practice that is illegal in the United States. The material
witness statute is normally used to detain witnesses deemed to be flight risks.

"Jailing people who are simply under investigation is a hallmark of an
authoritarian regime," said Kate Martin, who runs the center in Washington.

Justice Department officials say their detention of material witnesses has been
lawful, and critical to the battle against terrorism. "It is difficult for a
person in jail or under detention to murder innocent people or to aid or abet in
terrorism," Attorney General John Ashcroft said.

Ruth Wedgwood, a former prosecutor who is now a law professor at Johns Hopkins
University, points out that each detention has been approved by a judge.
"There's an affirmative human rights duty on the part of the government to
protect people," Ms. Wedgwood said.

The Portland terrorism suspects, several of whom are African-Americans who
converted to Islam, were arrested in October. Five are accused of traveling
overseas after the 9/11 attacks to join the Taliban, and one is charged with
helping the others.

Charles W. Mathews III, the senior agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
in Portland, said he has worked to reassure the Muslim community that agents are
pursuing serious threats. "We're letting them know we don't have a big net out
for Muslims," said Mr. Mathews, who refused to discuss the Hawash case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Supporters of Maher Hawash, known as Mike, held a protest rally
on April 7 outside the federal courthouse in Portland, Ore. They object to his
detention without charge as a material witness in a terrorism case. (Michael
Lloyd/The Oregonian); Maher Hawash with his daughter Sarra in a 1998 photograph.
He has been held for a month; government officials refuse to discuss his case.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); WITNESSES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); LAWYERS (89%); PRISONS (89%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); RELIGION (89%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
EVIDENCE (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); ARRESTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(64%); SOCCER (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: INTEL CORP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

TICKER: INTC (NASDAQ) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (54%)

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (90%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1022 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: AIRLINE SAFETY;
Government's 'No Fly' List Is Challenged In a Lawsuit

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


Civil rights advocates demanded today that the federal government explain how
hundreds of people -- some of them vocal critics of the Bush administration --
have ended up on a list used to stop people suspected of having terrorist links
from boarding commercial air flights.

In a lawsuit filed in San Francisco, the American Civil Liberties Union said
government officials had improperly withheld information about how people wind
up on the "no fly" list, what steps are taken to ensure its accuracy and how
people who are erroneously detained at airports can get their names off the
list.

"Without even basic information about the no-fly list or other watch lists," the
lawsuit said, "the public cannot evaluate the government's decision to use such
lists."

Since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, the F.B.I. and federal transportation
officials have generated secret lists of people suspected of having terrorist
ties who should be stopped and questioned if they try to board an airplane.

Law enforcement officials say the policy is a necessary safeguard to prevent the
type of security lapses that allowed two of the Sept. 11 hijackers to board a
plane even though intelligence officials had reason to suspect they were
terrorists.

But the so-called no-fly lists have generated criticism. Many people have been
mistakenly stopped, while others assert they were on the list in part because of
their strong liberal politics.

In a well-publicized incident last year, some two dozen members of a group
called Peace Action of Wisconsin, including a priest, a nun and high school and
college students, were detained in Milwaukee en route to a "teach-in" and missed
their flight.

In San Francisco, meanwhile, Rebecca Gordon and Janet Adams, two self-described
peace activists who help run a publication called War Times that has been
critical of the administration's terrorism policies, were detained on their way
to Boston. An American Trans Air employee told them their names appeared on a
no-fly list, according to the A.C.L.U. lawsuit, which includes both women as
plaintiffs.

Officials insisted they were not seeking to single out legitimate political
critics. Ms. Adams's name may have been similar to that of another person on the
no-fly list, they said.

Ms. Adams said in an interview that "it strains my credulity" to think that her
longtime role as a political advocate did not play a part in the incident. "It's
bad enough that the government is stopping people in these vast quantities," she
said. "But then to learn that you can't even find out why they did it is just an
additional injury."

In its lawsuit, the civil liberties union said it had documented 339 cases since
the Sept. 11 attacks in which people at San Francisco International Airport were
stopped and questioned because they were thought to be on the no-fly list. While
the group's investigation has focused on San Francisco because of complaints
there, it said the situation there offers a window into what is happening at
airports around the country, based on anecdotal evidence the group has
collected.

"There's every reason to believe this is happening at airports around the
country," said Jayashri Srikantiah, staff lawyer for the A.C.L.U. of Northern
California.

The civil liberties union brought the lawsuit under the Privacy Act and the
Freedom of Information Act after federal officials turned down several months of
requests for information on the passenger lists.

The F.B.I. told the group in a letter last December that it found "no records
pertinent" to the no-fly issue. But A.C.L.U. officials said records from the San
Francisco airport showed that the F.B.I. was contacted about many of the airport
detentions.

Officials at the Transportation Security Administration, named as a defendant in
the suit, did not return calls seeking comment. Officials at the F.B.I., also
named as a defendant, said they could not comment because the lawsuit was
pending.

But a law enforcement official, who would speak only if not named, acknowledged
that there was confusion in the public about how the no-fly lists were created
and executed. The official said the F.B.I. provided intelligence on people
suspected of links to terrorism, which was relayed to the transportation
security agency. Transportation officials then provide airlines and airports
with lists of people to look for at airports.

The security agency "needs to do a better job of explaining what this list is,"
the official said.

The official insisted that politics had nothing to do with who makes the list,
saying that "people that are expressing their constitutional rights of free
expression would not come to the attention of the F.B.I."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); AIRLINES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); HIJACKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AIRPORTS (89%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (79%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); AIR TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
(76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); LIBERALISM (73%); POLITICS (64%); INTERVIEWS
(62%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  TERRORISM;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (56%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MILWAUKEE, WI, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); WISCONSIN, USA (92%);
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1024 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: THE COURTS;
Prosecutors Seek to Limit Questioning in Terror Trial

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


The Justice Department is seeking broad new powers to prosecute terrorist
defendants by urging an appeals court to deny Zacarias Moussaoui the right to
question a captured member of Al Qaeda who features prominently in his
indictment, according to a newly declassified court brief made public today.

In the brief, which was classified as top secret when it was filed last month,
the department said Mr. Moussaoui had no right to seek testimony from the
captured Qaeda member, despite Mr. Moussaoui's claim that the testimony would
prove he is not guilty. Mr. Moussaoui is the only person charged in an American
court with conspiring in the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.

"An alien seized and detained abroad as an enemy combatant in the midst of a war
is beyond the court's power to compel his presence for testimony," the
department said in the brief filed with an appeals court in Richmond, Va.

The department said that if Mr. Moussaoui were given access to the Qaeda member
-- identified by government officials as Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a ringleader of the
cell that carried out the Sept. 11 attacks -- it would become "the favorite
trump card" of terror suspects trying to derail their trials.

"By seeking access to depose high-ranking Al Qaeda leaders captured abroad,
defendants could be guaranteed that they would either hobble interrogation
efforts directed at their comrades overseas or ensure the abandonment of
prosecutions against themselves," the department said.

If the government's argument is adopted by the Richmond court, the United States
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, it would have important implications
for terror suspects and other criminal defendants seeking testimony or other
evidence that is in the control of the government abroad.

Legal specialists said the argument would trouble civil liberties groups, which
have accused the Justice Department of trying to limit the legal protections of
terror suspects in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.

Bush administration officials have acknowledged that Mr. bin al-Shibh, who was
apprehended last year in Pakistan, and other captured Qaeda figures have
suggested in recent interrogations that Mr. Moussaoui was not involved in the
Sept. 11 attacks but was sent to the United States on a different mission.

In its brief to the appeals court, the department cited a 1950 Supreme Court
case involving German prisoners held oversees as a central precedent for its
argument that Mr. Moussoaui should be denied access to captured Qaeda leaders.

In the 1950 case, Johnson v. Eisentrager, the Supreme Court found that the
prisoners could not seek review of their detention in an American court because
it would interfere with the judgments of American military commanders overseas
and require the courts to exceed their authority under the Constitution's
separation of powers.

The Justice Department said that allowing Mr. Moussaoui to seek testimony from
captured Qaeda witnesses overseas "would directly interfere with the
determinations that military and intelligence officials have made concerning the
best means for pursuing their critical mission of obtaining intelligence."

But legal specialists who reviewed the department brief today said the
circumstances of the German prisoners were very different from those of Mr.
Moussaoui, who is charged in an American court and is entitled to the legal
protections of the criminal justice system here.

"There's no question but that this is a stretch by the Justice Department," said
Sean D. Murphy, a former career lawyer in the State Department who is now a
professor of international law at George Washington University.

"On the one hand, as a matter of judicial policy, I think it's important for the
courts to be worried about interfering with the interrogation process that the
United States is undertaking with respect to these combatants," Professor Murphy
said. "But as a matter of law, it seems to me that the federal courts do have
the power to order the United States to make available a person who is in U.S.
custody."

Eugene Fidell, a military-law specialist in Washington, said that if the Justice
Department's argument was accepted, "another part of the legal canvas would be
beyond the reach of the court system," much as hundreds of Qaeda members have
been held outside civilian court jurisdiction since last year at the United
States installation at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

"The challenge this case presents is whether a domestic prosecution in the
federal courts can be treated as hermetically sealed from potential sources of
exculpatory evidence that, while outside the country, are nonetheless within the
federal government's control in a postcombat environment," Mr. Fidell said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
TESTIMONY (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DEPOSITIONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (90%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (79%); GERMANY (51%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1033 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hunting War Criminals

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 138 words


To the Editor:

Re "Simon Wiesenthal Bows Out" (Topics of The Times, April 23):

After recognizing the biological statute of limitations on catching Nazi
fugitives still at large, Simon Wiesenthal is retiring.

The Justice Department should consider revising the mandate of the Office of
Special Investigation, which also hunts Nazis exclusively, to include
investigations of war criminals from other atrocities, like those in the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Iraq, who have illegally or fraudulently entered or seek
to enter the United States, and then have them prosecuted in the appropriate
domestic or international court.

Bringing war criminals beyond Nazis to justice would be a fitting tribute to and
natural extension of Mr. Wiesenthal's admirable and courageous legacy.

ZACHARY D. KAUFMAN
Oxford, England, April 23, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%) NAZI
POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: KAUFMAN, ZACHARY D; WIESENTHAL, SIMON

CITY: OXFORD, ENGLAND (50%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); IRAQ (93%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); MONTENEGRO (68%); ENGLAND (50%)

REGION: RWANDA;  IRAQ;  SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1035 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEW YORK OBSERVED;
Rooms Where the Wars Refuse to End

BYLINE:  By ERIKA KINETZ

SECTION: Section 14; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1205 words


LARGE maps of the world figure prominently in the calm, clean rooms of the wing
at Bellevue Hospital for survivors of torture. The doctors' offices here are
filled not with the sterile stuff of most medical suites, but with fragments of
a wide world: an intricate mandala of blue Buddhas, masks from Senegal, a
Bedouin traveler carved in stone and sand. A sign reads: "Adversity introduces a
man to himself."

Most wars eventually find their way to this hidden corner of New York. Since he
founded the Program for Survivors of Torture at Bellevue Hospital in 1995, Dr.
Allen S. Keller has watched history march through his office.

"New York is like one big refugee camp," said Dr. Keller, a solid, plain-spoken
man. "As a result of war over the last 20 years, millions of individuals have
been displaced from their homes. They come here to rebuild their lives."

His practice is a reminder of how long the shadow of war can be. The real work,
Dr. Keller says, begins after the fighting stops -- and the conflict in Iraq is
no exception.

Rebuilding Iraq will require more than installing a new leader and getting the
electricity and phone lines up and running. The nation suffered 35 years of
totalitarian repression, and its citizens still carry the scars. Abu Muslim
al-Hayder, a Shiite Muslim who has returned to Iraq to help with the rebuilding
and who was not a patient in the program, said he still had flashbacks of the
electric torture he received from Saddam Hussein's regime a decade ago.

"This is going to be a marathon, a real long, difficult process of rebuilding
individual lives," Dr. Keller said of the Iraqi people.

And the Iraqis are not unique. The use of torture in the late 20th and early
21st centuries has been widespread. Dr. Keller estimates that 50,000 to 100,000
of the 500,000 torture survivors in the United States live in New York. Since
its inception, the program has treated 722 people from more than 60 countries.
The center, at First Avenue and 27th Street, gets 5 to 10 new referrals each
week, and there is a six-week backlog for initial appointments.

Bosnians fleeing the so-called ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia
descended on the center in the mid-1990's. Kosovar Albanians started showing up
in significant numbers after Serbian authorities began a campaign of mass
deportation and terror against them in 1998. After rebels killed, raped and
hacked thousands of civilians in an attack on Freetown in 1999, the center had
an influx of patients from Sierra Leone. About one-third of the center's
patients are Tibetans on the run from ongoing repression by China.

In 2001, the program provided psychological support for witnesses in a trial
stemming from the embassy bombings in Africa in 1998 and, after 9/11, it offered
counseling to New York firefighters. No one knows how soon, or if, Iraqis and
Kurds will start to appear.

"That depends on how many Iraqis make it to the United States or New York," Dr.
Keller said. "If they do, it is sure they will come to us, if history is any
indicator."

Traditionally, immigrants are drawn to New York because their countrymen are
here. But for some torture survivors, understandably, the attraction is another
city trait. "You don't know who is who," said a Senegalese man who spoke on the
condition of anonymity, in summing up his wariness. "You want to be careful
about who you mix up with." He likes New York because, he said, "It is a city
where you can lose yourself easily." A big man with an easy smile and a
background as a linguist, he fled Senegal in 2000 and now drives a cab.

One night in August 1999, 25 police officers came to his house in Bignona, in a
part of southern Senegal where there has long been violence between the
government and a separatist movement. "I tried to escape," he said, "but the
house was surrounded." It was the last time he saw his wife, now 25, and his
son, now 7, both of whom were also taken. As a suspected separatist, he said, he
was imprisoned for six months in a poorly lighted 6-foot-by-9-foot cell. He was
regularly beaten and deprived of food, water and sleep. "Everything was like
night," he said.

"They tied my hands and my legs," he continued. "I was hung between two tables.
I was beaten all over the body." The prison guards made him strip. "When you
take off your clothes," he said, gesturing down his body. They did things he
can't talk about.

"Physical torture you can bear it, but the psychological torture and humiliation
are deeper than that," he said. "It is harder to get rid of the mental
injuries." A year and a half of psychotherapy and weekly group therapy sessions
at the Bellevue program have helped. "You don't feel alone," he said.

He did not watch coverage of the war in Iraq. "It brings back bad memories," he
said. In the middle of the war, a taxi dispatcher tried to show him newspaper
photographs of American prisoners of war. He walked away.

Most torture victims, whether P.O.W.'s, political activists or civilians, have
similar psychological symptoms, including anxiety, depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder and insomnia. But each prognosis can be different.

"Sometimes the innocent bystanders can have a rougher time of things because
they didn't expect it," Dr. Keller said. "I can't begin to imagine how difficult
this is for our prisoners of war, but they hopefully do have a context of who
they are, as an American soldier, to help strengthen them emotionally."

PART of the difficulty is that systematic torture, whether genocide,
totalitarianism or ethnic cleansing, is designed not only to dehumanize the
individual, but also to debase an entire community. "The purpose of torture then
has a clear, broad goal, which is a message to a community," said Kate
Porterfield, the program's clinical director. "We have power over you. We will
destroy you."

Rebuilding victims' trust, which must precede rebuilding a victimized society,
is a big challenge. "Warfare, but specifically torture and maltreatment that
occurs in warfare, disrupts basic human connection and basic human trust," Ms.
Porterfield said. "The task after torture is to see can you help that person
regain a sense of trust in others, in communities, in society, in humanity at
large. That's kind of a tall order."

For many of the program's patients, New York no longer seems like the refuge it
once was, and lately, the clinic's halls have buzzed with fear.

The federal government effort to increase surveillance of suspected terrorists
and authorize indefinite detention of asylum-seekers from certain nations has
the program's patients, especially Muslims, worried. Doctors have been asked
about mandatory fingerprinting and secret police.

Also, recurrences of symptoms can be set off by bad news, like the images of
war, torture chambers and civil unrest that have relentlessly marched across
American television screens recently.

Yinka Akinsulure-Smith, a senior psychologist with the program, said she had
started to hear a disturbing new question from her patients: "Where do we go
now?"

One Congolese refugee has started to wonder whether he would be better off back
in the bush than in New York. Back home, he knew how to escape. He isn't sure
how to get to Canada.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Sasha Meret)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (78%); PSYCHOLOGY (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); DISPLACED PERSONS (76%);
REFUGEES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (74%); PHYSICIAN PRACTICES
(73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); BOMBINGS (71%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (69%);
DEPORTATION (69%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (68%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(65%); TERRORISM (63%) MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS;  TORTURE;  BIOLOGICAL AND
CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: BELLEVUE HOSPITAL CENTER (NYC)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%) KELLER, ALLEN (DR); KINETZ, ERIKA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); ALBANIA (79%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); TIBET
(76%); CHINA (58%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1039 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Once Neighbors, Now Rival Palestinian Leaders

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: GAZA, April 28


In the wretched Khan Yunis refugee camp, their family homes faced each other
across the same sandy street.

But Muhammad Dahlan cast his lot with Fatah, the mainstream Palestinian movement
of Yasir Arafat. Dr. Abdel Aziz Rantisi joined Hamas. In student politics,
rallies and Israeli prisons, the two ambitious, clever men climbed the ranks of
their separate organizations.

Now, with the Palestinian parliament expected to confirm a new government as
soon as Tuesday, Gaza is waiting for Mr. Dahlan, the new security chief, to
return from the West Bank. With hope or dread, Gazans are waiting to see if Mr.
Dahlan, who has spoken privately of plans to wipe out Hamas, will act against
his old neighbor, now a top political leader of Hamas, and his organization. The
Israeli government and the Bush administration are watching as well.

Dr. Rantisi said he was not worried. "He can say anything," Dr. Rantisi said.
"But I believe they will hesitate to do anything."

Yet Hamas, whose power and popularity have grown steadily through more than two
years of conflict with Israel, is suddenly facing hard times and hard choices.
The American war in Iraq and the new pressure on Syria have endangered sources
of the group's financing and other support. Israeli raids and killings of
militants have temporarily thinned its leadership, while Israeli military
closures and other restrictions have hampered its ability to strike.

Now Mr. Dahlan is threatening action. To avert a confrontation, Mahmoud Abbas,
the Palestinian prime minister, has asked Hamas to set aside armed conflict and
instead to compete as a political party, Hamas officials and other Palestinian
leaders here said.

Hamas has not given a formal reply, but in separate interviews three top
political leaders of Hamas said that they would reject the deal.

"I asked him to come to the trenches of resistance with Hamas," Dr. Rantisi said
of Mr. Abbas. "He said nothing, I said nothing."

The Hamas men said they were preparing for possible civil conflict in Gaza,
while hoping it would not occur. "If anyone will attack Hamas, Hamas will defend
itself," said another of the leaders, Dr. Mahmoud Zahar. "If anybody is going to
confiscate the weapons of Hamas, Hamas will not allow it."

For his part, Mr. Dahlan, a cautious politician, was said by associates to be
weighing his next move. The struggle with Mr. Arafat over the new government,
which was forced upon him by international pressure, has undermined Mr. Dahlan
in Gaza by making him look like an Israeli and American security agent,
Palestinian analysts and Hamas leaders said. The struggle with Mr. Arafat is
likely to continue.

In interviews over the last year, Mr. Dahlan said that no security official
could act unless Israel gave Palestinians hope by relaxing its military campaign
and restrictions. But the Israelis are adamant that Mr. Dahlan must first
decisively fight violence.

A senior Israeli security official said he thought Mr. Dahlan would instead seek
a temporary truce with Hamas in hopes of proceeding with an American-backed
peace plan, known as the road map. "They are all friends," this official said.
"This is what makes it so complicated."

Dr. Rantisi, 56, was initially dismissive when asked what he had to say about
Mr. Dahlan, who is 15 years younger. "Nothing," he replied, as he fingered a
loop of prayer beads in his living room here today. "He's one of the Fatah
members."

But when a visitor said he knew of their shared background, Dr. Rantisi smiled
and, sticking each hand in front of him, indicated how close the family doors
once were. "It's face to face," he said.

He said that one of his brothers had grown up playing with Mr. Dahlan, and that
it was just possible that as a pediatrician, he had treated Mr. Dahlan as an
11-year-old. Mr. Dahlan and he visit each other's mothers when they are in the
camp, he said.

One Palestinian legislator, Imad Falouji, a former Hamas member who knows both
men, said that Dr. Rantisi's mother had cared for Mr. Dahlan as an infant. Mr.
Dahlan declined to be interviewed today, citing the pending parliamentary vote.

The two leaders have tangled before. In 1996, Mr. Arafat ordered a crackdown on
Hamas, and Mr. Dahlan was then the chief of the Palestinian preventive security
in Gaza. Hundreds of Hamas leaders were arrested. Some were tortured, Dr.
Rantisi recalled bitterly.

But in 1996, Dr. Rantisi said, Hamas could not resist, because Palestinians in
Gaza were optimistic about the Oslo peace efforts and Hamas was relatively weak.
Now, the situation is different, he said, adding, "We will not accept jail."

While Mr. Dahlan seeks political negotiations with Israel, Dr. Rantisi argues
that the disappointing outcome of the Oslo efforts proved the futility of talks.
"The only thing that will help the Palestinians is the balance of suffering," he
said.

Although there have been isolated clashes between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas, Hamas has generally avoided direct confrontation, using a strategy that
Mr. Falouji calls the circle: "Hamas makes attacks against Israelis, Israel
pressures the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian Authority arrests Hamas and
Hamas attacks Israelis."

He said that this approach allowed Hamas to damage both Israel and the
Palestinian Authority without appearing to strike at fellow Palestinians.
Despite signs that support for the armed uprising is wavering, Hamas remains
popular, particularly in Gaza, partly because of its commitment to violence.

But, Palestinian politicians say, it has also done a better job of staying close
to the people and guarding a reputation for incorruptibility. Dr. Rantisi still
lives among refugees in a poor neighborhood here. Mr. Dahlan, who amassed a
fortune working as a security chief, bought the walled mansion of Gaza's richest
family.

Ismail Abu Shanab, another political leader of Hamas, said that the Palestinian
Authority could rebuild some of its popular strength. "If the Israelis want to
succeed, and you want the Palestinian people to be with you against Hamas, then
you have to do something for the Palestinian people," he said.

He said if Israel took a step like releasing Palestinian detainees, that might
enable Mr. Dahlan to "convince Hamas and others to calm down, until we see if
the Israelis are serious."

Israel is demanding that Mr. Dahlan break up Hamas and collect its weapons,
saying that a truce would merely give Hamas time to rearm.

But Raji Sourani, the director of the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, said
that a security crackdown without respect for basic rights would strengthen
Hamas and lead to more suicide bombers in thelong term. "Make people feel there
is something to lose, and then you don't need Dahlan," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); HAMAS (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(78%); REFUGEES (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (77%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (70%); IRAQ WAR (66%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (77%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(93%); IRAQ (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1041 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: DETAINEES;
Suspect Charged With Plotting To Fight U.S. in Afghanistan

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


An American citizen detained for more than a month as a material witness in a
terrorism case in Oregon was charged today with plotting to fight against
American soldiers in Afghanistan.

The American, Maher Hawash, a 38-year-old software designer in Portland, was
accused of conspiring with a group of six others who had already been charged
with trying to provide material support to Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

The authorities said Mr. Hawash and five of the other people flew to China
shortly after Sept. 11, 2001, intending to go to Afghanistan. The officials said
he stayed at the same hotels as the others and even shared a room with some of
them. But after their money ran low, Mr. Hawash and most of the others returned
to the United States without reaching Afghanistan, officials said.

"We're dealing with people who had the motivation, desire and ability to travel
halfway around the world to wage war against the United States," Charles W.
Mathews III, the senior F.B.I. official in Portland, said in a telephone
interview. "We moved as quickly as we could."

Mr. Hawash's case has drawn national attention, with civil liberties groups
questioning why he was detained. Until the charges were released today,
prosecutors had refused to discuss why they were holding him.

Mr. Hawash's friends have been upset by the secrecy and have described the
evidence against him as circumstantial. They described Mr. Hawash, a
Palestinian-American, as a family man who volunteered as a soccer coach and
worked for Intel for nearly a decade. When he was arrested without charge on
March 20, his supporters marched in front of the courthouse and two Oregon
Democrats, Representative Earl Blumenauer and Senator Ron Wyden, questioned his
detention.

Mr. Hawash was charged with one count of conspiring to levy war and two counts
of conspiring to provide material support to the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Friends acknowledge that Mr. Hawash knew several of the others accused in the
case and prayed with them at a mosque. But while the government's affidavit
describes taped conversations and recovered e-mail messages linking other men
directly to the plot, it acknowledges that Mr. Hawash was never identified by
witnesses or mentioned by name.

"We don't see anything here except guilt by association," said Debbie Burke, who
worked for several years with Mr. Hawash at Intel. "I know this guy and there's
no way I can imagine him going to Afghanistan."

The authorities stumbled across Mr. Hawash's name during their investigation of
the other men, who quickly became known as the Portland Six. Most of the
suspects, several of whom are African-Americans who converted to Islam, were
arrested in October. Five are accused of traveling overseas after the Sept. 11
attacks to join the Taliban, and one is charged with helping the others. One man
is still a fugitive.

Officials found scraps of paper with Mr. Hawash's last name and phone number in
the homes of several of the suspects. Jeffrey Leon Battle, one of the accused,
was caught on tape describing a Palestinian man as a co-conspirator.

"He was a Palestine," said Mr. Battle, according to a transcript of the taped
conversation.

Mr. Hawash, who is married to a native of Oregon, removed his name from the
title deed on his house in the days before his trip to China and bought hiking
gear, including a parka, boots and a backpack.

Around that time, neighbors in the placid suburb of Hillsboro called the police
to report that Mr. Hawash had become increasingly religious, growing a long
beard and favoring clothing common in the Middle East.

Officials say Mr. Hawash told his wife, Lisa, that he was traveling to China to
look for business for his privately owned Internet service provider. But China's
trade representative in Portland, who often facilitates such trips, told the
authorities that she had never had any contact with Mr. Hawash. His telephone
and cellphone records show that he did not make any calls to China before he
left, the affidavit said.

Officials say they expect Mr. Hawash to be indicted later this week and to stand
trial in October along with the others charged. Some of Mr. Hawash's friends
said they planned to march at the federal courthouse tomorrow to show their
continuing support. They said they were relieved that his case was no longer
shrouded in secrecy.

"We're really sad that he's been charged," Ms. Burke said in a telephone
interview. "But we're also happy that he finally knows what the issues are so he
can publicly defend himself."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maher Hawash, a detainee, now facesconspiracy charges. (Federal
Bureau of Investigation)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); ARRESTS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); HOTELS &
MOTELS (70%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (68%); RELIGION (61%); SOCCER (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: INTEL CORP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (82%)

TICKER: INTC (NASDAQ) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (54%)

PERSON: RON WYDEN (57%); EARL BLUMENAUER (50%)

CITY: PORTLAND, OR, USA (92%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CHINA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1045 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: DOMESTIC SECURITY;
New Devices To Recognize Body Features On U.S. Entry

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


Domestic-security agencies will begin this year to use computer equipment that
recognizes fingerprints and other features to verify the identifies of foreign
visitors as they enter and depart the United States, Bush administration
officials said today.

They said the new security measures, which may also include the use of
computerized facial-recognition machinery, are intended to block the entry of
terrorists into the United States and to verify that foreign visitors leave on
schedule.

Such biometric technology had been mandated by Congress for use beginning late
next year in an entry and exit system for foreign visitors as a result of the
attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. But in a speech today, Homeland Security Secretary
Tom Ridge said the department had decided to move up the time frame, with some
of the body-recognition equipment in place by the end of this year.

Department officials said that while the department had still not worked out
many of the details of its biometrics program, it was likely that some
computerized fingerprint and facial-recognition equipment would be installed at
some international airports, border crossings and seaports within several
months.

In some cases, they said, the machinery would be used to verify the identities
of visitors who had provided fingerprints as part of their visa applications to
enter the United States. In other cases, they said, visitors may be asked to
provide fingerprints as they arrive in the United States -- information that
would then be used to verify their departures.

In a speech marking the first 100 days of his new department, Mr. Ridge
announced the creation of the new entry and exit system, to be known as U.S.
Visit, an acronym for the Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology
system.

He said the system, which replaces several other programs to monitor immigrants
that have been criticized by immigration and civil-liberties groups, would
create an "electronic check-in, check-out system for people who come to the
United States to work or to study or to visit."

"We want to keep terrorists out without compromising the welcoming mat," Mr.
Ridge said. "While the new visitor system will make it more difficult to enter
the United States illegally, it will expedite the process for people who are
entering the country lawfully."

Another senior department official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the
department would first install fingerprint-recognition equipment, since it was
already widely available in law enforcement agencies, and "we'll be working to
implement the other standards, such as facial recognition."

He said the decision to move up use of the body-recognition equipment was not
prompted by intelligence data suggesting an imminent threat. "It's that the
secretary is committed to making this happen as quickly as possible," he said.
"This is one of his top priorities."

In his remarks today to the National Press Club, Mr. Ridge said that the United
States was "absolutely" safer from terrorist attack because Saddam Hussein had
been forced from power and that his department could take credit for "solid,
productive and measurable progress" in defending the nation from the possibility
of terrorist strikes.

"With the demise of Saddam Hussein and his regime, we are considerably safer,"
he said, repeating the administration's assertion that the former Iraqi
government had worked closely with terrorist groups, including Al Qaeda. "We've
disarmed the dictator and his supporters," Mr. Ridge said, cautioning, however,
that there "is still a real and daily threat to this country."

After months of delay, the White House announced that it had named an Air Force
general and former C.I.A. official to take over from Mr. Ridge as the White
House domestic security adviser, the post Mr. Ridge left in January to become
the first secretary of homeland security.

The new homeland security adviser, Gen. John Gordon of the Air Force, is
currently a presidential national security adviser for counterterrorism. His new
White House post does not need Senate confirmation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Ridge, the homeland security secretary, greeting members of
the National Press Club yesterday. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BIOMETRICS (92%); FINGERPRINTING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); AIRPORTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM
(90%); PATTERN RECOGNITION (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (90%);
SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); IDENTITY SECURITY (78%); COMPUTER
EQUIPMENT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); VOICE RECOGNITION (78%); AIRLINES (76%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (68%) TERRORISM;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;
BIOMETRICS;  IDENTIFICATION DEVICES;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  AIRPORTS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (91%); NATIONAL PRESS CLUB
(59%) HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT

PERSON: RIDGE, TOM (SEC); SHENON, PHILIP

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1047 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing Plains: Nebraska: Suit On Civil Unions

BYLINE:  By Jodi Wilgoren (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 79 words


The A.C.L.U. has filed a federal lawsuit challenging a section of the state
Constitution that bans not only same-sex marriage but also civil unions and
domestic partnerships. The suit says that Article I, Section 29, added in 2000,
is the only one of its kind in the country and discriminates against gays by
preventing them from lobbying state and local agencies for health-care benefits
and, for example, the right to visit partners in the hospital.   Jodi Wilgoren
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (91%); COHABITATION (90%); DOMESTIC
PARTNERSHIPS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (88%); LEGISLATION (88%);
DISCRIMINATION (88%); LOBBYING (88%) MARRIAGES;  CONSTITUTIONS;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  DISCRIMINATION;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION

PERSON: WILGOREN, JODI

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: NEBRASKA

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1048 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Liberia: Rebel Leader Sought

BYLINE:  By Somini Sengupta (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 94 words


Wanted for a campaign of rapes and mutilations in Sierra Leone and accused in
the assassination of Felix Doh, a top rebel commander in western Ivory Coast,
the warlord Sam Bockarie has found shelter in Liberia, the chief investigator
for a special United Nations court said. Mr.

Bockarie has been in hiding since his March 10 indictment by the Sierra
Leone-based court for crimes against humanity. The investigator, Al White,
called on the Liberian president, Charles Taylor, to turn him in or risk
prosecution for harboring a war criminal.   Somini Sengupta (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); SEX
OFFENSES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); INDICTMENTS (86%);
LITIGATION (86%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (83%); POLITICS (82%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  EXTRADITION;  CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  LIBERIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-SIERRA LEONE;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  SEX CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI; BOCKARIE, SAM; WHITE, ALAN W; TAYLOR, CHARLES (PRES)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); SIERRA LEONE (95%); COTE D'IVOIRE (92%); AFRICA (91%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE;  LIBERIA

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1051 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Digging Up The Dead

BYLINE:  By BILL KELLER;  E-mail: billkeller@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1472 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Among all the unfinished business in that capital of unfinished business named
Iraq, an accounting for three decades of horrors may not be the most urgent.
Unless you are one of those heart-sore Iraqis haunting the newly emptied prisons
and torture chambers for evidence of your disappeared children, you are likely
to agree that questions of guilt can wait until the electricity is restored and
the crime is contained and the schools are working and somebody is governing.

But a reckoning is due, and how Iraq faces its recent past will ultimately count
for as much as the design of a transitional government or the divvying up of the
oil.

This sounds like a matter for historians, or maybe for poets, but it turns out
to be an indispensable part of what goes these days by the term "nation
building." If you bury your past, it keeps surfacing, like some corpse in a
Stephen King novel, to ruin your peace of mind. On that point, we have the last
century's testimony from Germany and Japan and South Africa and Cambodia and
Argentina and Yugoslavia, and other places that either exorcised their devils or
failed to.

My own point of reference when it comes to the subject of grand evil is Russia,
which was also Saddam Hussein's. Saddam was, you recall, an avid pupil of
Stalin. (What were the Baathists, after all, but Bolsheviks with an Arab
accent?)

The other day I went to see Aleksandr Yakovlev, who has spent the last dozen
years excavating abominations in the archives of the Soviet Union. Mr. Yakovlev
is unique among the many diggers at this graveyard because he was for much of
his life a loyal Communist, ultimately becoming the chief ideologist of the
party and a member of its ruling Politburo. He was Mikhail Gorbachev's sidekick
in the reforms that unplugged Communism from its life support.

But where Mr. Gorbachev clung to his illusions, Mr. Yakovlev has shredded his
with a startling ferocity. So far, his digging has produced 33 volumes of
declassified documents, a searing book translated recently into English as "A
Century of Violence in Soviet Russia," and an angry conviction that the whole
Soviet experience was a crime against humanity.

Mr. Yakovlev, who is nearing 80 and has the face of a benevolent frog, is
something of a newfound hero to Western conservatives. He is admired on the
Western right for documenting beyond any refutation that every monstrosity
Stalin carried out -- from the imprisonment of children to the deliberate
starving of peasants, from the extermination of clergy members to the monumental
crime of the forced labor camps -- was inspired, if not invented, by Lenin. That
is, the depravity was not an aberration -- it pervaded the whole Communist
project.

Mr. Yakovlev's intensely moral view of world affairs, and his ready recourse to
the vocabulary of good and evil, is much more in step with President Bush's
Washington than with Vladimir Putin's Kremlin. (President Putin recently sent a
Kremlin courtesy note to a conference of the remnants of the Communist Party,
which Mr. Yakovlev told me was like "sending a greeting to the commandant of
Auschwitz.")

Perhaps Mr. Yakovlev's conservative admirers should arrange an audience at the
White House for him because he has timely advice, and Mr. Bush is sorely in need
of it.

Mr. Yakovlev believes in holding criminals to account, and he understands that
obligation as something more profound than purging bad guys. In the case of the
Soviet Union, he contends that the unwillingness to face history in its dreadful
entirety has left his country as an invalid -- the people still hobbled by
prehensile fear, the system still paternalistic, if not exactly repressive.

Mr. Yakovlev sees the legacy of Bolshevism in every Russian bureaucrat who still
acts as if he is the law, and in every citizen who surrenders before arbitrary
authority. The falsified glory of Soviet history makes heroes of the army and
the intelligence services and helps them retain disproportionate influence.
Russia has still not gotten much beyond the idea of Stalin as the lone villain,
and even Stalin slightly outranks the unpopular Mr. Gorbachev in polls of the
public's affection. As for Lenin, he is more loved than blamed.

Most of Russia's culprits are dead, but for Iraq, with its mass graves still
fresh, Mr. Yakovlev prescribes a methodical settling of accounts, in two parts.
Saddam's top 40 or 50 henchmen, he says, should be tried by an international
(not U.S.) tribunal, to lift the weight of fear from Iraq.

The rest -- the little people who guarded the prisons and applied the electrodes
and buried the bodies -- should be tried by Iraqis themselves, but only after
they have rebuilt their court system. This rebuilding, and these trials, should
be backed up by the faith of the United Nations. The domestic trials would be a
way for Iraqis to establish the rule of law, to educate their children and, not
least, to set an example for their neighbors in the region. And because Iraqis
could not muster the strength to get rid of the old regime on their own, trying
the guilty would let them reclaim a measure of national honor.

Mr. Yakovlev's proposal for Iraq has both a practical and a moral logic. Sadly,
the Bush administration seems set on a different approach, one that bypasses
international institutions entirely for something that looks more like victor's
justice.

Bush officials envision a legal reckoning modeled loosely on the experience of
Japan and Germany after World War II. In the first phase, those accused of war
crimes against Americans would be tried by Americans. The first trials the world
would see, therefore, would be military tribunals against men who authorized
mistreatment of our P.O.W.'s or launched attacks under white flags of surrender.

Eventually, when they have found their political feet, the Iraqis themselves
would hold trials to handle the regime's crimes against Iraqis, in a
"collaboration," as one official put it, with American legal experts.

To its credit, the administration grasps the value of having Iraqis dispense
their own justice. As a general rule, it is better if countries that have spent
a season in hell arrange their own repentance. South Africa's homegrown Truth
and Reconciliation Commission provided imperfect truth and incomplete
reconciliation, but it relieved pressures for retribution and gave South
Africans an important experience of self-judgment. How soon Iraq's tainted
courts can shoulder such a responsibility, and whether the country can build a
credible justice system under the tutelage of its occupiers, it is too early to
tell. But what could be more wonderful than for the victims of a horror to
answer it, not with vengeance, but with a display of civilization?

What the administration misses, in its breathtaking self-satisfaction, is the
importance of conferring upon this whole process the legitimacy of the world,
beyond our little troupe of compliant allies.

Since the administration's failed attempt to get U.N. backing for the Iraq war,
it seems, the hawks' impatience with plodding multilateralism has been not only
vindicated, but also infused with childish vengefulness. We won't let the U.N.
weapons inspectors back into Iraq, no matter how useful it would be to have them
as impartial witnesses to any discovery of Iraqi poisons. We will let the U.N.
help bankroll postwar restoration, but with no strings attached. And the first
war crimes trials of this century will be run without U.N. sanction.

Bush administration officials can cite voluminous legal precedents for the
approach they prefer. The question, though, is not whether what they propose is
legal, but whether it is right for us, or for Iraq.

In a different world, this might be a case for the new International Criminal
Court, but the United States does not recognize its authority. (Neither does
Iraq. In their scorn for international justice, Mr. Bush and Saddam Hussein were
in full agreement.) But that is not the only way to confer international
legitimacy on a country's attempt to cope with a repugnant past. Special
tribunals created under theU.N. are now trying the monsters of Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, trials in which Americans have been rightly proud to participate. In the
afflicted states of Cambodia, Sierra Leone and East Timor, local courts have
been set up with international help under U.N. auspices.

Mr. Yakovlev points out that this is not just about clearing away evildoers, or
just about implanting democracy in Iraq. As we were in the last century, we are
up against a toxic ideology with global aspirations -- not Communism in this
case, but an ideology that feeds on Arab grievances and a malignant version of
Islam. Combating it requires all the moral authority we can muster, not just the
authority of our might. It shouldn't take an elderly ex-Communist to teach us
that.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Knickerbocker)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); HISTORY (76%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (76%);
WRITERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); CONSERVATISM (70%); GENOCIDE (60%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%); FORCED LABOR (50%); RELIGION (50%) WAR CRIMES,
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  COURTS

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (78%); STEPHEN KING (58%) KELLER, BILL; HUSSEIN, SADDAM;
YAKOVLEV, ALEKSANDR

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); JAPAN (79%); GERMANY (55%)

REGION: IRAQ;  RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1057 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2003 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Belgrade Journal;
For Partying Mobsters, the Morning After: Prison

BYLINE:  By PETER S. GREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia


They line up most days outside Central Prison in Belgrade dressed in elegant
finery, the women in faux Chanel or tailored Italian slacks, the men in dark
glasses and dark suits over black T-shirts. They clutch Louis Vuitton purses and
mobile phones, the men perhaps chain-smoking Marlboro Reds and the women puffing
nervously on Davidoff Lights, a local favorite.

These are the remnants of Belgrade's former elite -- the wives, girlfriends and
lawyers of some of the thousands of suspected organized crime figures and war
criminals jailed since the killing of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic on March 12.

So far, at least 45 people have been charged in the killing, including former
government officials and members of the Red Berets, a police unit linked to some
of the worst atrocities of the Balkan wars.

The people lined up here are loath to talk to strangers as they clutch gym bags
and plastic sacks of the clothing, food and medicine they are allowed to leave
at the prison gate.

"I'll tell you how bad it is, they're arresting the lawyers!" shouted one tall
young man clutching a tiny cellphone.

For the decade under Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian strongman, and well into
Serbia's democratic transition, Belgrade was a playground for what locals came
to call the "Mafija." These were the thugs, gangsters and paramilitary goons who
oscillated between running their own criminal networks and murdering, raping and
looting in the orchestrated frenzy of ethnic cleansing that rent apart what was
Yugoslavia.

The trademarks of these mafiosi were flashy cars, short haircuts and clothing
somewhere between Nike warm-ups and the Italian Riviera. They paraded down
Belgrade's main streets in luxury sedans and S.U.V.'s, hung their coats at top
nightclubs and traveled with retinues of ripple-muscled bodyguards.

The airwaves and the covers of the gossip magazines were ruled by women like
Svetlana Raznatovic, the widow of Zeljko Raznatovic, a k a Arkan, leader of the
Tigers, a notorious paramilitary group. Ms. Raznatovic, nicknamed Ceca, was a
star of turbo-folk, a cacophonous blend of Serbian folk tunes and contemporary
electro-pop.

"Everything was in one house," said Veran Matic, editor in chief of B-92, an
independent radio and television network. "Politics was criminalized and crime
was politicized. Arkan was a criminal, a war criminal -- and president of a
political party, a member of Parliament and owner of the biggest music star in
the country. They determined the values of Serbian society."

Even after Mr. Milosevic, now on trial for war crimes in The Hague, was ousted
in October 2000, the mafia and suspected war criminals held Belgrade in their
sway, running extortion rackets and drug rings, kidnapping businessmen who
opposed them and often taking over nightclubs at gunpoint on Belgrade's lively
after-hours scene.

Their world collapsed in March after Prime Minister Djindjic was shot. In the
post-assassination crackdown, the police arrested 10,111 people and jailed more
than 4,500 of them. The biggest fish still out of jail is the Red Berets' former
leader, Milorad Lukovic, also known as Legija.

"We can say today that we have dealt a crucial blow to organized crime," Natasa
Micic, Serbia's acting president, said on national television. "We have
dismantled Milosevic's criminal apparatus and severed a spiral of crime that has
ravaged our country for more than a decade."

With so many big spenders behind bars, local wags have taken to calling the
Central Prison the Central Business Center, after the suburban New Belgrade
Business Center, a shopping mall often frequented by gangsters.

At the Sava Center, another convention hall whose indoor shopping mall was a
mafia favorite, the shops are now virtually empty.

"Business is not good," noted Natasa, a sales clerk, who said infamous war
criminals and gangsters were among the customers who had stopped coming by for
the latest in Italian suits and silk ties. Business, she said, is down 20
percent or more.

In another shop, Bojana Jakovljevic, selling leather jackets, said: "It's a big
loss for the store, but, paah, it's better now. I can walk at midnight wherever
I want."

The pressure on the mob has apparently also created a panic among Belgrade's
drug users. Since the police began their crackdown in March, rehabilitation
clinics have been full.

At Sova, an elegantly modern downtown nightclub, the goons and their girlfriends
were noticeably absent on a recent Saturday night as a young woman gyrated on
the bar and youngsters in fashionably tight clothes moved to a pounding techno
beat. Sova's owner, Djordjije Stajkic, said business was down 10 to 15 percent
since the movements of some of his more illustrious clients had been restricted.

That is an improvement on the old days, he said, even though the gangsters were
often big spenders.

"When Legija came, 50 percent of the club would leave," Mr. Stajkic said. "It
was not very good for business. It used to be a curse in my business -- 'I hope
that Legija comes to your place.' "

Now, he said, the gangsters have been replaced by a new group of free spenders.

"There are young people opening up Champagne and whiskey bottles who didn't use
to," Mr. Stajkic said. "Now they feel it's their territory."

In fact, Mr. Stajkic said, he has already laid off half the bouncers who used to
guard his bar.

"People were openly terrorized in Belgrade by Legija and the others," said Jovan
Dulovic, chief crime reporter for the weekly magazine Vreme. "He would walk into
a cafe and force everyone to do push-ups. They would close whole streets when he
went out."

Now, Mr. Dulovic said, the climate has changed. "We can breathe again," he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Visitors at Central Prison in Belgrade, where more than 4,500
people have been jailed in a crackdown after the killing of Prime Minister Zoran
Djindjic. (Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ORGANIZED CRIME (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); WOMEN (78%); FASHION DESIGNERS (78%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
COMMUNICATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (75%); CRIME RATES (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); POLITICS
(75%); ARRESTS (75%); HOMICIDE (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); SMOKING (72%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS
EQUIPMENT (72%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (72%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); EXTORTION (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(69%); PLASTIC FILM SHEETS & BAGS (68%); POP & ROCK (65%); FOLK & WORLD MUSIC
(65%); MOTOR VEHICLES (64%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (64%); MUSIC (60%); MURDER
(58%); SEDANS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: LVMH MOET HENNESSY LOUIS VUITTON SA (72%)

TICKER: MC (PAR) (72%); LVMH (BIT) (72%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS316992 WOMEN'S HANDBAG & PURSE MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS312140
DISTILLERIES (72%); NAICS312130 WINERIES (72%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (65%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ITALY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1060 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 6, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Teachers' Union Sues Klein, Claiming Bias in Layoffs of Aides

BYLINE:  By ABBY GOODNOUGH

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 793 words


The union representing New York City teachers sued Chancellor Joel I. Klein
yesterday, accusing him of racial discrimination and saying his plan to lay off
nearly 1,000 classroom aides disproportionately affected black and Hispanic
workers.

Randi Weingarten, the union president, said the layoffs were "an unconscionable
choice" because two-thirds of classroom aides, known as paraprofessionals, were
black and Hispanic, and because they were among the school system's lowest-paid
employees. The 17,000 paraprofessionals are paid an average of $23,000 a year,
she said.

The lawsuit, filed in State Supreme Court in the Bronx, seeks to block the
Education Department's plan to send pink slips to 864 paraprofessionals. It
questions why Mr. Klein would lay off paraprofessionals just as he is creating
more than 130 supervisory jobs as part of his reorganization of the school
system.

Most of those hired as supervisors are white and earn six-figure salaries,
according to the lawsuit. They include 10 regional superintendents who are
replacing district superintendents, their deputies, 108 instructional
supervisors and 6 regional operations managers. Mr. Klein has insisted that the
reorganization is needed to tame the bureaucracy.

The paraprofessional layoffs are supposed to save at least $22 million, while
the reorganization will cost $250 million over two years.

"The fact that two-thirds of our paras are black and Latino and that the
executives who have just been hired are not makes this a clear violation of the
state's and the city's human rights laws," Ms. Weingarten said at a news
conference at the Manhattan headquarters of the union, the United Federation of
Teachers.

Mr. Klein's office referred inquiries about the lawsuit to Deputy Mayor Dennis
M. Walcott, who predicted that it would have no standing in court. "It's unfair
and really quite sad that they are injecting race and discrimination into the
conversation," Mr. Walcott said. "Discrimination is something this
administration will never practice."

After Ms. Weingarten's news conference, she received a memo from the Education
Department saying the layoffs would go into effect on June 16. She said Mr.
Klein had assured her before that they would not take effect until after the
school year ends on June 26.

Paraprofessionals have been a fixture in the schools since the 1970's, when the
position was created in response to pressure from minority residents who wanted
more control over local schools. It was hoped that many paraprofessionals would
become teachers, diversifying the overwhelmingly white teaching force.

While 7,000 paraprofessionals have become teachers, the teaching force is now 62
percent white and only 21 percent black, 14 percent Hispanic and 3 percent
Asian.

Paraprofessionals are also more likely than teachers to live near the schools
where they work, which Bertha Lewis, the executive director of New York Acorn, a
community advocacy group, said was another reason not to lay them off.

"The laying off of these black and brown women who spend their money in the
neighborhoods and live in the neighborhoods is tantamount to writing off
low-income black and brown students in our school system," she said at the news
conference.

The paraprofessionals who are to be laid off include 194 of the 4,000 who work
in elementary and middle schools and 670 of the 900 who work in high schools.
Most of these paraprofessionals work in a single classroom or divide their time
among several, helping the teacher by working with small groups of students who
need extra attention.

The school system also employs about 11,000 special education paraprofessionals,
who work solely with disabled students. Those paraprofessionals cannot belaid
off, because their numbers are regulated by a 1980 court decree.

Chancellor Klein also intends to lay off about 1,400 school aides, most of whom
work part time in lunchrooms or school offices or as hallway and playground
monitors. Those aides are represented by another union, District Council 37.

All the layoffs are part of $178 million in cuts that Mr. Klein says he must
make to the school system's $12.4 billion budget to help address the city's $3.9
billion budget gap.

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg asked the city's labor unions for $600 million in
productivity savings to avert layoffs and other cuts, but he rejected the
unions' offer.

Many paraprofessionals work in overcrowded classrooms, where parent and student
advocates say their presence would be most acutely missed. Their numbers are
always shifting, since paraprofessionals are among the first to be laid off
during budget crises and hired during flush economic times.

This would be the largest layoff of paraprofessionals since at least 1991,
school officials said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAEDUCATORS (92%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (92%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS
(91%); LAYOFFS (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); RACE & RACISM (91%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (90%); LABOR UNIONS (90%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(90%); TEACHER UNIONS (90%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (90%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (89%); SCHOOL
DISTRICTS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (77%); WAGES &
SALARIES (77%); JOB CREATION (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%)
EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;  TEACHERS AND SCHOOL EMPLOYEES;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;
LAYOFFS AND JOB REDUCTIONS;  BLACKS;  HISPANIC-AMERICANS;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED FEDERATION OF TEACHERS (59%) UNITED FEDERATION OF TEACHERS

PERSON: GOODNOUGH, ABBY; KLEIN, JOEL I (CHANCELLOR); WEINGARTEN, RANDI

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 7, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Roots of Mideast Terror

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 195 words


To the Editor:

Contrary to Scott Atran's assertion ("Who Wants to Be a Martyr?," Op-Ed, May 5)
that "Israel's coercive efforts to end the string of Palestinian suicide
bombings" have failed, these actions have helped to greatly reduce the number of
suicide bombings in Israel over the past several months.

Israeli security forces thwart numerous attacks each day.

Mr. Atran suggests that it is the actions of America that the terrorists
despise, and that if America marketed its image abroad better, we could prevent
terrorism.

Yet he ignores the real roots of terrorism: societies that preach hate and
intolerance.

Terrorists are not born in a vacuum. They are taught from birth that violence
and murder are acceptable means with which to achieve their goals.

Terrorism will not go away until the societies that breed terrorists re-evaluate
what they are teaching their children.

It is not solely the responsibility of the United States to persuade the Arab
and Muslim world to "like us," but rather a responsibility that rests on the
shoulders of the leadership of Arab and Muslim governments.

ABRAHAM H. FOXMAN
National Director
Anti-Defamation League
New York, May 5, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CHILDREN (73%) TERRORISM;
PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

ORGANIZATION: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (82%) ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE

PERSON: FOXMAN, ABRAHAM H; ATRAN, SCOTT

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); UNITED STATES
(93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1064 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 7, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Bosnian Serb Officer Admits Guilt in '95 Massacre

BYLINE:  By JOHN TAGLIABUE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 487 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 6


A former commander in the Bosnian Serb army agreed today to plead guilty to
crimes against humanity in the massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys
in the town of Srebrenica in1995.

The decision by the commander, Momir Nikolic, paves the way for his potentially
crucial testimony at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague later this month, when
three other commanders of the Bosnian Serb army are due to go on trial for the
killings of the Muslim civilians at Srebrenica. Mr. Nikolic is the first former
Bosnian Serb officer to agree to provide testimony.

As part of the plea agreement, four other charges against Mr. Nikolic, an
intelligence officer during the 1992-95 Bosnian war, will be dropped. He also
agreed to testify against three other Bosnian Serb commanders, Vidoje
Blagojevic, Dragan Obrenovic and Dragan Jokic, who led Serbian forces involved
in separating the men and boys of Srebrenica from their families and killing
them.

Dutch peacekeepers for the United Nations who had been assigned to protect the
Muslims failed to intervene.

Mr. Nikolic, an officer in the Serbian brigade that encircled the Srebrenica
area, acknowledged in the agreement, which the court released, that he
"discussed the operation to transport the women and children to Kladanj and
separate, detain and kill the able-bodied Muslim men in Potocari," referring to
villages in the area.

Mr. Nikolic pleaded guilty to the "widespread and systematic attack on the
civilian population of Srebrenica," and to the murder of over 7,000 boys and men
between the ages of 16 and 60.

The tribunal's judges will now decide whether to accept Mr. Nikolic's guilty
plea and, if they do, what his sentence will be. The prosecution recommended as
part of the agreement that Mr. Nikolic receive 20 years in prison; his defense
counsel has asked for a prison term of 10 years. Mr. Nikolic's sentencing will
follow the trial of the other defendants.

The trial of Mr. Nikolic and the three other officers was originally scheduled
to begin today, but has been postponed until May 14 by the tribunal, created in
1993 to deal with the Balkan conflicts.

NATO peacekeepers arrested Mr. Nikolic a little more than one year ago in
Bratunac, in eastern Bosnia. During the war he was part of the Bratunac brigade,
which was commanded by Mr. Blagojevic, one of the three other defendants.

At his first court appearance in April 2002, Mr. Nikolic pleaded not guilty to
the charge of genocide. Today's plea was on lesser charges of crimes against
humanity. The other three defendants have all pleaded not guilty to the charges
brought against them.

A former Bosnian Serb general, Radislav Krstic, was found guilty of genocide in
August 2001 for his role in the massacre at Srebrenica. It was the tribunal's
first conviction on the charge of genocide in the war. The former general was
sentenced to 46 years in prison, the longest sentence issued by the tribunal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GUILTY PLEAS (92%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SENTENCING (89%); MEN
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); PEACEKEEPING (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (78%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); CHILDREN (73%);
RELIGION (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%);
MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); NETHERLANDS
(90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1066 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Republicans Pledge Aid For Abolitionist's Home

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 390 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Republican Congressional leaders pledged nearly $1 million today to refurbish
the former home of the 19th-century abolitionist Frederick Douglass.

In a ceremony at Cedar Hill, Douglass's Washington estate, the leaders signed a
resolution that they introduced to Congress to allocate $955,000 for restoration
of the house, which has been damaged by exposure to moisture in recent years.

Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois and Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the
majority leader, said the financing would help complete a three-year, $2 million
renovation project on the property.

"This really is the very best of what government can be about," Dr. Frist said
on the front porch of the house, which sits on a bluff with a grand view of the
Capitol.

Born into slavery on Maryland's Eastern Shore in 1818, Douglass escaped to
freedom at age 20 and eventually became one of the country's most prominent
orators and civil rights activists. He lived at Cedar Hill from 1877 until his
death in 1895.

The National Park Service, which has maintained the Douglass home since 1962,
will oversee its renovation. The estate is one of 12 sites within the park
system dedicated to preserving and interpreting African-American history.

The ceremony provided a backdrop for the start of a Republican-led agenda that,
Republicans say, seeks to strengthen African-American families and help them
achieve economic security. The initiative consists mainly of support for
Republican legislative proposals like tax cuts and vouchers for low-income
students to attend private schools.

Armstrong Williams, a conservative columnist and an organizer of the Republican
initiative, said the effort originated because of the furor last year over the
remarks of Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, who said the nation would have
been better off had Strom Thurmond been elected president in 1948 when he ran on
a segregationist platform.

That event "rallied the entire party," Mr. Williams said. He added that
Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader, told him that
"this is our last chance to get it right," in reference to the Republican
Party's relationship with African-Americans.

A spokesman from Mr. DeLay's office confirmed that Senator Lott's comments
played a role in shaping the agenda, which the Republicans call "fulfilling
America's promise."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Among Republicans publicizing an agenda to help blacks were
Senators Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, left, and Bill Frist of Tennessee, rear.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); BUILDING RENOVATION
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CONSERVATISM (79%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (79%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (79%); HISTORY (78%); SLAVERY (78%); LEGISLATION (77%);
HISTORIC DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%);
CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (74%); TAX LAW (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); NATIONAL PARKS
(72%); POOR POPULATION (70%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (69%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(64%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (50%) BLACKS;  ELECTION ISSUES;  RESTORATION AND
REHABILITATION;  SLAVERY;  HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND SITES;  BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL PARK SERVICE (82%) NATIONAL PARK SERVICE

PERSON: TRENT LOTT (79%); RICK SANTORUM (74%) DOUGLAS, FREDERICK (1818-1895);
FRIST, BILL (SEN); SANTORUM, RICK (SEN); LOTT, TRENT (SEN); THURMOND, STROM

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1068 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Milosevic Prosecutors Need More Time

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 81 words


Prosecutors at the United Nations war crimes trial of the former Yugoslav
president Slobodan Milosevic appealed to judges for at least six more months to
wrap up their case, potentially delaying the start of Mr.

Milosevic's defense until next year. The prosecutors said they hoped to complete
their case against Mr. Milosevic, charged with genocide and crimes against
humanity in the Bosnian and Croatian wars from 1991 to 1995, by next February,
two years after his trial started.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

COUNTRY: CROATIA (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: FATALITIES;
Correspondent Is Killed in Iraq In a Car Crash

BYLINE:  By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 267 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 9


Elizabeth Neuffer, an award-winning correspondent for The Boston Globe, was
killed today along with her translator when the car they were traveling in hit a
guard rail near the city of Samarra, north of here.

It was not clear whether there were any witnesses to the crash, which happened
around 4 p.m., or what caused it.

Ms. Neuffer, 46, was returning from an overnight trip to Tikrit, Saddam
Hussein's ancestral home, where she had been reporting on efforts to dismantle
the Baath Party apparatus that helped to enforce Mr. Hussein's totalitarian
rule.

The translator who was killed was identified as Waleed Khalifa Hassan al-Dulami.
The driver, Saad al-Azami, survived the crash. Colleagues who reached the scene
said the bodies were evacuated by United States military personnel to an air
base in northern Iraq.
Martin Baron, The Globe's editor, said today that Ms. Neuffer had made a
specialty of covering war crimes, human rights and the struggles of fractured
nations.

Ms. Neuffer had reported from Iraq for several weeks in December and then
followed United States forces into Baghdad last month.

Early in her career Ms. Neuffer was an intern in the London bureau of The New
York Times. She joined The Globe in 1988.

She wrote "The Key to My Neighbor's House: Seeking Justice in Bosnia and Rwanda"
(Picador, 2001), a book about war crimes investigations and the search for
post-conflict justice in Bosnia and Rwanda. In 1997, her articles on war crimes
in Bosnia and Rwanda won a prize for "excellence in international journalism"
from the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); JOURNALISM (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (67%);
APPRENTICESHIPS & INTERNSHIPS (66%); ARMED FORCES (54%) ROADS AND TRAFFIC;
ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  DEATHS
(OBITUARIES)

ORGANIZATION: BOSTON GLOBE

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (70%) NEUFFER, ELIZABETH

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); RWANDA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1081 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suit Accusing French Railways of Holocaust Role Is Thrown Out

BYLINE:  By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 437 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 14


A Paris court today rejected a lawsuit charging France's national railroad
company with the equivalent of complicity in crimes against humanity for
deporting Jews to Nazi death camps during Germany's wartime occupation of
France. The court ruled that a 10-year statute of limitations applied in this
case.

The plaintiff, Kurt Werner Schaechter, 82, an Austrian-born French Jew, had sued
the National Railroad Service for a symbolic one euro for deporting his parents,
both of whom died in death camps. After a judge read a summary of the ruling at
the Palais de Justice this afternoon, Mr. Schaechter said he would appeal the
verdict.

"I don't think this is a glorious day for France," Mr. Schaechter, a retired
musical instruments salesman, said. "They always want to hide things. I think
the face of France is a bit dirty today."

The case dates back to 1991 when Mr. Schaechter discovered -- and illegally
photocopied -- thousands of wartime documents held in the French National
Archives in Toulouse. Some of these documents detailed the railroad's active
role in organizing the deportation of some 76,000 Jews from French concentration
camps to Germany. Of those deported, only around 2,500 survived.

In the suit, Mr. Schaechter's lawyer, Joseph Roubache, argued that the company
went beyond orders issued by either France's collaborationist Vichy government
or German occupying forces. Specifically, he charged that the railroad tried to
disguise the purpose of the train convoys by using code names, closed and locked
the doors of the rail cars and discouraged volunteers from giving the deportees
food and water.

Mr. Schaechter brought the case under the civil code, because a 1994 revision of
the penal code allowing plaintiffs to bring criminal charges against companies
or institutions did not apply retroactively.

The two-member Paris court ruled today, however, that a case could be brought
under the civil code only within 10 years of the offense in question, in this
case the deaths of Mr. Schaechter's parents.

"They have used a very elemental, simplistic argument," Mr. Roubache said today.
"They have not responded to our arguments. They have chosen the easy path.
Crimes against humanity should not be subject to proscription under either civil
or penal law."

Mr. Roubache said that, in his view, the 10-year statute of limitations should
apply from 1991 when Mr. Schaechter obtained the necessary information to bring
the case.

Mr. Schaechter filed his suit within 10 years of discovering the documents
incriminating the national rail service, although the case was not heard until
March 19 of this year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (91%); LITIGATION (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (90%); RAIL TRANSPORTATION (90%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (90%); VERDICTS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL LAW (89%); CORPORATE WRONGDOING (78%); TRAINS (78%); RAILROAD ROLLING
STOCK (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (67%); MUSIC (54%);
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (54%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  STATUTES OF LIMITATIONS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS

PERSON: RIDING, ALAN; SCHAECHTER, KURT WERNER

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (90%); TOULOUSE, FRANCE (58%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (97%); GERMANY (92%)

REGION: FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1083 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial Opens for 3 Charged in Srebrenica Killings

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, May 14


Three former Bosnian Serb army commanders went on trial today, charged with
helping to carry out the 1995 massacre of more than 7,000 Muslims in Srebrenica.

The three officers, Vidoje Blagojevic, Dragan Obrenovic and Dragan Jokic, had
pleaded not guilty at the Hague war crimes tribunal to charges of playing a role
in one of the most notorious episodes of mass killing in the 1992-95 Bosnian
war.

The accused men sat impassively in the dock as a prosecutor outlined what he
said was their part, as commanders in the Bratunac and Zvornik brigades, in the
systematic killing of Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica, an enclave that had
been declared a United Nations "safe area," in July 1995.

Prosecutors said Bosnian Serb forces expelled women and children and executed
men and boys after capturing the town when Muslim resistance collapsedafter
years of fighting. The bodies were dumped in mass graves.

Mr. Blagojevic and Mr. Obrenovic are charged with complicity in genocide and
crimes against humanity. Mr. Jokic is accused of crimes against humanity.

A fourth man, who has pleaded guilty to one charge, has agreed to testify
against the other three defendants.

Troops under the command of the men were involved in systematically preparing
and carrying out the executions in the enclave and burying the bodies in mass
graves over several days in a well-planned operation, prosecutors said.

"These accused and their troops were absolutely critical to the success of the
murder operation and none of them had the strength of character or courage
necessary to say no and to walk away," a prosecutor, Peter McCloskey, told the
court.

"Men were separated from their wives, from their kids, from their families.
Their I.D.'s and property were taken and heaped in piles. It was clear that no
one intended to do anything with these people but murder them," Mr. McCloskey
said.

It is not the first time the United Nations tribunal has tackled a case dealing
with the killings. Its judges sentenced Radislav Krstic, a senior Bosnian Serb
commander, to 46 years in jail for genocide for his role in the atrocity in a
landmark verdict in 2001.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MEN (90%);
ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); VERDICTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); GUILTY PLEAS
(78%); RELIGION (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BLAGOJEVIC, VIDOJE (COL); OBRENOVIC, DRAGAN; JOKIC, DRAGAN (LT COL)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);
SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1085 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

2nd Bombing This Week in Chechnya Kills 15 at Festival

BYLINE:  By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 14


A suicide bombing in Chechnya, the second there this week, killed at least
15people and wounded dozens more today during a religious festival. The attack
appeared to be an attempt to assassinate the republic's pro-Russian leader,
officials in Chechnya said.

The attack occurred about 3 p.m. in Iliskhan-Yurt, a village about 20 miles east
of the Chechen capital, Grozny, the officials said. It came two days after a
truck bombing in Znamenskoye, a town on the other side of Chechnya, which had by
today left 59 dead.

The methods of the two attacks differed. Today's occurred moments after two
women tried to approach the head of the regional administration, Akhmad Kadyrov,
who was among thousands of Chechens -- who are predominantly Muslim -- attending
a religious festival commemorating the birth of the Prophet Muhammad, the
officials said.

One of the women pleaded that she wanted to speak to Mr. Kadyrov, one official
said, because three of her sons had disappeared, a common occurrence in
Chechnya. She was stopped, and a large explosion followed. A second bomb,
evidently carried by the other woman, did not explode; the authorities found
explosives and detonated them afterward.

Images on Russian television showed that the force of the blast severed bodies
and strewed bits of flesh and bone across a lush green field beside a religious
shrine on the village's outskirts. Mr. Kadyrov was not wounded, but four of his
bodyguards were among those killed, the chief Russian prosecutor in Chechnya,
Vladimir P. Kravchenko, said tonight.

While deadly attacks by Chechen fighters seeking to make the region independent
from Russia occur almost daily, the two attacks this week signaled a sharp
intensification of the war, as well as the evident willingness of the
separatists to resort to suicidal attacks.

Some politicians here have begun to refer to the "Palestinization" of the war,
because of the rebel forces' increasing reliance on suicidal tactics -- and the
Russians' inability to stop them. The Chechnya conflict has been shaped in part
by Islamic fundamentalism.

"Nothing sacred remains for them," Mr. Kravchenko said in a telephone interview
from Chechnya, voicing a rising Russian anger and frustration.

While the rebels have justified their resistance in the name of
self-determination for the Chechens, he added, "these crimes are aimed at their
own people."

There were sharply conflicting reports tonight on the death toll. Akhmet K.
Abatsov, the leader of the local district that includes the village, said in a
telephone interview that as many as 30 people had died and more than 150 had
been injured.

But other officials said only 15 had so far been confirmed killed, including the
two women identified as suicide bombers. Mr. Kravchenko said 78 people were
hospitalized, some of them in critical condition. Officials grimly predicted
that the toll would rise.

On Tuesday, a day after the truck bombing in Chechnya and only hours after a
wave of bombings in Saudi Arabia, President Vladimir V. Putin portrayed the
attacks as evidence that the war in Chechnya was part of a larger struggle
against international terrorism.

The same day, the White House issued a statement condemning "all terrorist acts
and senseless violence against civilians in Chechnya," but also calling for a
political settlement of the war that would end "human rights violations,"
something Russian forces in Chechnya have been accused of committing.

Today's attack coincided with a visit to Moscow by Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell, who after a visit to Saudi Arabia for a second day found himself in a
country rent by suicide bombings.

Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov, appearing with Mr. Powell at the Kremlin, said
the attacks in Chechnya and Saudi Arabia underscored the need for closer
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Mr. Powell did not address today's
attack or Chechnya in general.

In March voters in Chechnya approved a new constitution that declared the region
an integral part of the Russian Federation while granting it limited autonomy.
Mr. Putin and other officials have said the vote -- though ridiculed by rebel
commanders and questioned even by some Russians as meaningless without peace
talks -- was a first step toward a political settlement to end the bloodshed
there.

The attacks this week appeared to have been intended to demonstrate that the
separatists planned to continue their resistance against Russian military and
security forces, and against Chechens who cooperate with them.

In the attack on Monday, a truck carrying explosives blew up outside a
government compound housing mostly Chechen officials in Znamenskoye, a town on
the Terek River in an area that had largely escaped the worst of the conflict.

Officials said that the death toll in that attack rose to 59 today as four more
people died overnight from their injuries.

The religious festival where today's attack occurred was organized by United
Russia, the political party allied with Mr. Putin.

Mr. Abatsov, the local administrator, said the festival was held at a shrine
believed to be the burial place of one of Muhammed's grandsons.

Chechnya's population is predominately Muslim, and thousands of Muslims from
Chechnya and beyond had gathered for the festival, including Muslim religious
leaders and Mr. Kadyrov and members of his administration.

Mr. Abatsov said Mr. Kadyrov, himself a rebel commander during the first war in
Chechnya from 1994 to 1996, remained in the field and helped to evacuate the
wounded. He had removed his shoes during prayers and in the confusion could not
find them afterward, forcing him to leave the scene barefoot.

Mr. Kravchenko said documents found after the attack and interviews with
witnesses identified the two women as Shakhida Shabulatova, born in 1957, and
Sulai Abdurzakova, born in 1951. The documents showed that Ms. Shabulatova's
husband had died in 1999, when the current war in Chechnya began, but it is not
clear under what circumstances. Mr. Kravchenko cautioned that the documents
might not be authentic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the Chechen village of Iliskhan-Yurt, a relative of one of
the victims of the suicide bombing there cried yesterday. The attack occurred at
a Muslim religious festival celebrating Muhammad's birthday. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); ASSASSINATION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); FESTIVALS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (89%); MENTAL ILLNESS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); MAWLID (78%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (73%); CIVIL WAR (68%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATIONS

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE; KADYROV, AKHMAD

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1087 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mass Graves, Pointed Questions

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 104 words


To the Editor:

Thomas L. Friedman is right about America's failure to secure the sites of mass
graves in Iraq ("Two Right Feet," column, May 14).

So occupied with the search for weapons of mass destruction, we overlook the
mass destruction itself.

Whether or not weapons are ever found, no one will doubt the justness of the war
if Saddam Hussein's atrocities are fully revealed and documented.

By ignoring the most heinous crimes the Iraqi regime perpetrated, America
reinforces the image that its purpose was never to give Iraqis a political
renaissance or a new lease on freedom.

GABRIEL POSNER
Philadelphia, May 14, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (87%); WEAPONS
OF MASS DESTRUCTION (87%); VIOLENT CRIME (87%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (84%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (73%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (72%) HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES);
POSNER, GABRIEL

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1096 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE MIDEAST TURMOIL: REFUGEE PROGRAMS;
Israel Is Criticized for Restricting U.N. Access in Gaza

BYLINE:  By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 19


Stringent Israeli travel restrictions are preventing dozens of international
workers and managers for United Nations refugee programs from getting in and out
of the Gaza Strip, the United Nations envoy to the Middle East told the Security
Council today.

"These policies are violations of the privileges and immunities" afforded United
Nations workers, the envoy, Terje Roed-Larsen, said. He added, "They run counter
to Israel's international humanitarian law obligations as the occupying power."
United Nations officials have been unable to pass in and out of Gaza since May
11, he said.

Since 1949, United Nations refugee officials, later joined by representatives of
other United Nations agencies, have offered a variety of services in Gaza.
Currently they run schools and clinics and food distribution networks.

Unless United Nations credentials are again recognized at the Erez crossing, Mr.
Roed-Larsen said, "it will become progressively impossible to carry out U.N.
operations in Gaza." The Gaza services employ thousands of Palestinians, whose
movements have long been severely restricted. The April 30 suicide bombing in
Tel Aviv, which killed three people, led to tighter controls, preventing
international passport holders from entering Gaza.

It is highly unusual for the Israelis to refuse to honor the "laissez-passer,"
or "let pass," credentials issued to United Nations international personnel, the
Israeli envoy to the United Nations, Dan Gillerman, confirmed today.

Asked about the reasons for the new restrictions, Mr. Gillerman said in a
telephone interview today: "All the measures undertaken over the last few weeks
are measures that have been necessitated by the very tragic escalation in the
terrorist attacks and suicide bombing by the Palestinians. Israel is very
appreciative of the U.N.'s work in Gaza; they are doing a terrific job."

He added: "What we are witnesses to today is a phenomenon that is short-lived
and limited to the last few weeks," during which "we are looking at a tragic
surge in terror." Mr. Gillerman hinted that the current rules were likely to be
rescinded within the next 48 hours. A meeting on the issue is set for Wednesday.

Referring to the deteriorating situation with services in Gaza, Mr. Gillerman
said today, "This is a direct result of terrorism." Gaza as much as anywhere in
the world, he added, showed that terrorism exacerbates poverty, not the other
way around.

In his message to the Security Council this morning, Mr. Roed-Larsen suggested
that Gaza's 75 percent poverty rate and the 53 percent unemployment rate in the
Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank had been exacerbated by
"movement restrictions imposed by the Israeli security regime."

Roughly two-thirds of Gaza's population are refugees who depend on the United
Nations' relief agency, he said. "In the face of the rising misery among
Palestinians," he said, the new restrictions should "be lifted in a way that
meets Israel's security needs while easing the plight of the Palestinians," he
said.

Mr. Roed-Larsen also urged Israel to endorse the road map, a blueprint created
to pave the way to new peace negotiations. But Israel's government has not
agreed to the concessions envisioned in the proposal, a position that has
hardened during the series of suicide bombings in Israel in the past few days.

Israel's deputy permanent representative, Arye Mekel, meeting with reporters
after the Security Council meeting, challenged the Palestinian authority to act
to curb the violence. "So far we have seen nothing in the past two weeks," he
said.

Nasser al-Kidwa, the Palestinian observer at the United Nations, was asked by
reporters today about possible actions that the new Palestinian prime minister,
Mahmoud Abbas, could take to prevent violence.Mr. Kidwa said the prime minister
was "unable to take these steps as long as Israel rejects the road map."

Mr. Kidwa also challenged the Israeli position, saying, "The bottom line is: do
we want a political settlement or not? Are we ready for cooperation or not?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Terje Roed-Larsen, the United Nations envoy to the Middle East,
with Nasser al-Kidwa, the United Nations Palestinian envoy, yesterday. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (93%); TERRORISM (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (87%);
MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); POOR
POPULATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%);
POPULATION SIZE (71%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (67%); POVERTY RATES (64%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (64%); INTERVIEWS (64%) TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS;  PALESTINIANS;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: BARRINGER, FELICITY; ROED-LARSEN, TERJE; GILLERMAN, DAN (AMB)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1098 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Bosnian Serb Admits Srebrenica Role

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 83 words


Dragan Obrenovic, a former Bosnian Serb army commander joined a former comrade
in confessing to his role in the massacre of thousands of Muslims in Srebrenica
in 1995, the war crimes tribunal said. Mr. Obrenovic said he would plead guilty
to one count of crimes against humanity, and prosecutors said they would drop
other charges and recommend a 15- to 20-year prison sentence. On May 6, another
former commander, Momir Nikolic, agreed to plead guilty to a single count of
crimes against humanity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (90%); ARMIES (88%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
RELIGION (85%); JAIL SENTENCING (84%); SENTENCING (84%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (90%);
NETHERLANDS (74%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1099 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFTEREFFECTS: ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE;
Experts Say Technology Is Widely Disseminated Inside and Outside Military

BYLINE:  By JOHN MARKOFF

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 20


Congressional efforts to rein in a Pentagon surveillance project may be
ineffective because new surveillance technology is being widely disseminated
both inside and outside of the military and other less visible federal offices
are pursuing similar research, industry executives and computer scientists say.

The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's Information Awareness Office,
overseen by Adm. John M. Poindexter, faced widespread opposition last year to
its Total Information Awareness project after reports about the project raised
concerns about civil liberties. On Tuesday, the agency delivered a 102-page
report to Congress to reassure legislators.

But a related program being pursued by the government's intelligence agencies
has drawn no public scrutiny.

The research being conducted for the National Security Agency, Central
Intelligence Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency is being financed by a
little known federal office called the Advanced Research and Development
Activity, established during the Clinton administration to provide federal
intelligence agencies with basic research capability similar to that of Darpa.

The agency has a budget of about $100 million a year, according to a former
government official. Its research covers a wide range of areas from
nanotechnology to quantum computing.

The agency is pursuing research in areas like facial recognition as well as
basic image recognition technologies, according to computer scientists. In March
2000, for example, the organization reviewed 45 research proposals and made
grants to nine organizations including corporations, universities and research
centers that are studying various image recognition problems.

ARDA is also financing a program called "Novel Intelligence from Massive Data,"
which was begun after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. The intent of the project
is to give intelligence analysts early warning of "strategic surprises" in the
same way that the Total Information Awareness system was intended to provide
advance information about possible domestic terrorist attacks.

Both the Pentagon's Total Information Awareness project and the ARDA research
project seek to detect hidden patterns of activity in vast collections of
digital data. The development of these technologies has drawn opposition from
civil liberties groups and some technical organizations.

Moreover, several computer scientists question whether such giant data
"hoovering" operations, involving either vast databases or software to scan
connected databases through a network, can be successful.

They emphasize that once enemies of the United States are aware that digital
sentries are hunting for unusual patterns of information, they will simply alter
their behavior.

"You won't find terrorists buying C4 explosives with a Mastercard," one computer
scientist said.

A spokeswoman for the security agency said in a faxed statement that the Novel
Intelligence research had begun in 2001 and that the only data that would be
used was open source and that data about analysts would be collected with their
consent within strict guidelines. Computer scientists have raised questions
about the project's research agenda, because the technologies can easily be
disseminated broadly.

"If they were to stick to strictly military-related research and development,
there is less of an issue, but these technologies have much broader social
implications," said Barbara Simons, a computer scientist who is past president
of the Association of Computing Machinery, an organization that has expressed
concerns about the Pentagon's project.

Information about the project on the organization's Web site
(http://ic-arda.org) states that the agency is developing technologies to avoid
events like the Sept. 11 attacks and other actions taken by enemies of the
United States.

Since the Watergate era, the nation's intelligence agencies have been generally
restricted from conducting domestic surveillance. But concerns about terrorism
have led the Bush administration to try to break down barriers between various
government agencies.

Military analysts said that one of the problems facing Congress was that
attempts to limit weapons technologies have frequently left basic research
exempt from restrictions in areas like antiballistic missile defense and nuclear
weapons design.

"The downside is that basic research creates new pressures," said Christopher
Paine, a senior analyst at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an
environmental organization that has an arms control segment. "When the political
climate changes, these opportunities loom large."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (92%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); RESEARCH &
DEVELOPMENT (90%); SCIENCE NEWS (90%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (90%); SCIENCE &
TECHNOLOGY (90%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); TECHNICIANS &
TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (78%); DEFENSE RESEARCH (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); NANOELECTRONICS (77%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (77%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE (75%); QUANTUM
COMPUTING (72%); BUDGETS (72%); PATTERN RECOGNITION (71%); BIOMETRICS (69%);
INTELLIGENCE & COGNITION (55%); NANOTECHNOLOGY (52%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRIVACY;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;  COMPUTER SOFTWARE;
SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY (84%); DEFENSE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (56%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (56%); NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY (56%)

PERSON: MARKOFF, JOHN

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1107 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Ex-Officer Pleads Not Guilty

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 59 words


A former Yugoslav Army officer, Miroslav Radic, has pleaded not guilty to
charges of involvement in a 1991 massacre in the Croatian town of Vukovar. The
United Nations war crimes tribunal had charged him with overseeing the execution
of about 200 civilians, many of them pulled from a local hospital, during a
siege of Vukovar.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMIES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE
(84%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; RADIC, MIROSLAV (CAPT)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (93%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: CROATIA;  SERBIA;  VUKOVAR (CROATIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1109 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Anti-Semitism Endures

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 125 words


To the Editor:

Re "Mutating Virus: Hatred of Jews," by Edward Rothstein (Arts & Ideas, May 17):

Could it not be that numerous genocide-sensitive Europeans, like their abundant
Israeli and American Jewish counterparts, simply see the Palestine situation for
what it is -- a fanatical settler movement to which the Israeli government has
historically given direct financial and military support at the expense of
Palestinian land, trees, water and children's lives?

If human-rights-minded Jews and Europeans make public objection to these
draconian government policies, that is in no way "antiSemitic." Labeling it as
such not only denies this current situation, but also trivializes the term and
its history.

DAVID FRANKFURTER
Durham, N.H., May 17, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
PUBLIC POLICY (69%) JEWS;  ANTI-SEMITISM

PERSON: FRANKFURTER, DAVID; ROTHSTEIN, EDWARD

STATE: NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: EUROPE;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1116 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Serbia: 23 Held In 1991 Massacre

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 124 words


The police have detained 23 people suspected of having links to the massacre in
the Croatian town of Vukovar in 1991, Interior Minister Dusan Mihajlovic said.

About 200 civilians, many pulled from a local hospital, were executed during a
siege by Serbs backed by the Yugoslav Army. The international war crimes
tribunal in The Hague has indicted three former Yugoslav Army officers for their
roles in the massacre. Another Serb indicted by the tribunal and facing
extradition for crimes committed by his paramilitary police unit, Jovica
Stanisic, a former secret police chief, was hospitalized in Serbia to determine
whether he needed surgery before he was handed over to the tribunal. The health
problems of Mr. Stanisic were not specified.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); EXTRADITION (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); POLICE FORCES (88%); ARMIES (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(87%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (86%); GENOCIDE (84%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  EXTRADITION

PERSON: MIHAJLOVIC, DUSAN (MIN); STANISIC, JOVICA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: CROATIA;  SERBIA;  VUKOVAR (CROATIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1123 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Momir Talic, 60, Bosnian Serb General

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, May 29


Gen. Momir Talic, 60, a Bosnian Serb general indicted for genocide and crimes
against humanity, has died in the military hospital in Belgrade, a newspaper
here reported today.

General Talic died late Wednesday of lung cancer, Vecernje Novosti quoted the
hospital chief, Gen. Zoran Stankovic, as saying.

General Talic was the Bosnian Serb army chief of staff when he was arrested in
Vienna in August 1999 and transferred to the custody of the United Nations
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague. During
the 1992-95 war in Bosnia, he commanded an army corps.

In September, the tribunal allowed General Talic to receive medical treatment at
the hospital.

He had been on trial along with a Bosnian Serb civilian, Radoslav Brdjanin,
since January 2002 on charges of "killing and terrorizing" non-Serbs in Bosanski
Novi, Bosanska Krupa and Kljuc in northwestern Bosnia, according to the United
Nations indictment.

He was also accused of destroying non-Serbian villages as well as driving out
anyone who did not submit to Serbian authority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (90%); ARMIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HOSPITALS (88%); WAR
CRIMES (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CANCER (88%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); ARRESTS (73%); LUNG CANCER (72%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS
& PROCEDURES (72%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  WAR CRIMES,
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

PERSON: TALIC, MOMIR (GEN)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (94%);
NETHERLANDS (69%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Doctor Saves an African Boy, and Vice Versa;
Brought to New York for Care, an Orphan Transforms His Benefactor's Life

BYLINE:  By COREY KILGANNON

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1125 words


"I want to go where you are from."

That is what the boy told the white doctor who showed up one day at a crowded
hospital in Sierra Leone.

Soldiers had conquered the boy's village and he had lost his whole family. Then
the snake bit him and ruined his leg. Now people at the hospital were asking the
doctor to cut the boy's leg off.

The doctor, Ian M. Zlotolow, had not come to cut off legs or adopt little boys,
but he did not say the second part out loud. The boy, Lansana Lapia, 8, was
fierce in hobbling into a refugee soccer game on his rickety wooden crutches.
The doctor felt a strange, strong connection to this orphan, he recalled. He
suddenly announced that doctors in New York could save the leg.

That's how it began. Now Lansana was stretched out on the blond hardwood floor
in Dr. Zlotolow's sunny, spacious Greenwich Village apartment. He was speaking
English, mastering Nintendo and calling Dr. Zlotolow Dad.

He scoots on his rump and uses one leg, but not for long. His doctors say he may
walk by the end of the year.

"Come on man, let's play soccer," he said, flashing his lethal smile.

Dr. Zlotolow, 58, met Lansana while in Africa making prosthetic ears for people
mutilated by war violence in Sierra Leone. Dr. Zlotolow, a specialist at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, felt that he could save the
boy's leg and save him from a life as a street beggar. So he arranged for United
Nations health officials to bring Lansana to New York in January 2002 on an
emergency medical visa.

Since then, the boy has had nine major operations to lengthen his leg, including
one last week at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan to pin a brace to
his leg to stretch the bone until it attaches to his foot.

And Dr. Zlotolow agreed to take care of the boy. Instead of working into the
night as chief of dental service and maxillofacial prosthetics at
Sloan-Kettering, he raced home in midafternoon to give Lansana his intravenous
medication. It cut into his work schedule, dominated his personal time and gave
him a sore back. And he was never happier.

They make an odd couple, these two bachelors. They battle at Nintendo and argue
on the street. Wendy Cohen, Dr. Zlotolow's companion, told them they were soul
mates.

Dr. Zlotolow applied to become Lansana's legal guardian and enrolled him at
Public School 3 in Greenwich Village. He plans to legally adopt the boy.

Dr. Zlotolow recently decided to step down from his post at Sloan-Kettering and
move to California for a lower-paying job at the Stanford University Medical
Center. There, he and Ms. Cohen can raise Lansana in a gentler environment and
he can devote more time to outreach work with the International Society of
Maxillofacial Rehabilitation, which he helped to found in 1994. "The kid saved
my life," he said. "Meeting him was a wake-up call."

"There are no accidents," Dr. Zlotolow said as he started dinner in the kitchen.
His work schedule had left him with a heart ailment and hardly any time for his
friends or his outreach work.

Dr. Zlotolow said that many of his hospital colleagues were shocked that he
would give up his position as one of the world's top doctors in his field. "They
all think I'm crazy for leaving the prestige and the salary," he said, "but I
feel like the luckiest man alive right now."

This is not to say adoption was an easy decision. Dr. Zlotolow is divorced with
a grown child. So is Ms. Cohen, an advertising executive at Elle Decor. He was
recovering from malaria contracted in Africa. They are white and Jewish. Lansana
is a black Muslim.

Early last year, Lansana spoke only his tribal dialect, Mende, and hoarded food
in the house. He had never been to a city, watched television, flushed a toilet
or taken a shower. He had never had a real change of clothing.

But once in New York, the boy picked up English quickly, and, with his magnetic
personality, made friends just by walking down the block.

Lansana picked up speed chess in Washington Square and was soon scaring the
regulars there. He traded in his wheelchair for a skateboard that he sat on to
ride.

He was amazed by any sort of toy and was adamant that one day he would play
soccer with the other children, without crutches. He scuttled up and down four
flights to the apartment on his rump. He has nice new sneakers and wears his
jeans baggy. Now he will speak only English, preferably New York street slang.

At the same time, he has built an impenetrable fire wall against his past. He
ignores questions about Africa and offers only occasional obscure recollections:
his family fleeing to the bush when soldiers invaded his village, his fear of
ordinary soldiers and kitchen knives.

A village doctor practiced bloodletting to treat his snakebite, so having blood
drawn terrifies him. He guesses he is 10 now, and he will not talk about his
birthday, his birthplace or his parents' names. He said once that soldiers
killed his mother.

When some West African cabdrivers and a college professor engaged him in
dialect, he ignored them.

Some of his memories echo the countless stories of atrocities in Sierra Leone.
The country's diamond trade has created a brutal civil war. Rebel soldiers hack
off opponents' limbs and commit other atrocities on everyone, including
children.

"I know there is a lot that has happened in his life that he won't talk about,"
Ms. Cohen said. "We just want to give him the chance to be a little boy. I think
he had that taken away from him."

Sometimes Lansana's smile disappears. On Mother's Day, he suddenly began sobbing
and saying he missed his parents. Another time, he looked in a barbershop window
and began crying because "I look like my brother Mustapha."

On one wall in Lansana's room is a world map with a string tacked up, from
Sierra Leone to New York City, and another from New York to San Francisco.

Another wall has a group of photos of Muhammad Ali, whom Dr. Zlotolow knew as a
boy growing up in Louisville, Ky. In Africa, the doctor gains trust and respect
by showing people snapshots of himself sparring with Mr. Ali. He also used Mr.
Ali's clout by listing him on Lansana's immigration application last year.

Mr. Ali happened to be in town last week, and Dr. Zlotolow took Lansana to meet
him at the St. Regis Hotel. Lansana and Mr. Ali sparred and wrestled and clowned
around for an hour. Mr. Ali did some magic tricks for the boy and then grabbed a
black marker and drew on a big linen napkin his rendition of the Thrilla in
Manila for him.

"It's like they were twins," Dr. Zlotolow exuded afterward.

It was all meant to be, the doctor said of their life together. Yes, he had
saved the African boy, but not as much as the boy had saved him. "He's going to
guide me to good things," the doctor said. "He's really going to help me."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: After one of many operations on his leg, Lansana is washed by
Wendy Cohen, Dr. Zlotolow's girlfriend.; Lansana Lapia celebrates after scoring
a touchdown in a video game at the Greenwich Village apartment of Dr. Ian M.
Zlotolow, who is planning to adopt him. (Photographs by JAMES ESTRIN/The New
York Times)(pg. B1); Lansana pushes his friend, Malo Le Flem, on a swing in
Central Park. At right, Dr. Zlotolow, who first met Lansana in Sierra Leone last
year, carries him into their apartment building.; Dr. Ian M. Zlotolow wheels
Lansana Lapia to a birthday party for a friend near their Greenwich Village
apartment. With a magnetic personality, Lansana makes friends easily.
(Photographs by JAMES ESTRIN/The New York Times)(pg. B4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ORPHANS (90%); PROSTHETICS & ORTHOTICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%);
SURGERY & TRANSPLANTATION (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); COMPUTER GAMES (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); CANCER (73%); CHILDREN (71%); REFUGEES (70%);
GUARDIANSHIPS (69%); SOCCER (69%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS (69%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
(68%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%); GENOCIDE (64%) CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  AMPUTATION;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY

COMPANY: NINTENDO CO LTD (55%)

ORGANIZATION: MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING CANCER CENTER (54%)

TICKER: 7974 (TSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS339930 DOLL, TOY & GAME MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC3944 GAMES, TOYS,
& CHILDREN'S VEHICLES, EXCEPT DOLLS & BICYCLES (55%)

PERSON: KILGANNON, COREY; ZLOTOLOW, IAN M; LAPIA, LANSANA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (96%); CALIFORNIA, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE;  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DETAINEES;
Report Said to Be Critical of Detentions Is Expected on Monday

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 261 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


A government report due to be released next week is expected to criticize the
tactics and strategies the Justice Department used in detaining foreigners after
the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, officials said today.

The report, by the Justice Department's inspector general, does not draw any
conclusions about the legality of the actions by the department or Attorney
General John Ashcroft, officials who have seen it said.

But the report does examine the legal rationale for detaining more than 700
foreigners after counterterrorism sweeps, along with their access to lawyers,
the length of their confinement and their treatment. Most of those held on
immigration violations after the attacks were deported, and very few were ever
linked to accusations of terrorism.

Government officials said the report was expected to provide new data showing
that dozens of mostly Middle Eastern men were confined for more than 90 days,
some without access to lawyers. The report is also expected to question the pace
with which the Justice Department resolved cases against those in detention and
whether immigration officials were pressured to detain suspects.

Members of Congress and civil liberties groups have been eager for the release
of the report.

Officials with the American Civil Liberties Union, who have met with the
inspector general's office about the report,said they expect that its findings
should buttress their complaints that prosecutors have run roughshod over civil
liberties in their pursuit of terrorists.

Justice Department officials would not comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); REFUGEES (69%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION
AND REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(55%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: LICHTBLAU, ERIC; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1130 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Into Africa;
In Africa, Pricking The West's Conscience

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 923 words

DATELINE: BUNIA, Congo


THE problem, up to now, has been the absence of genocide.

For more than four years, desire for the gold and coltan (a mineral used in the
computer chip) found in northeastern Congo has turned this region into a
showcase of cruelty. Ethnic enmities, the greed and political meddling of
neighboring states and lawless militias comprised, in part, of gun-toting
children, have created a state of ongoing violence that has claimed the lives of
3.3 million of the Congo's roughly 54 million people, according to a recent
estimate by the International Rescue Committee.

The great majority have died of diarrhea, malnutrition and other miseries that
could have been prevented if the warring parties hadn't kept humanitarian
workers from delivering aid. Just last week, several refrigerators filled with
donated medicine were destroyed by ethnic Hema fighters here, in this capital
city of the northeastern province of Ituri.

Meanwhile, the nations of the West have looked on, wary of intervening in a
nation the size of western Europe, with a history of suffering and turmoil
stretching back to the 19th century.

"The immensity of the problem is a good excuse sometimes for doing nothing,"
said Jean-Marie Guehenno, the United Nations undersecretary general for
peacekeeping operations, on a visit here this week.

Another excuse, too, was the absence of a Rwanda-style genocide. The very word
sparks heated debate among Western aid workers and diplomats here. Is it a
genocide when the carnage is mutual? How many thousands have to be killed? Does
there have to be majority and minority?

In Bunia and its surroundings, the Hema and Lendu tribes seem to be mutually
well armed. Each has a massacre or two to its name.

"It is very difficult to find the good guys here," said one Western diplomat.

Then -- as though by the intervention of a malicious deity -- the latest
massacre here unfolded before the eyes of the world. Over several days earlier
this month, United Nations peacekeepers and aid workers stationed here watched
as Hema and Lendu militias went around hacking babies and old men, dumping
bodies in a water tank, slaughtering people seeking refuge in a church.

The Hema drove away the Lendu and took control of the town. Thousands of
terrified townspeople scampered over a barbed wire fence and sought shelter in
the backyard of the U.N. compound. Many of the town's 250,000 people have fled.
Two unarmed U.N. military observers have been massacred, 46 miles to the north.
So far, 415 corpses have been collected.

As news trickled out from the United Nations compound here, alarms rang in its
New York headquarters. On Friday, the Security Council authorized a French-led
multinational peacekeeping force of up to 1,400 troops, with the first troops to
arrive this week.

"Enough is enough," Mr. Guehenno said, reflecting the galvanizing effects of
mass murder in the proximity of western observers. This is the same province,
after all, where about 50,000 people have been killed over the past five years.

The plain fact, aid workers and diplomats here agree, is that the international
community doesn't think it can afford the stain of another Rwanda. And this
time, none can say they didn't know what was happening.

Rwanda is just a short trip south through the bush and across Lake Kivu. There,
just a few years ago, nearly one million Tutsis were slaughtered by Hutu
tribesman. And the stigma of failing to prevent it has sullied the image of all
those who didn't act -- especially the permanent members of the Security
Council.

"It's clear from Council members' rhetoric that the international failure to
stop Rwanda's genocide in 1994 looms large in the thinking of current Council
members," said Nicola Reindorp, the representative of the British aid agency,
Oxfam. "But if the Council can get troops on the ground in the coming days, this
comparatively swift action to do more to protect Ituri's people will be a sign
that nations take seriously their obligations to protect civilians in the Great
Lakes region."

"You can't say this time you didn't know," Patricia Tome, the spokeswoman for
the U.N. Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo. "You are in
the middle of the storm and you have to do something."

If the specter of past genocide hangs over the Western nations in responding to
today's conflict in the Congo, it is also, Congolese government officials, the
chief reason that Western countries have, until recently, failed to pressure
Rwanda to withdraw its forces from the country.

Rwanda insists that eastern Congo harbors Hutu militias that carried out the
Rwandan genocide. But U.N. investigators have also found that Rwanda, along with
Uganda and Zimbabwe, have systematically plundered the region, while fueling its
war by supporting various Congolese military and political groups.

The United States and Britain, in particular, became the Tutsi regime's most
stalwart supporters. "There was a deep and powerful outpouring of guilt after
the genocide," said Peter Rosenblum, a director of the Human Rights Program at
Harvard Law School. "It was part of a love affair, part of the moral mantle that
was conferred on those who ended the genocide and succeeded power."

In the meantime, with French troops presumably on their way, Bunia is eerily
calm. Only Hema live here for the moment; perhaps the Lendu will drive them out
tomorrow.

In any case, the peackeeping troops will be here soon -- enough of them, it is
believed, to stop the killings in Bunia. That only leaves the rest of the
country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A boy waits at Bunia airport, in northeastern Congo, hoping for
a flight to a safer part of the country. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. 14); DRODRO,
CONGO -- A nun bows before a mass grave for hundreds of civilians who were
massacred last month. (Reuters)(pg. 1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); FOOD CHARITIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (75%); MALNUTRITION (70%);
CITY LIFE (68%); CITIES (68%); ARMED FORCES (63%); NEWS BRIEFS (62%); JUVENILE
CRIME (56%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE (57%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI

COUNTRY: AFRICA (94%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); WESTERN
EUROPE (79%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: CONGO

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1131 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Truth at The Hague

BYLINE:  By Emir Suljagic;  Emir Suljagic is a reporter for Dani, a magazine
based in Sarajevo, and the Institute of War and Peace Reporting.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 464 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


I am a Bosnian Muslim from Srebrenica, where more than 7,000 Muslims were killed
by Bosnian Serbs in July 1995. I survived because at the time of the massacre I
was in Potocari, some 15 miles away from most of the execution sites, working as
an interpreter for the United Nations. My uncle, my 70-year-old grandfather, my
best friend and almost all of my schoolmates were killed.

Two officers in the Bosnian Serb army, Momir Nikolic and Dragan Obrenovic, last
month pleaded guilty before the war crimes tribunal at The Hague for crimes
against humanity, admitting they helped plan the Srebrenica massacre, the worst
atrocity committed in Europe since World War II. Both Mr. Nikolic and Mr.
Obrenovic have agreed to testify against the other officers indicted for the
massacre, which took place in a designated "safe area" under the protection of
Dutch United Nations peacekeepers.

The International Commission for Missing Persons for the Former Yugoslavia has
collected many of the remains of those killed in Srebrenica. Some 7,500 bags of
body parts -- many of which may contain pieces of my friends and relatives --
are sitting in a warehouse waiting for identification. Yet until the moment Mr.
Nikolic confessed, I had never heard a Bosnian Serb admit that the massacre even
happened.

In the Serb half of Bosnia, most people claim that the killings in 1995 never
took place. When pressed, they sometimes say that the Muslims killed one another
in a fight over whether or not to surrender to the Serbs, or that all of those
killed were soldiers. Last year, the Bosnian Serb government issued a report
claiming that only 2,000 Bosnian Muslims were killed in Srebrenica. And of
those, the report said, 1,800 were soldiers.

Mr. Nikolic's confession -- in which he described in chilling detail how he
helped organize the mass execution and burial and an extensive cover-up, all of
which he says army superiors ordered him to carry out -- punches a big hole in
the Bosnian Serb wall of denial. Serbs should have no reason to doubt his
admission. Mr. Nikolic has nothing to gain by exaggerating.

I don't expect the confessions by Mr. Nikolic and Mr. Obrenovic to transform
Bosnian Serb views. Many of the men he named as co-conspirators are still at
large. Some of them still hold senior positions in the Bosnian Serb army; one of
them is a member of the Parliament.

But the confessions have brought me a sense of relief I have not known since the
fall of Srebrenica in 1995. They have given me the acknowledgment I have been
looking for these past eight years. While far from an apology, these admissions
are a start. We Bosnian Muslims no longer have to prove we were victims. Our
friends and cousins, fathers and brothers were killed -- and we no longer have
to prove they were innocent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ARMIES (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); ARMED
FORCES (76%); INDICTMENTS (75%); GUILTY PLEAS (75%); WORLD WAR II (71%); MISSING
PERSONS (68%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: SULJAGIC, EMIR; NIKOLIC, MOMIR; OBRENOVIC, DRAGAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); NETHERLANDS
(91%); EUROPE (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SREBRENICA (BOSNIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1135 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: GOVERNMENT REPORT;
U.S. Report Faults the Roundup Of Illegal Immigrants After 9/11

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


The Justice Department's roundup of hundreds of illegal immigrants in the months
after the Sept. 11 attacks was plagued with "significant problems" that forced
many people with no connection to terrorism to languish in jails in unduly harsh
conditions, an internal report released today found.

The highly critical report from the Justice Department's inspector general
concluded that F.B.I. officials, particularly in New York City, "made little
attempt to distinguish" between immigrants who had possible ties to terrorism
and those swept up by chance in the investigation.  Excerpt, Page A18.

Justice Department officials said they believed they had acted within the law in
pursuing terrorist suspects. "We make no apologies for finding every legal way
possible to protect the American public from further terrorist attacks," said
Barbara Comstock, a spokeswoman for the department.

But the inspector general's report found that some lawyers in the department
raised concerns about the legality of the tactics, only to be overridden by
senior officials.

The report validated the concerns raised by some members of Congress and civil
rights groups who charge that the Justice Department has cast too wide a net in
the campaign against terrorism. The findings will probably provide legal and
political ammunition to those seeking to curb the department's counterterrorism
tactics, officials said.

"It feels good to have someone saying that we shouldn't have had to go through
all that we did," said Shanaz Mohammed, 39, who was held in Brooklyn for eight
months on an immigration violation before being deported to Trinidad last year.

"I think America overreacted a great deal by singling out Arab-named men like
myself," he said in a phone interview. "We were all looked at as terrorists. We
were abused."

Justice Department officials said that despite their disagreements with some of
the report's conclusions, they have already adopted some of the 21
recommendations made by Glenn A. Fine, the department's inspector general,
including one to develop clearer criteria for the processsing of such
detentions.

Mr. Fine, appointed in 2000 by President Bill Clinton to what is regarded as a
largely nonpartisan position, said that while he recognized "the enormous
challenges and difficult circumstances" that the department faced after Sept.
11, "we found significant problems in the way the detainees were handled."

The inspector general initiated the report last year, in part because of public
reports of mistreatment of detainees. Most major agencies have inspectors
general, who serve as independent watchdogs with periodic reports on internal
matters.

A total of 762 illegal immigrants were jailed in the weeks and months after the
attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, as the authorities traced
tens of thousands of leads and sought to prevent another attack. Most of the 762
immigrants have now been deported, and none have been charged as terrorists.

The Justice Department has sought to maintain the secrecy of the arrests,
fighting news organizations' efforts to gain access to deportation proceedings
and for disclosure of more information about the detainees. Public information
about the arrests has been fragmented; the report offers the most detailed
portrait to date of who was held, the delays many faced in being charged or
gaining access to a lawyer, and the abuse that some faced in jail.

The report showed, for instance, that nearly three of every four jailed
immigrants were from New York City or New Jersey, many were Pakistanis, and most
were arrested within three months of Sept. 11.

The report also found that immigrants arrested in New York and housed at the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn faced "a pattern of physical and
verbal abuse" from some guards as well as "unduly harsh" detention policies.

A total of 84 inmates who were held in Brooklyn in terrorism investigations were
subjected to highly restrictive, 23-hour "lockdown," the report found. They were
limited to one phone call a week, and they were put in handcuffs, leg irons and
heavy chains any time they moved outside their cells, according to the report.

And because of a "communication blackout" in the weeks after Sept. 11, families
of some inmates in the Brooklyn facility were told their relatives were not
housed there.

The highly restrictive conditions and long delays in processing cases and giving
suspects access to lawyers appeared to differ markedly from policies before
Sept. 11, according to government officials and advocates for immigrants. Prior
to Sept. 11, the Immigration and Naturalization Service had 24 hours to decide
about charging an illegal immigrant, but six days after the attacks, the Justice
Department gave itself an indefinite time period because of the "extraordinary
circumstances."

Immigration officials sometimes did not notify prisoners of the charges against
them for more than a month, though the report said that the goal in the Sept. 11
investigation was to notify prisoners within three days. The average wait for
those arrested in New York City and housed in Brooklyn was 15 days, the report
said.

Early arrests after Sept. 11 included some "glaring errors" in how illegal
immigrants were charged, leading immigration officials to route all charges
through Washington for months in the fall of 2001, investigators found, which
caused delays. A "disconnect" in communication between officials in New York and
New Jersey added to those delays, the report said.

In addition, investigators found that the Federal Bureau of Investigation moved
very slowly to determine whether a suspect rounded up as part of the Sept. 11
investigation was linked to terrorism. It took the bureau an average of 80 days
to clear prisoners for removal or release because of understaffing and because
the process was "not given sufficient priority," the report said.

Mr. Fine traced the problem to an unannounced policy shift soon after Sept. 11
giving the F.B.I. the final say over when and whether illegal immigrants
detained in connection with the attacks could be released.

The policy shift -- moving authority away from immigration officials --
represented "uncharted territory," an unnamed department lawyer told
investigators, because it assumed that a person in detention could have a link
to terrorism unless and until the F.B.I. said otherwise.

Though this policy was apparently never written down, it was cleared "at the
highest levels" of the Justice Department, the report found.

The report found that some lawyers at the naturalization service "argued
vehemently" against giving the F.B.I. final authority to clear people in New
York City because the process was moving so slowly. Some Justice Department
lawyers raised concerns as well.

In New York City, anyone who was picked up as a result of a lead in the Sept. 11
investigation was held under this policy, "regardless of the strength of the
evidence or the origin of the lead," the report said.

Had it not been for the attacks, "most if not all" of the arrests would probably
have never been pursued, the report said. Some illegal immigrants were picked up
at random traffic stops, others because of anonymous tips that they were Muslims
with erratic schedules, officials said.

Department officials acknowledged to the inspector general's office that they
realized soon after the roundups began "that many in the group of Sept. 11
detainees were not connected to the attacks or terrorism," the report said.

The report did not name any detainees, but it did give numerous examples of
questionable treatment. It did not single out for criticism Attorney General
John Ashcroft or specific senior department advisers, prosecutors or F.B.I.
agents.

The report spotlighted cases of unfair treatment. A Muslim man, for instance,
was arrested when an acquaintance wrote to officials that the man had made
"anti-American statements." The statements "were very general and did not
involve threats of violence or suggest any direct connection to terrorism," the
report found, but the man had overstayed his visa and was held.

Though the bureau's New York office and the Central Intelligence Agency cleared
the man of any terrorist connections by mid-November 2001, F.B.I. headquarters
did not clear him for release from incarceration until more than three months
later because of an "administrative oversight," the report said.

Law enforcement officials today defended their handling of the arrests, noting
that the policy was in keeping with guidance from the department's Office of
Legal Counsel about detaining illegal immigrants.

Moreover, Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson, whose aides handled some of
the key policy decisions, was quoted in the report as saying that it was "unfair
to criticize the conduct of members of my staff" during such an extraordinary
period.

Critics of the Justice Department, however, said that the findings bolstered
their concerns about the government's antiterrorism tactics.

The findings "confirm our long-held view that civil liberties and the rights of
immigrants were trampled in the aftermath of 9/11," said Anthony D. Romero,
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union.

William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty International USA, said that
the inspector general's office "should be applauded for releasing a report that
isn't just a whitewash of the government's actions."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some immigrants were held at this federal detention center in
Brooklyn. (Aaron Lee Fineman for The New York Times)(pg. A18) Chart: "AT ISSUE:
DETAINEES, PROFILED"The Justice Department rounded up 762 illegal immigrants in
the months after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
Nationalities of those detainedPakistan: 254Egypt: 111Turkey: 54Jordan: 47Yemen:
42India: 29Saudi Arabia: 24Morocco: 22Tunisia: 16Syria: 15Lebanon: 14Israel:
12Iran: 9Guyana: 8Algeria: 7Bangladesh: 7Afghanistan: 6Britain: 6France: 5Other:
74 Arrests by locationNew York: 491New Jersey: 70Other or no data: 201 Days
held1 to 50: 12751 to 100: 220101 to 150: 174151 to 200: 77201 to 250: 47251 to
300: 27Data not available for 90 detainees. Graph tracks arrests by week from
Septmber 2001 through July 2002. Graph tracks those detainees who were released,
deported or left the country from September 2001 through August 2002.197 were
released on bond. Data not available for 68. (Source: Office of the Inspector
General, Justice Department)(pg. A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); DEPORTATION (89%); WAR ON TERROR
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); PRISONS (77%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%); LAWYERS (75%);
INTERVIEWS (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); APPOINTMENTS
(71%); US PRESIDENTS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (96%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(57%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (74%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MOROCCO (79%); TURKEY (79%);
ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); LEBANON (79%); JORDAN (78%); FRANCE (59%)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1136 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Ex-Paramilitary Leader Pleads Not Guilty

BYLINE:  By Peter S. Green (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 101 words


Franko Simatovic, the Yugoslav paramilitary leader whose secretive Serbian unit
is accused of committing some of the worst atrocities in the Balkans in the
1990's, pleaded not guilty to charges of murder and "ethnic cleansing" at the
war crimes tribunal in The Hague. Mr.

Simatovic, an ethnic Croat, is accused of forming a "criminal enterprise" to
evict non-Serbs from parts of Croatia and Bosnia. Mr. Simatovic's unit was the
core of the Serbian police's special operations unit whose senior officers are
accused of killing the Serbian prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, in March.   Peter
S. Green (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (88%); HOMICIDE (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); ASSASSINATION (84%); POLITICS (82%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES,
GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATIONS;  ORGANIZED CRIME;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: GREEN, PETER S; SIMATOVIC, FRANKO; DJINDJIC, ZORAN (PRIME MIN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); CROATIA (94%); SERBIA (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA;  SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1141 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE PRESIDENT'S TRIP: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Looking Beyond Words

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1165 words

DATELINE: AQABA, Jordan, June 4


Locked in conflict, fearing for their very existence as nations, Israelis and
Palestinians have for generations prized national unity, deferring or papering
over internal disputes about the means and ends of their struggles.

But before even hoping to end the conflict with each other, each side must first
face up to these conflicts within itself, according to the iron logic of a new
international peace plan. Today, President Bush secured commitments from Ariel
Sharon, the Israeli prime minister, and Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian prime
minister, to begin doing just that.

Mr. Sharon promised to begin confronting the settler movement he nurtured for
decades. That means plunging into a long-postponed national debate, which Mr.
Sharon has tentatively begun, over what Israel wants from its occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, which it captured in the 1967 war and where it has now
settled 200,000 of its citizens.

Mr. Abbas promised to end the armed Palestinian uprising and to permit only law
enforcement officers to carry guns. That means stopping the terrorists who have
hijacked the Palestinian national dream and shifting the internal Palestinian
conversation away from empathy for suicide bombers to horror at the killing.

To make peace in the Middle East, Israelis and Palestinians may have to come to
the brink of what they fear could be civil conflict. If they are sincere about
seeing this process through, each ofthe leaders here, including President Bush,
will have to take severe political tests, and all of them will have to pass.

Tonight in Jerusalem, thousands of settlers gathered to angrily protest today's
summit, accusing their old ally, Mr. Sharon, of surrendering to terrorism. In
the Gaza Strip, leaders of Hamas rejected Mr. Abbas's suggestion that they
surrender their arms. It seemed fitting that these men took this leadership
challenge upon themselves in Aqaba, which translates as "obstacle." They met
down the beach from the ruins of a fort captured in 1917 by Lawrence of Arabia
during a previous attempt to reshape the Middle East. On each side of this
triangular summit, doubts weighed heavily about the depth of the others'
commitments.

Palestinian officials fear that Mr. Sharon's talk of dismantling "unauthorized
outposts" of settlements was meant merely to create political theater, to
generate an appearance of Israeli sacrifice for peace without much cost to the
settlement movement. In recent years, settlers have set up dozens of these
makeshift outposts of trailers and tents on hilltops across the West Bank,
sometimes populating them with only a handful of people, if anyone.

Yet evacuating any outpost is almost sure to generate searing images of settlers
screaming at soldiers and perhaps even fighting with them, as they have in the
past. Then, after a time, the outposts can easily be set up again, as they have
been.

As an obstacle to a geographically contiguous Palestinian state in the West
Bank, these outposts pale beside giant settlements like Ariel and Ma'ale Adumim,
with some 20,000 residents or more, or beside smaller but deeply rooted
settlements like Itamar, near Nablus. Those settlements are untouched so far by
the peace plan.

"The settlements are perfectly legitimate," Alan Baker, the legal adviser to the
Foreign Ministry, said, drawing a distinction between them and the relatively
few outposts that Israel considers illegal.

During the 10 years of the Oslo agreement, which unlike this plan did not
explicitly address settlements, the population of the settlements doubled. The
new plan, though, calls for a freeze on settlement growth, which Mr. Sharon did
not address today.

It was perhaps significant that Mr. Sharon spoke in English, not in Hebrew.
Israeli leaders have often accused Palestinian leaders, particularly Yasir
Arafat, of speaking in English and not Arabic when they delivered messages that
were popular with the Americans but not necessarily with their own people.

Yet at 75, Mr. Sharon, an architect of the settlement movement as a means of
promoting Israel's security, has unique credentials to question whether
settlements now safeguard or endanger Israel's existence by perpetuating the
occupation. "It is in Israel's interest not to govern the Palestinians," he said
today.

A peaceful Palestinian democracy, he continued, "will promote the long-term
security and well-being of Israel as a Jewish state."

Like Mr. Sharon, Mr. Abbas, who spoke in Arabic, was careful to couch his
endorsement of the peace plan not just in idealistic terms but in hard-nosed
language about his people's national interests. In renouncing "terror against
the Israelis wherever they may be," he said that "such methods" clashed with
Palestinians' religious and moral traditions. "These methods also conflict with
the kind of state we wish to build, based on human rights and rule of law," he
said.

Yet Mr. Abbas's remarks were not without a note of ambiguity. Even as he ruled
out violence to deal with occupation, he said that Palestinians would be
partners in "the international war against occupation and terrorism," according
to the White House translation of his remarks.

After more than a month, Mr. Abbas's oratory about stopping violence has yet to
be put to the test. Mr. Abbas has been trying to negotiate a cease fire with
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other violent groups, rather than to arrest those
intent on violence, and to confiscate arms.

Mr. Abbas told Mr. Bush today that it would take him a couple of more weeks to
persuade Hamas to agree to stop the violence, Palestinian officials said.

Nabil Shaath, the Palestinian foreign minister, said that Mr. Abbas could work
only through persuasion, because Israeli raids had left him without police
forces. Yet Muhammad Dahlan, Mr. Abbas's security minister, has thousands of
armed men under this control.

Mr. Abbas does not have nearly Mr. Sharon's domestic political strength. But he
has credibility as a warhorse of the mainstream Fatah movement and as a
Palestinian refugee of the 1948 Arab-Israeli war. Perhaps most important, he has
gained international legitimacy.

Palestinian officials said tonight that they had achieved their chief goals for
the summit, reviving a relationship with the United States that has been all but
dead for more than a year, and gaining what they saw as a clear American
commitment to the peace plan. Diplomats who know him say Mr. Abbas understands
he will lose this critical asset, international credibility and support, if he
fails to act against terrorists.

Indeed, the risks to national unity may have been apparent today, but so were
the risks of not risking unity, as demonstrated by the man who was not there:
Mr. Arafat. Mr. Arafat led his people from behind, never completely alienating
any group or excluding any option, including terrorism.

"He wanted national unity," said one diplomat who has studied him closely. "But
you can't have national unity while you have people getting blown up in coffee
shops."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian prime minister, left, shook
hands yesterday with Ariel Sharon, the Israeli prime minister, after their
closing statements at the summit meeting with President Bush at the royal palace
at the Red Sea resort of Aqaba, Jordan. Below, Mr. Sharon showed the effects of
the heat. (Pool photo by Hussein Malla); (Pool photo by Menahem Kahana)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); HAMAS (89%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); PEACE
PROCESS (77%); RELIGION (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (72%); POLITICAL DEBATES (71%); FUNDAMENTALISM (71%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (67%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (53%) PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  DEMONSTRATIONS
AND RIOTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%) PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY; HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST
MOVEMENT)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (85%) SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN);
ABBAS, MAHMOUD (PRIME MIN); BENNET, JAMES; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: RED SEA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (67%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); JORDAN (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1146 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thousands of Arabs and Muslims Could Be Deported, Officials Say

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


More than 13,000 of the Arab and Muslim men who came forward earlier this year
to register with immigration authorities -- roughly 16 percent of the total --
may now face deportation, government officials say.

Only a handful have been linked to terrorism. But of the 82,000 men older than
16 who registered, more than 13,000 have been found to be living in this country
illegally, officials say.

Many had hoped to win leniency by demonstrating their willingness to cooperate
with the campaign against terror. The men were not promised special treatment,
however, and officials believe that most will be expelled in what is likely to
be the largest wave of deportations after the Sept. 11 attacks.

The government has initiated deportation proceedings, and in immigrant
communities across the country, an exodushas already begun.

Quietly, the fabric of neighborhoods is thinning. Families are packing up; some
are splitting up. Rather than come forward and risk deportation, an unknowable
number of immigrants have burrowed deeper underground. Others have simply left
-- for Canada or for their homeland.

The deportations are a striking example of how the Bush administration
increasingly uses the nation's immigration system as a weapon in the battle
against terror.

For decades, illegal immigrants have often flourished because officials lacked
the staff, resources and political will to deport them. But since the attacks on
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the government has been detaining and
deporting illegal immigrants from countries considered breeding grounds for
terrorists.

"There's been a major shift in our priorities," said Jim Chaparro, acting
director for interior enforcement at the Department of Homeland Security, which
has subsumed the old immigration service.

"We need to focus our enforcement efforts on the biggest threats," Mr. Chaparro
added. "If a loophole can be exploited by an immigrant, it can also be exploited
by a terrorist."

Advocates for immigrants warn that such a strategy -- indeed, the
administration's sweeping reorientation of law enforcement toward terrorism
prevention -- can be abused by government officials.

They note that, though it did not deal directly with the registration program,
an internal Justice Department report was released this week that was deeply
critical of the government's roundup of illegal immigrants after Sept. 11, 2001.
Senior officials were found to have repeatedly ignored calls from immigration
officials to quickly distinguish between the innocent and guilty. As a result,
many people who had no ties to terrorism were jailed unnecessarily, the report
said.

Advocates for immigrants have also accused officials of practicing selective
enforcement by focusing on illegal immigrants from Arab and Muslim nations.
Rather than disrupting communities, they say, the government should improve its
intelligence and prosecution of terrorists.

"What the government is doing is very aggressively targeting particular
nationalities for enforcement of immigration law," said Lucas Guttentag,
director of the immigrants' rights project at the American Civil Liberties
Union. "The identical violation committed by, say, a Mexican immigrant is not
enforced in the same way."

Some of those facing deportation have waited months or years for officials to
process applications to legalize their status. Immigration lawyers say they
believe that a substantial number of these men avoid deportation. Their clients
are only illegal, the lawyers say, because of the government's inefficiency.

Even before the registration program began early this year, the government had
deported hundreds of illegal immigrants in its effort to prevent, and not simply
respond to, terrorist attacks. But the scope of those deportations remains
unclear.

Officials say more than 600 Arab and Muslim illegal immigrants were deported
during the first wave of expulsions after Sept. 11. But the Justice Department
stopped releasing figures after the number of arrested immigrants surged to
1,200, and officials have declined to give complete statistics for that period.

Another wave of deportations began last year after officials said they planned
to find and arrest illegal immigrants who pose security threats and already have
deportation orders. Of that group, more than 3,000 people have been arrested.
Officials say they cannot say how many of those Arab and Muslim men have been
deported.

But it is the special registration program -- which required noncitizens from 25
Arab and Muslim countries to register from December through April -- that seems
likely to produce the largest number of expulsions. In the last two months,
officials have released a succession of tallies of immigrants facing
deportation; the 13,000 figure represents the most up-to-date estimate.

Officials acknowledged that most Arab and Muslim immigrants swept up in
counterterrorism sweeps have no ties to terrorist groups. Of the 82,000 men who
showed up at immigration offices, and tens of thousands more screened at
airports and border crossings in the past six months, 11 have had links to
terrorism.

Still, officials said, they can no longer ignore illegal immigrants from
countries that pose a security risk. They noted that several Sept. 11 hijackers
were in the country illegally at the time of the attacks.

In all, deportations of illegal immigrants from Asian and African countries have
surged by nearly 27 percent in the last two years. The number of Pakistani,
Jordanians, Lebanese and Moroccans deported during that time has doubled, the
statistics show; the number of Egyptians deported has nearly tripled.

In the immigrant communities, the impact multiplies.

The Pakistani Embassy in Washington said that since Sept. 11, more than 15,000
Pakistanis in this country illegally are believed to have left for Canada,
Europe and Pakistan.

Three weeks ago, in Stanton, Calif., Yasser Tair, a Syrian real estate agent,
was deported to the country he left 14 years ago. Mr. Tair's wife, Zhour, and
his two American-born children are also moving.

Their dining room table is already gone. So are the rugs, the children's beds,
the computer. "I am selling everything," Zhour Tair said. "I cannot make it here
anymore."

In Brooklyn, hundreds of illegal immigrants have sought help from the
Arab-American Family Support Center. About 500 of the center's clients who
registered are now fighting deportation in court.

Johanna Habib, the center's only staff lawyer, writes their names and court
dates on an increasingly crowded wall calendar. Some of the men have
American-born children or wives who are citizens or green-card holders. Many
have applications to legalize their immigration status that have been pending
for years.

"We have a handful that are going to be O.K." Ms. Habib said. "But it's a very
small handful."

Abdel Hakim Benbader, a cabdriver from Algeria at the center, said he registered
even though he was living here illegally, because he wanted to help. He said he
thought his future was in the United States. His wife has a green card and his
son is an American citizen.

"We were thinking of buying a house," said Mr. Benbader, who is fighting
deportation. "We were thinking of having good jobs like everybody. If I'm
leaving, it's going to be a big problem."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Zhour Tair and her children, Ammar, left, and Danya, plan to
leave California. Mrs. Tair's husband, Yasser Tair, was recently deported. "I am
selling everything," Mrs. Tair says. "I cannot make it here anymore." (J. Emilio
Flores for The New York Times)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); DEPORTATION (95%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); MEN
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); RELIGION (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
WAR ON TERROR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); REFUGEES (73%) IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  TERRORISM;
ILLEGAL ALIENS;  DEPORTATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%) HOMELAND SECURITY
DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CHAPARRO, JIM

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1147 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Staff to Leave Liberia

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


The United States today ordered all of its non-emergency embassy personnel to
leave Monrovia, Liberia, and said the West African nation's president, Charles
Taylor, should face trial in a special war crimes court.

The departure order by the State Department followed a recommendation on May 22
that all Americans in Liberia leave the country because of fighting between
government troops and rebels, who have now reached the outskirts of Monrovia,
the capital.

The State Department also said that Mr. Taylor should be brought to trial at the
war crimes tribunal in neighboring Sierra Leone after that court issued an
international arrest warrant for him on Wednesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); CIVIL WAR (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); GENOCIDE (85%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); ARREST WARRANTS (85%); ARRESTS (85%) UNITED
STATES FOREIGN SERVICE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE
AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: TAYLOR, CHARLES (PRES)

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); LIBERIA (94%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); WESTERN AFRICA
(92%)

REGION: LIBERIA;  MONROVIA (LIBERIA);  SIERRA LEONE

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1150 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SOUTHEAST ASIA;
Thailand Tiptoes in Step With the American Antiterror Effort

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, June 7


Although Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra insists publicly that his country is
safely on the sidelines in the campaign against terrorism, he has secretly been
helping the United States in several significant ways, American officials say.

He has allowed the Central Intelligence Agency to bring suspected members of Al
Qaeda here for interrogation and the American Air Force to use bases in Thailand
for the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, American officials say. Twoweeks ago, the
Thai authorities were acting on a C.I.A. tip when they arrested a man suspected
of being part of a plot to blow up the United States Embassy in Singapore in
December 2001.

But Mr. Thaksin has largely kept his support of the United States secret, and he
has enlisted the Bush administration in his efforts. Thus, when the State
Department was preparing a list of countries that had identified themselves as
part of the United States-led coalition in Iraq, the Thai government insisted
that Thailand not be included. The White House agreed, reluctantly.

The Bush administration is not pleased with Mr. Thaksin's quiet approach. "It is
not enough to be with us in the war on terrorism, but you have to trumpet it,"
explained an American official in Southeast Asia. Washington would prefer that
leaders behave like President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo of the Philippines, who
has publicly pledged her allegiance to the United States in the campaign against
terrorism, the official said. In gratitude, President Arroyo was honored with a
state dinner at the White House last month.

Mr. Thaksin is paying his own call on President Bush this coming week, but his
visit to Washington is not an official one. It is being sponsored by the
U.S.-Asean Business Council, and there was a debate within the administration as
to whether President Bush should meet with him.

Adding to American unease over Mr. Thaksin's approach to terrorism are concerns
about the human rights situation in Thailand, particularly surrounding the
government's crackdown on suspected drug dealers. In the past few months, more
than 2,000 suspected dealers have been killed, most of them by the police,
foreign diplomats say.

But Mr. Bush will receive Mr. Thaksin for several reasons, officials said. For
one, the administration wants Thailand's promise not to turn over any Americans
to the International Criminal Court, a pledge the administration has been
seeking from other countries as well.

Thailand is also important in the Pentagon's new strategy of "forward
positioning," establishing sites where American forces can store equipment and
from which they can come and go as needed.

One such place in Thailand is Utapao Air Base, 90 miles south of Bangkok. During
the Vietnam War, Utapao was humming 24 hours a day as a base for B-52's carrying
out bombing raids over North Vietnam. Despite Thailand's studied neutrality on
the war in Iraq -- one Thai foreign affairs official said during the war that
the country had no position -- Mr. Thaksin allowed Utapao to be used by American
warplanes flying into combat in Iraq, as he had earlier, during the war in
Afghanistan.

Utapao is also probably where Qaeda operatives have been interrogated, retired
American intelligence officials said, explaining that the base had facilities
for sophisticated interrogations.

Last year, according to other American officials, at least two senior Qaeda
operatives were brought here for interrogation -- Abu Zubaydah, thought to have
been Al Qaeda's operations chief, and Ramzi bin al- Shibh, a planner of the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Both men were captured last year in Pakistan, and they may have been brought to
Thailand as part of a broader C.I.A. program to take captives to "undisclosed
locations." They have since been moved. It is not known how many other Qaeda
suspects have been interrogated here, or if any are still here.

A spokesman for the Thai government declined to answer any questions about the
interrogations, as did officials at the United States Embassy, both saying they
were "sensitive intelligence matters." They also refused to answer questions
about the use of Utapao during the Iraq war.

Several diplomats here also said in interviews this week that Mr. Thaksin, a
billionaire former telecommunications executive, did not have a strong grasp of
security issues.

But diplomats and Thais alike explain Mr. Thaksin's low-profile approach to
terrorism with one word: tourism. Drawn by beautiful beaches, great weather and
a wide-open night life, more than 10 million tourists a year came to Thailand
before the bombing last year in Bali, Indonesia, and before the SARS virus
further discouraged travel to Southeast Asia.

Mr. Thaksin, these diplomats and Thais say, fears that any public talk about
terrorism in Thailand will frighten tourists away. Nor does he want the country
to be a target for terrorists because of an association with the United States.

The issue of the extent of a terrorist presence here was raised again two weeks
ago with the arrest of Muhammad Yusuf, a Singaporean alleged to be a member of
Jemaah Islamiyah, a Qaeda organization that has operated from Indonesia and
neighboring Malaysia.

Mr. Yusuf, whose arrest has not been publicly reported here, had eluded capture
since December 2001, when the police in Singapore rounded up more than 20 Jemaah
Islamiyah members suspected of plotting to blow up the American, Australian and
Israeli Embassies there.

In separate interviews, senior diplomats from four countries said they did not
think that Al Qaeda or Jemaah Islamiyah had a base in Thailand. Thailand's
usefulness to terrorists, they said, is as a meeting place, a transit point and
an easy place to pick up false documents.

In early 2002, several Qaeda operatives met in Bangkok and decided that American
embassies had become too well protected, and that it was better to go after more
vulnerable targets, like nightclubs and tourist resorts popular with Westerners,
Western and Asian officials have said. The attack on Bali several months later
is seen as an outcome of that meeting.

The United States, Australia and a dozen other countries now have teams at
Bangkok's international airport looking for people traveling on fraudulent
passports; they seize 200 to 300 false documents a week, officials here said.

But there are virtually no controls on the border with Malaysia, which has been
a base for Qaeda operatives. More than 40,000 people cross each weekend.

Two of the Sept. 11 hijackers traveled from Afghanistan to Malaysia and then in
effect laundered their travel documents through Thailand before entering the
United States, American and Malaysian officials have said.

Thailand is a Buddhist country, with the minority Muslim population concentrated
in the country's southern provinces, along the border with Malaysia. There has
been an increase in violence in the south -- burning of schools and shootings --
but diplomats attribute much of it to gang warfare.

Last week, Australia warned its citizens traveling in Thailand to "exercise
extreme caution," especially in Phuket and Pattaya, two of the most popular
tourist destinations, adding that the government had "reports that terrorist
elements in the region are planning attacks."

The United States travel advisory, which is unchanged since last year, urges
Americans traveling in Thailand to "exercise caution, especially in locations
where Westerners congregate."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thaksin Shinawatra, the prime minister of Thailand, has sought
to play down his government's unwavering cooperation with the United States.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
WAR ON TERROR (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
IRAQ WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); VIETNAM WAR (76%); AIR FORCES (76%);
MILITARY BASES (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (75%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (70%)
TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%); US AIR FORCE
(58%) CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (50%) THAKSIN SHINAWATRA
(PRIME MIN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); THAILAND (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA
(93%); ASIA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); VIET NAM (92%); PHILIPPINES (79%);
SINGAPORE (79%)

REGION: THAILAND#000T031212SRAQA01#

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1151 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

The Back Page: Unsettling;
The Bush Plan: Put the Toughest Hurdles First

BYLINE:   By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1481 words


ON Sept. 14, 1993, the very first morning that the Oslo accord had promised
would lead to peace between Israel and the Palestinians, 19-year-old Bahaa
al-Din rose early for dawn prayers in a fetid refugee quarter of the Gaza Strip.
He bathed, shaved his head, shook hands with his friends and went to a mosque to
pray again.

Then he tried to blow up an Israeli police station.

Just a little over two years later, as one of the architects of that accord,
Yitzhak Rabin, was addressing a peace rally in Tel Aviv, a slight, intense,
deeply religious Jew, Yigal Amir, slipped past the bodyguards who were watching
for Arabs.

Three shots rang out from his pistol and the prime minister was dead.

Neither Mr. Din, a Hamas member blown apart when his bomb exploded, nor Mr.
Amir, a Torah scholar and supporter of the hard-line Jewish settler movement,
was entirely an aberration. Both represented widely shared ideologies within
their own communities that, together, make this struggle so intractable -- all
the more so because these ideologies are driven not just by nationalism but by
religion and, thus, by absolute, uncompromisable certainties. In effect, each
camp, with all its secularists and people who might want peace, has become over
the years a captive of its side's most extreme elements.

With the bright hopes of Oslo long gone, and 32 months into a bitter second
intifada, President Bush vowed last week to "ride herd" on the Israelis and
Palestinians until peace is achieved. He gathered the Israeli prime minister,
Ariel Sharon; the new Palestinian prime minister, Mahmoud Abbas, and King
Abdullah of Jordan at the Red Sea resort of Aqaba. American officials wrote
conciliatory-sounding speeches for them and haggled over the wording, coming up
with variations on a formula of two states "living side by side in peace and
security."

Mr. Bush's approach appears to be to confront immediately two issues that
confounded the Oslo peace process: Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip, which the Oslo agreement had left for later, and Israel's demand for
security -- that is, an end to Palestinian suicide bombings -- which the Oslo
bargaining process proved unable to deliver.

But the history of the region shows how difficult addressing those questions
immediately will be -- indeed, more difficult than a decade ago. The single most
salient fact is that at the time of the Oslo agreement there were roughly
100,000 Jewish settlers; today there are more than 200,000. And the ricocheting
violence -- suicide bombings by Palestinians, targeted killings by the Israelis
-- has only hardened hatreds and fears.

Mr. Bush's road map toward peace was immediately greeted with protests by
thousands of Jewish settlers on one hand and thousands of Hamas supporters on
the other. Hamas broke off negotiations with the Palestinian Authority over
seeking a cease-fire between Palestinians and Israel. Yasir Arafat, the longtime
Palestinian leader who was frozen out of the meeting by Mr. Bush, dismissed the
meeting as insignificant. There were no comparable demonstrations in favor.

Mr. Bush's foray into the Middle East came with all the flair and attention to
detail that his White House -- already notable for positioning an aircraft
carrier so the shoreline couldn't be seen by the camera when the president made
his "Top Gun" landing -- could muster. The Americans ordered a bridge built over
the swimming pool at the king's summer palace so the four leaders could make a
dramatic entrance. When it proved to narrow for them to walk abreast, it was
torn down and a wider one built.

The Americans even installed a hidden air conditioning system that blew chill
blasts up from the bottom of the podiums so no unstatesmanlike sweat would
appear on men wearing suits under a broiling sun.

But reshaping the Middle East is a considerably more difficult matter than
stage-managing a photo-op.

Indeed, even as the leaders were reading their scripts before the cameras there
appeared to be some holding back. Mr. Abbas promised "a complete end to violence
and terrorism," but it is doubtful he has the political clout to do so. In any
case, the Palestinian Authority security forces that might be used to disarm
Hamas have been devastated by the Israelis.

In the optimistic early years after Oslo, when Palestinians came back from
abroad eager to invest in what they hoped would be a new country, there was
little popular support for suicide bombers, and there were times when Mr.
Arafat's security chiefs locked up Islamic militants.

But in recent years, as the peace process launched at Oslo fell behind schedule
for reaching a final settlement, and especially since it collapsed two years
ago, Hamas and Islamic Jihad began taking the lead in the Palestinian struggle.
Their attacks challenged not only Israel but Mr. Arafat's leadership. Mr. Arafat
was also challenged -- along with the old-guard exiles he had brought back from
Tunis, including Mr. Abbas -- by a younger, home-grown leadership that had grown
up in the first intifada. Now, even as Israeli targeted killing of some of these
leaders has stepped up, they too have turned to suicide bombing, under the name
Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.

So today Mr. Abbas' ability to deliver on a promise of controlling radical
violence is challenged by not just one group, but many.

At the ceremony with Mr. Bush, Mr. Sharon referred to dismantling "illegal"
settlements, and Israel officials were using the word "outposts" when they
talked about dismantling settlements.

"Outposts" and "illegal settlements" refer to small clusters of house trailers
thrown up on the rocky hillsides of the West Bank by militant young Israelis.
Often they are near established settlements and are intended to expand their
area. Sometimes they are put up to honor a settler killed in raids by
Palestinian gunmen. But sometimes, as a settler leader once explained on the
settlers' own pirate radio station, they are a kind of ruse, thrown up precisely
so the army can dismantle them and the government can respond to international
pressure by announcing it has eliminated some settlements. A cartoon in the
newspaper Ha'aretz portrayed this as a kind of stage set, with a flat cardboard
trailer being attacked by the defense minister in a cardboard bulldozer.

More important are giant settlements like Ariel and Ma'ale Adumim -- small
cities with over 20,000 residents -- as well as many smaller but
well-established places. Identifiable by their red tile roofs and well-watered
greenery, they are spattered all over the West Bank and connected by special
roads that bypass Arab villages. Their existence as protected Israeli islands
makes it difficult, if not impossible, to map out a contiguous Palestinian
state, a concept Mr. Bush and Mr. Sharon both say they support.

The explosive growth of the settlements -- along with the humiliating roadblocks
Palestinians had to travel through -- was a major factor feeding the frustration
with the Oslo agreement that exploded into the current round of violence.

Since the West Bank was seized from Jordan in the 1967 Middle East war, the
settlements have expanded and changed under both Labor and Likud governments.
The original settlements were in the Jordan Valley, intended as a buffer against
Arab invasion from the east.

Many of Israel's founders were staunchly secular. But an important change came
with the 1967 war, when the Israeli army reached the Western Wall of the Temple
Mount, the most sacred place in Judaism. In tears, Rabbi Zvi Yehuda Kook was
brought by two paratroopers who had been his students to the place where Jews
had been forbidden to worship.

It was Rabbi Kook who laid down the ideological framework of religious Zionism.
His ruling that the present was a messianic age created the basis for religious
settlements on the West Bank, or biblical Judea and Samaria, and it was a
devoted follower, Rabbi Moshe Levenger, who launched the first effort, in 1968,
to resettle Hebron -- King David's first capital and the site of a massacre of
Jews by Arabs in 1929. The shock of the nearly lost 1973 war galvanized the main
religious settler movement, Gush Emunim (Bloc of the Faithful) into renewed
efforts to hold onto the land, and when Menachem Begin's Likud party took power
in 1977, settlement became official policy.

Trailers and prefabricated sheds, then red-roofed cities, sprouted across the
strategic, stony hilltops as the settlers created "facts on the ground" to hold
onto the land forever. Carefully presiding over their growth, map in hand,
operating under such titles as minister of housing or minister of
transportation, was a tough old warrior who had fought in all of Israel's wars.
It was Ariel Sharon, the man who now has told Israelis and President Bush that
he is ready to face the issue of dismantling settlements if Mr. Abbas'
government can deliver an end to violence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 15, 2003



CORRECTION: A map last Sunday showing Jewish settlements in the West Bank
omitted the source of the information. It was B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights
organization.

GRAPHIC: Photos: STATES OF MIND -- In Gaza (above), uniformed Islamic Jihadists
await a funeral. In the West Bank (right), a Jewish settlement. (Associated
Press)(pg. 1) Map of Israel highlighting the West Bank and Jerusalem. Map also
highlights municipal boundaries of Israeli settlement areas and areas of formal
Palestinian authority. (pg. 14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
HAMAS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%);
PEACE PROCESS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); PRIME
MINISTERS (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); POLICE FORCES (71%); TORAH & JUDAIC
TEXTS (70%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); KIFNER,
JOHN

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: RED SEA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (53%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (98%); JORDAN (79%); IRAQ
(79%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1153 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Ruling Leaves Hitler's Paintings in U.S. Hands

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM H. HONAN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 368 words


A federal judge in Washington has all but brought to a close a 20-year fight
over the ownership of four watercolors signed by Adolf Hitler and a huge archive
of photographs, some of which were used by prosecutors at the postwar Nuremberg
trials.

The ruling, a 26-page decision issued on May 30 by Judge Henry H. Kennedy Jr. of
Federal District Court, leaves the works in the possession of the United States
government.

The archive holds 2.5 million images of Germany dating back to the 1860's and
includes many glamorized pictures of Hitler, some showing him rehearsing his
grandiloquent oratory. The photographs are in the National Archives. The
watercolors are at the United States Army Center of Military History in
Washington, and access to them is restricted to scholars and other experts.

The ruling comes in a case that began in 1983 when Billy F. Price, a Houston
collector of Nazi memorabilia, and the heirs of Heinrich Hoffmann, Hitler's
friend and personal photographer, filed a lawsuit in Texas seeking to gain the
paintings and photographs from the government. Mr. Price said he had signed an
agreement with the heirs to acquire the work.

A series of rulings and appeals followed, bolstering first one side, then the
other. The plaintiffs' latest filings tried to reopen the case, but Judge
Kennedy would not allow it, saying they had filed them too late. Robert I.
White, the Houston lawyer who represented Mr. Price and the Hoffmann heirs, had
argued that the paintings and photographs were unlawfully seized and kept by the
United States Army when it entered Germany in the last days of World War II.

Jeffrey Axelrad, a Justice Department lawyer, argued in court that there was
ample precedent in both federal and international law to justify the seizure of
propagandistic material from a defeated enemy.

Mr. White, reached by phone in Turkey, indicated that his clients' prospects
were now "kind of dismal" and that a further appeal was unlikely.

Mr. Axelrad, who had made the case a mission after a Texas court ruled in favor
of the Hoffmann heirs and Mr. Price and demanded that the government pay them
$7.8 million in damages, was jubilant. "The judge got the case exactly right,"
he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A detail from "Street in Vienna, 1914," one of the Hitler
watercolors in government hands. (Photograph From the Army Art Collection, Army
Center of Military History)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (92%); LITIGATION (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
ARMIES (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); PAINTING (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PHOTOGRAPHY (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); LAWYERS (78%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); VERDICTS (78%); VISUAL ARTISTS (78%); GENOCIDE
(77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); DAMAGES (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); HISTORY (69%);
COLLECTORS & COLLECTING (68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS
AND MINORITIES;  WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  ARCHIVES AND RECORDS;  PHOTOGRAPHY;  ART

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ARCHIVES & RECORDS ADMINISTRATION (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF
ARMY (56%) NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION

PERSON: HITLER, ADOLF (1889-1945); KENNEDY, HENRY H JR (JUDGE); HONAN, WILLIAM
H; PRICE, BILLY F; HOFFMANN, HEINRICH (1885-1957)

CITY: HOUSTON, TX, USA (92%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (92%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); GERMANY (90%); TURKEY (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (57%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1154 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arrests After 9/11: Are We Safer?

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 170 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Report Faults the Roundup of Illegal Immigrants After 9/11" (front
page, June 3):

The Justice Department inspector general's report implies more than the
violation of the civil liberties of 762 noncitizens.

It also implies a dysfunctional and ineffective approach to protecting the
public after Sept. 11, 2001.

No one can be made safer by arresting the wrong people, just as no one was made
safer in 1942 when more than 100,000 Americans of Japanese descent were, for
that reason alone, arrested and detained.

None of the 762 people rounded up and detained after Sept. 11 were charged with
terrorism. Who was made safer by their detention? They were the wrong targets.
In focusing on them, the government certainly violated their rights but, more
important to most Americans, abandoned public safety as well.

There is no public safety defense for what the government did.

IRA GLASSER
New York, June 3, 2003

The writer was executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union from
1978 to 2001.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); TERRORISM (88%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
(88%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (88%); HIJACKING (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(55%)

PERSON: GLASSER, IRA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1157 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Milosevic Security Chief In U.N. Custody

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 90 words


Jovica Stanisic, once the feared chief of Serbia's secret police, was sent to
the United Nations prison in The Hague to face charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

A close ally of the former Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, the former
police chief's arrival was notable because he was one of the main organizers of
secret police and paramilitary actions against civilians in the Serbian wars
against Bosnia and Croatia. He had been indicted with his deputy, Franko
Simatovic, now also at The Hague.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); POLICE FORCES (86%);
INDICTMENTS (85%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (83%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; STANISIC, JOVICA; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (94%); CROATIA
(93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1161 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arab-Americans Gather to Build Their Civil Rights Activism

BYLINE:  By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 821 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., June 13


For nearly two years, many Arab and Muslim immigrants have been consumed by
anger and despair as they have watched the arrests, detentions and deportations
that have accompanied the hunt for terrorists since the attacks of Sept. 11,
2001.

But today, as hundreds of lawyers, teachers, students and advocates poured into
the Marriott Hotel here for the largest Arab-American civil rights conference in
the nation, the mood was mostly upbeat and the talk was about fighting back.

In Salon D, several dozen participants in pinstripes and blue jeans settled in
for a lesson in politics. "Ten letters to a House office in one day, it opens
the door," advised Jay Dick, a political consultant. "You need to get your
voices up there."

In Salon B, Arab-American politicians urged women to get involved in
presidential campaigns. Upstairs, panelists discussed the importance of building
partnerships with law enforcement agencies and school officials.

"We are at an absolutely critical moment," said Diana Abu-Jaber, a novelist who
lives in Portland, Ore., speaking at a seminar on the role of Arab-American
women.

"We must not be afraid to write to the newspapers," she told the crowd. "We must
be brave enough to get angry. We must vote, for God's sake. We must vote."

The meetings reflect a growing activism among some Arab-Americans, who are
coming together to battle the Bush administration's antiterrorism strategy.

Government officials say they are trying to protect the country from attacks and
note that the vast majority of detainees are people who have violated the
country's immigration laws. But in cities across the nation, outraged
Arab-Americans are starting or expanding community and legal groups to offer
support and services.

The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, the civil rights group that was
the host for today's conference, has been pushing its members to get involved in
the political process for more than two decades. These days, there is a growing
sense of urgency.

Hundreds of illegal immigrants and dozens of legal immigrants have been detained
since Sept. 11. The government has also registered more than 80,000 Arab and
Muslim men in a process that may lead to the largest wave of deportations since
the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. More than 13,000 of the
men who registered are in deportation proceedings, officials say. Advocates for
Arab and Muslim immigrants say the authorities are unfairly focusing on people
who have nothing to do with terrorism.

Hoping to change the current climate, some Arab-Americans are turning to
political action.

"These are the best of times and the worst of times," said Mary Rose Oakar, a
former Democratic member of Congress who is now the president of the
American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee.

"People are energized when they see some of the difficult problems experienced
by people who happen to be Middle Eastern," she said. "People want to have a say
about what goes on."

Zogby International, a polling company that tracks trends in Arab and Muslim
communities, estimates that there are more than 500,000 Arab-American voters
around the country.

In the last presidential election, 46 percent voted for President Bush while 38
percent voted for Al Gore, the Democratic candidate.

It is a strikingly diverse group. At today's conference, participants wore sober
suits and blue jeans, headscarves and strappy sandals. There were Muslims and
Christians, Democrats and Republicans, fluent speakers of Arabic and those who
could only sprinkle their conversations with a smattering of their grandparents'
languages.

Some people spoke of how difficult it had become for women who wear headscarves
to find jobs. A young Lebanese pilot talked about losing his job because his
employers suspected he was a terrorist. Many panelists decried the detentions of
people who had nothing to do with terrorism.

But attendees also described some victories. A civil rights group recently won a
court battle to prevent the deportation of a group of men in Michigan. An
Arab-American woman, Teresa Isaac, was elected mayor in Lexington, Ky., last
year.

This month, an internal Justice Department report acknowledged that many Arab
and Muslim immigrants were improperly detained in the aftermath of Sept. 11.

And prominent politicians from both parties have made time to meet and speak at
the conference. Today, Senator Lincoln Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, and
Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, attended the conference
luncheon.

On Saturday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is expected to speak at the
group's dinner banquet. Organizers say that the conference, which ends on
Sunday, is expected to draw more 2,000 participants.

"It's very important that we understand the rules of the game," said Mayor Isaac
of Lexington, who urged participants to get involved in politics. "That's the
only way to get our issues heard."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARAB AMERICANS (94%); TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%);
DEPORTATION (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); POLITICS (89%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (77%); HIJACKING (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); WOMEN (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); LAWYERS
(73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (69%); WRITERS (67%) TERRORISM;  ARAB-AMERICANS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  DEPORTATION

PERSON: SWARNS, RACHEL L

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PORTLAND, OR, USA (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); OREGON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  ARLINGTON (VA)#055T040106SL04A01#

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1164 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Page Two: June 8-14;
THE LAW: BALANCE ON TERRORISM

BYLINE:  By Eric Lichtblau

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 269 words


Attorney General John Ashcroft says he makes "no apologies" for using every
weapon in his legal arsenal to root out terrorists, and the message has proven
popular with many Americans.

The loudest objections to Mr.

Ashcroft's aggressive tactics have come from Arab-Americans and civil liberties
groups. But now, with some in his own camp raising concerns about whether
authorities have pushed too hard, law enforcement officials themselves
acknowledge the need for a mid-course correction.

The trigger for their introspection was a blistering report released earlier
this month by Mr. Ashcroft's inspector general at the Justice Department, Glenn
A. Fine. It found that few of the 762 illegal immigrants arrested in the
government's investigation of Sept. 11 had clear terrorist ties.

F.B.I. officials, among the main targets of the report, say they don't regret
casting a wide net. "No one wanted to be the person who cut someone loose and
then had that decision prove to be fatal," a senior F.B.I. official said. Still,
officials say they plan to adopt many of Mr. Fine's recommendations. That, they
say, will mean establishing clear criteria to identify a terrorism suspect,
returning power to immigration officials for removing suspects, and ensuring
adequate treatment of prisoners, among other measures.

But some aren't sure the changes would do enough to prevent profiling of illegal
immigrants as terrorists. "You can't have a fair system for mass round-ups of
people that throw away basic checks and balances," said Timothy Edgar
legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union.   Eric Lichtblau

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(76%); CORRECTIONS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (74%); IMMIGRATION (74%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); ARAB AMERICANS (73%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1171 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREATS AND RESPONSES: LAW ENFORCEMENT;
Bush Issues Racial Profiling Ban But Exempts Security Inquiries

BYLINE:  By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


President Bush issued guidelines today barring federal agents from using race or
ethnicity in their routine investigations, but the policy carves out clear
exemptions for investigations involving terrorism and national security matters.

The new policy, representing the first time that the federal government has
imposed across the board guidelines on racial profiling, governs the conduct of
70 federal law enforcement agencies. A narcotics agent, for instance, cannot
focus on a specific neighborhood simply because of its racial makeup, the policy
states.

In national security operations, however, the policy allows agents to use race
and ethnicity in "narrow" circumstances to help "identify terrorist threats and
stop potential catastrophic attacks," officials said.

Immigration officials, for instance, will continue to be able to require
visitors from largely Middle Eastern countries to register with the government.

And if intelligence officials had information indicating that terrorists of a
certain ethnic group planned to hijack a plane next week in California, the
authorities could impose "heightened scrutiny" on men of that ethnicity who
boarded planes in that area, officials said.

Arab-American and civil rights groups said the exemptions in the White House
policy would give the authorities legal justification to single out Middle
Easterners and others who may fall under suspicion, and they questioned whether
the new policy -- issued as "guidance" -- would be aggressively enforced.

"This policy acknowledges racial profiling as a national concern, but it does
nothing to stop it," Laura Murphy, director of the Washington office of the
American Civil Liberties Union, said in an interview. "It's largely a rhetorical
statement. The administration is trying to soften its image, but it's smoke and
mirrors."

The policy is more than two years in the making. It grows out of a commitment
Mr. Bush made on the campaign trail in 2000 and again in February 2001, in a
State of the Union-style address, when he said of racial profiling: "It's wrong,
and we will end it in America."

At that time, profiling had become a growing concern to many blacks and
Hispanics, who said that they were being disproportionately subjected to traffic
stops, searches and other law enforcement tactics. Civil rights leaders coined a
derisive name for the practice -- "Driving While Black" -- and the Clinton
administration intervened in New Jersey to prevent racial profiling by state
highway patrols.

Weeks after taking office, Mr. Bush ordered the Justice Department to conduct a
review of racial profiling. Officials said the study was delayed by the
terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, even as civil rights groups complained that
the government's expanded terrorism investigations had made Middle Eastern men
the target of racial profiling more than ever before.

The final report from the Justice Department and the policy recommendations were
delivered last week to Mr. Bush, who ordered the restrictions adopted across the
federal government, the White House said.

The Justice Department, in a survey of federal operations, concluded in its
report that profiling did not appear to be "a systemic problem."

"The way the president looks at it," a White House spokesman, Scott McClellan,
said, "this is about stopping the abuses of a few, and today's action should
only strengthen the public's confidence that the vast majority of law
enforcement officials have earned and deserve credit for the job they do in
protecting Americans."

The Justice Department acknowledged, however, that past policies were often
unclear.

Only 7 of the 70 law enforcement agencies surveyed had policies that
specifically prohibited racial profiling, and those policies sometimes varied in
tone and substance, the Justice Department review found.

Ralph Boyd, an assistant attorney general at the Justice Department who runs the
civil rights division, said the over-arching theme of the guidelines is that law
enforcement officials cannot use race or ethnicity "as a proxy" to focus
increased criminal suspicion on a person.

"This is an antistereotyping guidance" aimed at balancing the civil rights of
the public against the legitimate needs of law enforcement, Mr. Boyd said.

The policy lays out two distinct sets of guidelines: a broad prohibition on
profiling in traditional and often routine law enforcement investigations; and a
looser set of standards for national security cases.

In traditional operations like traffic stops, federal agents "may not use race
or ethnicity to any degree, except that officers may rely on race and ethnicity
in a specific suspect description," the policy states. Officials said this
prohibition was intended to go beyond the safeguards of the Constitution and
existing law.

So, for instance, agents conducting drug or auto theft investigations are barred
from singling out people or neighborhoods based on the "generalized assumption"
that people of a certain race or ethnicity are more likely to be drug dealers or
car thieves.

But federal park police who had a description of a fleeing bank robbery suspect
-- with a specific race and physical description -- could use race in deciding
which speeding drivers to pull over. The information in such cases must be
specific and "trustworthy," the policy says.

In investigations involving national security and border integrity, the new
policy adopts a lower standard, saying federal agents "may consider race,
ethnicity and other relevant factors to the extent permitted by our laws and the
Constitution."

The racial information that the authorities can use in such cases does not have
to be very specific. The policy notes that because terrorists have the ability
to strike almost anywhere, "there can be no expectation that the information
must be specific to a particular locale or even to a particular identified
scheme."

Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said
the new policy would do little to mollify Arab-Americans.

"There seem to be a lot of 'buts' and 'howevers' here that would allow profiling
of Arabs and Muslims to continue," Mr. Hooper said.

He said he found the policy paradoxical in light of a report from the Justice
Department this month criticizing the detentions of hundreds of illegal
immigrants, most of them Middle Eastern, after the 9/11 attacks.

"This is a problem that's certainly widespread, and I don't think this policy
does anything to help the situation," Mr. Hooper said.

Ms. Murphy at the A.C.L.U. said she was troubled that the policy was issued as
"guidance" from the Justice Department rather than as an executive order from
the White House or a legislative proposal. She said the policy might lack teeth
-- and enforcement mechanisms -- as a result.

The Bush administration "is trying to get the public relations benefits of a new
law without actually creating a new law," she said.

But the White House said that even without issuing an executive order, the
administration was committed to ensuring that the new policy was strictly
enforced.

"This guidance comes directly from the president," Mr. McClellan said. "The
president directed the attorney general to come up with specific steps to end
racial profiling, and this policy comes out of that commitment."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "UP CLOSE: How the New Rules Will Work"Here are some examples of
how the Bush administrations new policy on racial profiling affects federal
agents. Racial Profiling Not AllowedThe authorities cannot conduct more traffic
stops and other aggressive tactics to increase the number of drug arrests in a
neighborhood, based on its racial composition. Unless there is pertinent data
like 911 calls or arrest trends, this effort would be improper because it is
based on generalized stereotypes. A man walks into a courthouse and passes
through a metal detector, revealing nothing suspicious. A federal screener
cannot order him to undergo a more extensive search solely because he appears to
be of a particular ethnicity. Investigators receive an uncorroborated tip that a
man of a certain race will buy an illegal weapon at a bus terminal. They cannot
use that information to single out men of that race in the terminal because the
information is neither sufficiently reliable not sufficiently specific. Racial
Information AllowedThe authorities receive an all points bulletin giving the
race, hair color, age range and color of the car being driven by a fleeing bank
robber. Officers may use the race to decide which drivers to pull over.
Officials receive information indicating that terrorists of a particular
ethnicity plan to hijack a plane in California in the next week. Transportation
officials may subject men of that ethnicity boarding planes in California to
heightened scrutiny. Authorities seeking to increase drug arrests use software
to plot out patterns of arrests and discover that the clear majority occur in
neighborhoods occupied primarily by people of a single race. So long as they are
not motivated by racial animus, the authorities can use that information to
increase law enforcement operations in the area. (Source: Justice Department
Guidance Regarding the Use of Race by Federal Law Enforcement Agencies.)(pg.
A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); RACIAL PROFILING (91%); RACE & RACISM (91%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNICITY (90%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); INTERVIEWS (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (78%);
PUBLIC POLICY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); IMMIGRATION
LAW (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (74%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT
(73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); REFUGEES (70%) TERRORISM;  CRIME AND
CRIMINALS;  ARAB-AMERICANS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  MINORITIES (US);
DISCRIMINATION;  ELECTION ISSUES;  POLICE;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); LICHTBLAU, ERIC

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1183 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE SUPREME COURT;
Excerpts From Justices' Opinions on Michigan Affirmative Action Cases

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 8919 words


Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court rulings yesterday on two cases
involving affirmative action policies at the University of Michigan. The vote in
the law school case, Grutter v. Bollinger, was 5 to 4. Justice Sandra Day
O'Connor wrote the opinion, and dissents were filed by Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas. The vote in the case on undergraduate
admissions, Gratz v. Bollinger, was 6 to 3. Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote for
the court, while Justice O'Connor wrote a concurring opinion and Justice Ruth
Bader Ginsburg dissented. The full decisions are on line at nytimes.com/national


LAW SCHOOL

FROM THE DECISION
By Justice O'Connor

Petitioner Barbara Grutter is a white Michigan resident who applied to the law
school in 1996 with a 3.8 grade point average and 161 L.S.A.T. score. The law
school initially placed petitioner on a waiting list, but subsequently rejected
her application. In December 1997, petitioner filed suit in the United States
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan against the law school, the
Regents of the University of Michigan, Lee Bollinger (dean of the law school
from 1987 to 1994, and president of the University of Michigan from 1996 to
2002), Jeffrey Lehman (dean of the law school), and Dennis Shields (director of
admissions at the law school from 1991 until 1998). Petitioner alleged that
respondents discriminated against her on the basis of race in violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment; Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252, 42
U. S. C. S$2000d; and Rev. Stat. S$1977, as amended, 42 U. S. C. S$1981.

Petitioner further alleged that her application was rejected because the law
school uses race as a "predominant" factor, giving applicants who belong to
certain minority groups "a significantly greater chance of admission than
students with similar credentials from disfavored racial groups." Petitioner
also alleged that respondents "had no compelling interest to justify their use
of race in the admissions process." Petitioner requested compensatory and
punitive damages, an order requiring the law school to offer her admission, and
an injunction prohibiting the law school from continuing to discriminate on the
basis of race.

In an attempt to quantify the extent to which the law school actually considers
race in making admissions decisions, the parties introduced voluminous evidence
at trial. Relying on data obtained from the law school, petitioner's expert, Dr.
Kinley Larntz, generated and analyzed "admissions grids" for the years in
question (1995-2000). These grids show the number of applicants and the number
of admittees for all combinations of G.P.A.s and L.S.A.T. scores. Dr. Larntz
made "cell-by-cell" comparisons between applicants of different races to
determine whether a statistically significant relationship existed between race
and admission rates. He concluded that membership in certain minority groups "is
an extremely strong factor in the decision for acceptance," and that applicants
from these minority groups "are given an extremely large allowance for
admission" as compared to applicants who are members of nonfavored groups. Dr.
Larntz conceded, however, that race is not the predominant factor in the law
school's admissions calculus.

Dr. Stephen Raudenbush, the law school's expert, focused on the predicted effect
of eliminating race as a factor in the law school's admission process. In Dr.
Raudenbush's view, a race-blind admissions system would have a "very dramatic,"
negative effect on underrepresented minority admissions. He testified that in
2000, 35 percent of underrepresented minority applicants were admitted. Dr.
Raudenbush predicted that if race were not considered, only 10 percent of those
applicants would have been admitted. Under this scenario, underrepresented
minority students would have comprised 4 percent of the entering class in 2000
instead of the actual figure of 14.5 percent.

In the end, the district court concluded that the law school's use of race as a
factor in admissions decisions was unlawful. Applying strict scrutiny, the
district court determined that the law school's asserted interest in assembling
a diverse student body was not compelling because "the attainment of a racially
diverse class . . . was not recognized as such by Bakke and is not a remedy for
past discrimination." The district court went on to hold that even if diversity
were compelling, the law school had not narrowly tailored its use of race to
further that interest. . . .

We last addressed the use of race in public higher education over 25 years ago.
In the landmark Bakke case, we reviewed a racial set-aside program that reserved
16 out of 100 seats in a medical school class for members of certain minority
groups. The decision produced six separate opinions, none of which commanded a
majority of the Court. Four justices would have upheld the program against all
attack on the ground that the government can use race to "remedy disadvantages
cast on minorities by past racial prejudice." Four other justices avoided the
constitutional question altogether and struck down the program on statutory
grounds. Justice Powell provided a fifth vote not only for invalidating the
set-aside program, but also for reversing the state court's injunction against
any use of race whatsoever. The only holding for the Court in Bakke was that a
"state has a substantial interest that legitimately may be served by a properly
devised admissions program involving the competitive consideration of race and
ethnic origin.". . . For the reasons set out below, today we endorse Justice
Powell's view that student body diversity is a compelling state interest that
can justify the use of race in university admissions.

We turn to the question whether the law school's use of race is justified by a
compelling state interest. Before this Court, as they have throughout this
litigation, respondents assert only one justification for their use of race in
the admissions process: obtaining "the educational benefits that flow from a
diverse student body." In other words, the law school asks us to recognize, in
the context of higher education, a compelling state interest in student body
diversity.

We first wish to dispel the notion that the law school's argument has been
foreclosed, either expressly or implicitly, by our affirmative-action cases
decided since Bakke. It is true that some language in those opinions might be
read to suggest that remedying past discrimination is the only permissible
justification for race-based governmental action. But we have never held that
the only governmental use of race that can survive strict scrutiny is remedying
past discrimination. Nor, since Bakke, have we directly addressed the use of
race in the context of public higher education. Today, we hold that the law
school has a compelling interest in attaining a diverse student body.

The law school's educational judgment that such diversity is essential to its
educational mission is one to which we defer. The law school's assessment that
diversity will, in fact, yield educational benefits is substantiated by
respondents and their amici. Our scrutiny of the interest asserted by the law
school is no less strict for taking into account complex educational judgments
in an area that lies primarily within the expertise of the university. Our
holding today is in keeping with our tradition of giving a degree of deference
to a university's academic decisions, within constitutionally prescribed limits.

We have long recognized that, given the important purpose of public education
and the expansive freedoms of speech and thought associated with the university
environment, universities occupy a special niche in our constitutional
tradition. In announcing the principle of student body diversity as a compelling
state interest, Justice Powell invoked our cases recognizing a constitutional
dimension, grounded in the First Amendment, of educational autonomy: "The
freedom of a university to make its own judgments as to education includes the
selection of its student body." From this premise, Justice Powell reasoned that
by claiming "the right to select those students who will contribute the most to
the 'robust exchange of ideas,' " a university "seek s to achieve a goal that is
of paramount importance in the fulfillment of its mission." Our conclusion that
the law school has a compelling interest in a diverse student body is informed
by our view that attaining a diverse student body is at the heart of the law
school's proper institutional mission, and that "good faith" on the part of a
university is "presumed" absent "a showing to the contrary."

As part of its goal of "assembling a class that is both exceptionally
academically qualified and broadly diverse," the law school seeks to "enroll a
'critical mass' of minority students." The law school's interest is not simply
"to assure within its student body some specified percentage of a particular
group merely because of its race or ethnic origin." That would amount to
outright racial balancing, which is patently unconstitutional. Rather, the law
school's concept of critical mass is defined by reference to the educational
benefits that diversity is designed to produce.

These benefits are substantial. As the district court emphasized, the law
school's admissions policy promotes "cross-racial understanding," helps to break
down racial stereotypes, and "enables students to better understand persons of
different races." These benefits are "important and laudable," because
"classroom discussion is livelier, more spirited, and simply more enlightening
and interesting" when the students have "the greatest possible variety of
backgrounds."

The law school's claim of a compelling interest is further bolstered by its
amici, who point to the educational benefits that flow from student body
diversity. In addition to the expert studies and reports entered into evidence
at trial, numerous studies show that student body diversity promotes learning
outcomes, and "better prepares students for an increasingly diverse workforce
and society, and better prepares them as professionals."

These benefits are not theoretical but real, as major American businesses have
made clear that the skills needed in today's increasingly global marketplace can
only be developed through exposure to widely diverse people, cultures, ideas,
and viewpoints. What is more, high-ranking retired officers and civilian leaders
of the United States military assert that, " b ased on their decades of
experience," a "highly qualified, racially diverse officer corps . . . is
essential to the military's ability to fulfill its principle mission to provide
national security." The primary sources for the nation's officer corps are the
service academies and the Reserve Officers Training Corps (R.O.T.C.), the latter
comprising students already admitted to participating colleges and universities.
At present, "the military cannot achieve an officer corps that is both highly
qualified and racially diverse unless the service academies and the R.O.T.C.
used limited race-conscious recruiting and admissions policies." To fulfill its
mission, the military "must be selective in admissions for training and
education for the officer corps, and it must train and educate a highly
qualified, racially diverse officer corps in a racially diverse setting." We
agree that " i t requires only a small step from this analysis to conclude that
our country's other most selective institutions must remain both diverse and
selective." . . .

Individuals with law degrees occupy roughly half the state governorships, more
than half the seats in the United States Senate, and more than a third of the
seats in the United States House of Representatives. The pattern is even more
striking when it comes to highly selective law schools. A handful of these
schools accounts for 25 of the 100 United States Senators, 74 United States
Courts of Appeals judges, and nearly 200 of the more than 600 United States
District Court judges.

In order to cultivate a set of leaders with legitimacy in the eyes of the
citizenry, it is necessary that the path to leadership be visibly open to
talented and qualified individuals of every race and ethnicity. All members of
our heterogeneous society must have confidence in the openness and integrity of
the educational institutions that provide this training. As we have recognized,
law schools "cannot be effective in isolation from the individuals and
institutions with which the law interacts." Access to legal education (and thus
the legal profession) must be inclusive of talented and qualified individuals of
every race and ethnicity, so that all members of our heterogeneous society may
participate in the educational institutions that provide the training and
education necessary to succeed in America.

The law school does not premise its need for critical mass on "any belief that
minority students always (or even consistently) express some characteristic
minority viewpoint on any issue." To the contrary, diminishing the force of such
stereotypes is both a crucial part of the law school's mission, and one that it
cannot accomplish with only token numbers of minority students. Just as growing
up in a particular region or having particular professional experiences is
likely to affect an individual's views, so too is one's own, unique experience
of being a racial minority in a society, like our own, in which race
unfortunately still matters. The law school has determined, based on its
experience and expertise, that a "critical mass" of underrepresented minorities
is necessary to further its compelling interest in securing the educational
benefits of a diverse student body.

Even in the limited circumstance when drawing racial distinctions is permissible
to further a compelling state interest, government is still "constrained in how
it may pursue that end: T he means chosen to accomplish the government's
asserted purpose must be specifically and narrowly framed to accomplish that
purpose." The purpose of the narrow tailoring requirement is to ensure that "the
means chosen 'fit' . . . th e compelling goal so closely that there is little or
no possibility that the motive for the classification was illegitimate racial
prejudice or stereotype."

Since Bakke, we have had no occasion to define the contours of the
narrow-tailoring inquiry with respect to race-conscious university admissions
programs. That inquiry must be calibrated to fit the distinct issues raised by
the use of race to achieve student body diversity in public higher education.
Contrary to Justice Kennedy's assertions, we do not "abandon strict scrutiny."
Rather, as we have already explained, we adhere to Adarand's teaching that the
very purpose of strict scrutiny is to take such "relevant differences into
account."

To be narrowly tailored, a race-conscious admissions program cannot use a quota
system -- it cannot "insulat e each category of applicants with certain desired
qualifications from competition with all other applicants." Instead, a
university may consider race or ethnicity only as a " 'plus' in a particular
applicant's file," without "insulat ing the individual from comparison with all
other candidates for the available seats." In other words, an admissions program
must be "flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of diversity in
light of the particular qualifications of each applicant, and to place them on
the same footing for consideration, although not necessarily according them the
same weight."

We find that the law school's admissions program bears the hallmarks of a
narrowly tailored plan. As Justice Powell made clear in Bakke, truly
individualized consideration demands that race be used in a flexible,
nonmechanical way. It follows from this mandate that universities cannot
establish quotas for members of certain racial groups or put members of those
groups on separate admissions tracks. Nor can universities insulate applicants
who belong to certain racial or ethnic groups from the competition for
admission. Universities can, however, consider race or ethnicity more flexibly
as a "plus" factor in the context of individualized consideration of each and
every applicant.

We are satisfied that the law school's admissions program, like the Harvard plan
described by Justice Powell, does not operate as a quota. Properly understood, a
"quota" is a program in which a certain fixed number or proportion of
opportunities are "reserved exclusively for certain minority groups." Quotas "
'impose a fixed number or percentage which must be attained, or which cannot be
exceeded,' " and "insulate the individual from comparison with all other
candidates for the available seats." In contrast, "a permissible goal . . .
require s only a good-faith effort . . . to come within a range demarcated by
the goal itself," Sheet Metal Workers v. EEOC, supra, at 495, and permits
consideration of race as a "plus" factor in any given case while still ensuring
that each candidate "compete s with all other qualified applicants."

Justice Powell's distinction between the medical school's rigid 16-seat quota
and Harvard's flexible use of race as a "plus" factor is instructive. Harvard
certainly had minimum goals for minority enrollment, even if it had no specific
number firmly in mind. What is more, Justice Powell flatly rejected the argument
that Harvard's program was "the functional equivalent of a quota" merely because
it had some " 'plus' " for race, or gave greater "weight" to race than to some
other factors, in order to achieve student body diversity.

The law school's goal of attaining a critical mass of underrepresented minority
students does not transform its program into a quota. As the Harvard plan
described by Justice Powell recognized, there is of course "some relationship
between numbers and achieving the benefits to be derived from a diverse student
body, and between numbers and providing a reasonable environment for those
students admitted." " S ome attention to numbers," without more, does not
transform a flexible admissions system into a rigid quota. Nor, as Justice
Kennedy posits, does the law school's consultation of the "daily reports," which
keep track of the racial and ethnic composition of the class (as well as of
residency and gender), "suggest there was no further attempt at individual
review save for race itself" during the final stages of the admissions process.
To the contrary, the law school's admissions officers testified without
contradiction that they never gave race any more or less weight based on the
information contained in these reports. Moreover, as Justice Kennedy concedes,
the number of African-American, Latino, and Native-American students in each
class at the law school varied from 13.5 to 20.1 percent, a range inconsistent
with a quota.

The Chief Justice believes that the law school's policy conceals an attempt to
achieve racial balancing, and cites admissions data to contend that the law
school discriminates among different groups within the critical mass. But, as
the Chief Justice concedes, the number of underrepresented minority students who
ultimately enroll in the law school differs substantially from their
representation in the applicant pool and varies considerably for each group from
year to year.

That a race-conscious admissions program does not operate as a quota does not,
by itself, satisfy the requirement of individualized consideration. When using
race as a "plus" factor in university admissions, a university's admissions
program must remain flexible enough to ensure that each applicant is evaluated
as an individual and not in a way that makes an applicant's race or ethnicity
the defining feature of his or her application. The importance of this
individualized consideration in the context of a race-conscious admissions
program is paramount.

Here, the law school engages in a highly individualized, holistic review of each
applicant's file, giving serious consideration to all the ways an applicant
might contribute to a diverse educational environment. The law school affords
this individualized consideration to applicants of all races. There is no
policy, either de jure or de facto, of automatic acceptance or rejection based
on any single "soft" variable. Unlike the program at issue in Gratz v.
Bollinger, ante, the law school awards no mechanical, predetermined diversity
"bonuses" based on race or ethnicity. Like the Harvard plan, the law school's
admissions policy "is flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of
diversity in light of the particular qualifications of each applicant, and to
place them on the same footing for consideration, although not necessarily
according them the same weight."

We also find that, like the Harvard plan Justice Powell referenced in Bakke, the
law school's race-conscious admissions program adequately ensures that all
factors that may contribute to student body diversity are meaningfully
considered alongside race in admissions decisions. With respect to the use of
race itself, all underrepresented minority students admitted by the law school
have been deemed qualified. By virtue of our nation's struggle with racial
inequality, such students are both likely to have experiences of particular
importance to the law school's mission, and less likely to be admitted in
meaningful numbers on criteria that ignore those experiences. . . .

The law school does not, however, limit in any way the broad range of qualities
and experiences that may be considered valuable contributions to student body
diversity. To the contrary, the 1992 policy makes clear " t here are many
possible bases for diversity admissions," and provides examples of admittees who
have lived or traveled widely abroad, are fluent in several languages, have
overcome personal adversity and family hardship, have exceptional records of
extensive community service, and have had successful careers in other fields.
The law school seriously considers each "applicant's promise of making a notable
contribution to the class by way of a particular strength, attainment, or
characteristic -- e.g., an unusual intellectual achievement, employment
experience, nonacademic performance, or personal background." All applicants
have the opportunity to highlight their own potential diversity contributions
through the submission of a personal statement, letters of recommendation, and
an essay describing the ways in which the applicant will contribute to the life
and diversity of the law school.

What is more, the law school actually gives substantial weight to diversity
factors besides race. The law school frequently accepts nonminority applicants
with grades and test scores lower than underrepresented minority applicants (and
other nonminority applicants) who are rejected. This shows that the law school
seriously weighs many other diversity factors besides race that can make a real
and dispositive difference for nonminority applicants as well. By this flexible
approach, the law school sufficiently takes into account, in practice as well as
in theory, a wide variety of characteristics besides race and ethnicity that
contribute to a diverse student body. Justice Kennedy speculates that "race is
likely outcome determinative for many members of minority groups" who do not
fall within the upper range of L.S.A.T. scores and grades. But the same could be
said of the Harvard plan discussed approvingly by Justice Powell in Bakke, and
indeed of any plan that uses race as one of many factors.

Petitioner and the United States argue that the law school's plan is not
narrowly tailored because race-neutral means exist to obtain the educational
benefits of student body diversity that the law school seeks. We disagree.
Narrow tailoring does not require exhaustion of every conceivable race-neutral
alternative. Nor does it require a university to choose between maintaining a
reputation for excellence or fulfilling a commitment to provide educational
opportunities to members of all racial groups. Narrow tailoring does, however,
require serious, good faith consideration of workable race-neutral alternatives
that will achieve the diversity the university seeks.

We agree with the Court of Appeals that the law school sufficiently considered
workable race-neutral alternatives. The district court took the law school to
task for failing to consider race-neutral alternatives such as "using a lottery
system" or "decreasing the emphasis for all applicants on undergraduate G.P.A.
and L.S.A.T. scores." But these alternatives would require a dramatic sacrifice
of diversity, the academic quality of all admitted students, or both.

The law school's current admissions program considers race as one factor among
many, in an effort to assemble a student body that is diverse in ways broader
than race. Because a lottery would make that kind of nuanced judgment
impossible, it would effectively sacrifice all other educational values, not to
mention every other kind of diversity. So too with the suggestion that the law
school simply lower admissions standards for all students, a drastic remedy that
would require the law school to become a much different institution and
sacrifice a vital component of its educational mission. The United States
advocates "percentage plans," recently adopted by public undergraduate
institutions in Texas, Florida, and California to guarantee admission to all
students above a certain class-rank threshold in every high school in the state.
The United States does not, however, explain how such plans could work for
graduate and professional schools. Moreover, even assuming such plans are
race-neutral, they may preclude the university from conducting the
individualized assessments necessary to assemble a student body that is not just
racially diverse, but diverse along all the qualities valued by the university.
We are satisfied that the law school adequately considered race-neutral
alternatives currently capable of producing a critical mass without forcing the
law school to abandon the academic selectivity that is the cornerstone of its
educational mission.

We acknowledge that "there are serious problems of justice connected with the
idea of preference itself." Narrow tailoring, therefore, requires that a
race-conscious admissions program not unduly harm members of any racial group.
Even remedial race-based governmental action generally "remains subject to
continuing oversight to assure that it will work the least harm possible to
other innocent persons competing for the benefit." To be narrowly tailored, a
race-conscious admissions program must not "unduly burden individuals who are
not members of the favored racial and ethnic groups."

We are satisfied that the law school's admissions program does not. Because the
law school considers "all pertinent elements of diversity," it can (and does)
select nonminority applicants who have greater potential to enhance student body
diversity over underrepresented minority applicants. As Justice Powell
recognized in Bakke, so long as a race-conscious admissions program uses race as
a "plus" factor in the context of individualized consideration, a rejected
applicant "will not have been foreclosed from all consideration for that seat
simply because he was not the right color or had the wrong surname. . . His
qualifications would have been weighed fairly and competitively, and he would
have no basis to complain of unequal treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment."

FROM THE DISSENT
By Chief Justice Rehnquist

I agree with the Court that, "in the limited circumstance when drawing racial
distinctions is permissible," the government must ensure that its means are
narrowly tailored to achieve a compelling state interest. I do not believe,
however, that the University of Michigan Law School's (law school) means are
narrowly tailored to the interest it asserts. The law school claims it must take
the steps it does to achieve a "critical mass" of underrepresented minority
students. But its actual program bears no relation to this asserted goal.
Stripped of its "critical mass" veil, the law school's program is revealed as a
naked effort to achieve racial balancing.

As we have explained many times, " a ny preference based on racial or ethnic
criteria must necessarily receive a most searching examination." Our cases
establish that, in order to withstand this demanding inquiry, respondents must
demonstrate that their methods of using race "fit" a compelling state interest
"with greater precision than any alternative means." Before the Court's decision
today, we consistently applied the same strict scrutiny analysis regardless of
the government's purported reason for using race and regardless of the setting
in which race was being used. We rejected calls to use more lenient review in
the face of claims that race was being used in "good faith" because " m ore than
good motives should be required when government seeks to allocate its resources
by way of an explicit racial classification system." We likewise rejected calls
to apply more lenient review based on the particular setting in which race is
being used. Indeed, even in the specific context of higher education, we
emphasized that "constitutional limitations protecting individual rights may not
be disregarded."

Although the Court recites the language of our strict scrutiny analysis, its
application of that review is unprecedented in its deference. Respondents'
asserted justification for the law school's use of race in the admissions
process is "obtaining the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student
body." They contend that a "critical mass" of underrepresented minorities is
necessary to further that interest. Respondents and school administrators
explain generally that "critical mass" means a sufficient number of
underrepresented minority students to achieve several objectives: To ensure that
these minority students do not feel isolated or like spokespersons for their
race; to provide adequate opportunities for the type of interaction upon which
the educational benefits of diversity depend; and to challenge all students to
think critically and re-examine stereotypes. These objectives indicate that
"critical mass" relates to the size of the student body. Respondents further
claim that the law school is achieving "critical mass."

In practice, the law school's program bears little or no relation to its
asserted goal of achieving "critical mass." Respondents explain that the law
school seeks to accumulate a "critical mass" of each underrepresented minority
group. But the record demonstrates that the law school's admissions practices
with respect to these groups differ dramatically and cannot be defended under
any consistent use of the term "critical mass."

From 1995 through 2000, the law school admitted between 1,130 and 1,310
students. Of those, between 13 and 19 were Native American, between 91 and 108
were African-Americans, and between 47 and 56 were Hispanic. If the law school
is admitting between 91 and 108 African-Americans in order to achieve "critical
mass," thereby preventing African-American students from feeling "isolated or
like spokespersons for their race," one would think that a number of the same
order of magnitude would be necessary to accomplish the same purpose for
Hispanics and Native Americans. Similarly, even if all of the Native American
applicants admitted in a given year matriculate, which the record demonstrates
is not at all the case, how can this possibly constitute a "critical mass" of
Native Americans in a class of over 350 students? In order for this pattern of
admission to be consistent with the law school's explanation of "critical mass,"
one would have to believe that the objectives of "critical mass" offered by
respondents are achieved with only half the number of Hispanics and one-sixth
the number of Native Americans as compared to African-Americans. But respondents
offer no race-specific reasons for such disparities. Instead, they simply
emphasize the importance of achieving "critical mass," without any explanation
of why that concept is applied differently among the three underrepresented
minority groups.

These different numbers, moreover, come only as a result of substantially
different treatment among the three underrepresented minority groups, as is
apparent in an example offered by the law school and highlighted by the Court:
The school asserts that it "frequently accepts nonminority applicants with
grades and test scores lower than underrepresented minority applicants (and
other nonminority applicants) who are rejected." Specifically, the law school
states that "69 minority applicants were rejected between 1995 and 2000 with at
least a 3.5 Grade Point Average (G.P.A.) and a score of 159 or higher on the Law
School Admissions Test (L.S.A.T.)" while a number of Caucasian and
Asian-American applicants with similar or lower scores were admitted.

Review of the record reveals only 67 such individuals. Of these 67 individuals,
56 were Hispanic, while only 6 were African-American, and only 5 were Native
American. This discrepancy reflects a consistent practice. For example, in 2000,
12 Hispanics who scored between a 159-160 on the L.S.A.T. and earned a G.P.A. of
3.00 or higher applied for admission and only 2 were admitted. Meanwhile, 12
African-Americans in the same range of qualifications applied for admission and
all 12 were admitted. Likewise, that same year, 16 Hispanics who scored between
a 151-153 on the L.S.A.T. and earned a 3.00 or higher applied for admission and
only 1 of those applicants was admitted. Twenty-three similarly qualified
African-Americans applied for admission and 14 were admitted.

These statistics have a significant bearing on petitioner's case. Respondents
have never offered any race-specific arguments explaining why significantly more
individuals from one underrepresented minority group are needed in order to
achieve "critical mass" or further student body diversity. They certainly have
not explained why Hispanics, who they have said are among "the groups most
isolated by racial barriers in our country," should have their admission capped
out in this manner. True, petitioner is neither Hispanic nor Native American.
But the law school's disparate admissions practices with respect to these
minority groups demonstrate that its alleged goal of "critical mass" is simply a
sham. Petitioner may use these statistics to expose this sham, which is the
basis for the law school's admission of less qualified underrepresented
minorities in preference to her. Surely strict scrutiny cannot permit these sort
of disparities without at least some explanation.

Only when the "critical mass" label is discarded does a likely explanation for
these numbers emerge. The Court states that the law school's goal of attaining a
"critical mass" of underrepresented minority students is not an interest in
merely "assur ing within its student body some specified percentage of a
particular group merely because of its race or ethnic origin." The Court
recognizes that such an interest "would amount to outright racial balancing,
which is patently unconstitutional." The Court concludes, however, that the law
school's use of race in admissions, consistent with Justice Powell's opinion in
Bakke, only pays " s ome attention to numbers."

But the correlation between the percentage of the law school's pool of
applicants who are members of the three minority groups and the percentage of
the admitted applicants who are members of these same groups is far too precise
to be dismissed as merely the result of the school paying "some attention to the
numbers." . . . I do not believe that the Constitution gives the law school such
free rein in the use of race. The law school has offered no explanation for its
actual admissions practices and, unexplained, we are bound to conclude that the
law school has managed its admissions program, not to achieve a "critical mass,"
but to extend offers of admission to members of selected minority groups in
proportion to their statistical representation in the applicant pool. But this
is precisely the type of racial balancing that the Court itself calls "patently
unconstitutional."

Finally, I believe that the law school's program fails strict scrutiny because
it is devoid of any reasonably precise time limit on the law school's use of
race in admissions. We have emphasized that we will consider "the planned
duration of the remedy" in determining whether a race-conscious program is
constitutional. Our previous cases have required some limit on the duration of
programs such as this because discrimination on the basis of race is invidious.

FROM THE DISSENT
By Justice Thomas

Frederick Douglass, speaking to a group of abolitionists almost 140 years ago,
delivered a message lost on today's majority:

" I n regard to the colored people, there is always more that is benevolent, I
perceive, than just, manifested towards us. What I ask for the negro is not
benevolence, not pity, not sympathy, but simply justice. The American people
have always been anxious to know what they shall do with us. . . . I have had
but one answer from the beginning. Do nothing with us!  Y our doing with us has
already played the mischief with us. Do nothing with us! If the apples will not
remain on the tree of their own strength, if they are worm-eaten at the core, if
they are early ripe and disposed to fall, let them fall! . . . And if the negro
cannot stand on his own legs, let him fall also. All I ask is, give him a chance
to stand on his own legs! Let him alone! . . . Your interference is doing him
positive injury."

Like Douglass, I believe blacks can achieve in every avenue of American life
without the meddling of university administrators. Because I wish to see all
students succeed whatever their color, I share, in some respect, the sympathies
of those who sponsor the type of discrimination advanced by the University of
Michigan Law School. The Constitution does not, however, tolerate institutional
devotion to the status quo in admissions policies when such devotion ripens into
racial discrimination. Nor does the Constitution countenance the unprecedented
deference the Court gives to the law school, an approach inconsistent with the
very concept of "strict scrutiny."

No one would argue that a university could set up a lower general admission
standard and then impose heightened requirements only on black applicants.
Similarly, a university may not maintain a high admission standard and grant
exemptions to favored races. The law school, of its own choosing, and for its
own purposes, maintains an exclusionary admissions system that it knows produces
racially disproportionate results. Racial discrimination is not a permissible
solution to the self-inflicted wounds of this elitist admissions policy.

The majority upholds the law school's racial discrimination not by interpreting
the people's Constitution, but by responding to a faddish slogan of the
cognoscenti. Nevertheless, I concur in part in the Court's opinion. First, I
agree with the Court insofar as its decision, which approves of only one racial
classification, confirms that further use of race in admissions remains
unlawful. Second, I agree with the Court's holding that racial discrimination in
higher education admissions will be illegal in 25 years. I respectfully dissent
from the remainder of the Court's opinion and the judgment, however, because I
believe that the law school's current use of race violates the Equal Protection
Clause and that the Constitution means the same thing today as it will in 300
months

UNDERGRADUATES

FROM THE DECISION
By Chief Justice Rehnquist

During 1995 and 1996, O.U.A.  Office of Undergraduate Admissions counselors
evaluated applications according to grade point average combined with what were
referred to as the "Scuga" factors. These factors included the quality of an
applicant's high school (S), the strength of an applicant's high school
curriculum (C), an applicant's unusual circumstances (U), an applicant's
geographical residence (G) and an applicant's alumni relationships (A). After
these scores were combined to produce an applicant's "G.P.A. 2" score, the
reviewing admissions counselors referenced a set of "Guidelines" tables, which
listed G.P.A. 2 ranges on the vertical axis, and American College
Test/Scholastic Aptitude Test (ACT/SAT) scores on the horizontal axis. Each
table was divided into cells that included one or more courses of action to be
taken, including admit, reject, delay for additional information, or postpone
for reconsideration.

In both years, applicants with the same G.P.A. 2 score and ACT/SAT score were
subject to different admissions outcomes based upon their racial or ethnic
status. For example, as a Caucasian in-state applicant, Gratz's G.P.A. 2 score
and ACT score placed her within a cell calling for a postponed decision on her
application. An in-state or out-of-state minority applicant with Gratz's scores
would have fallen within a cell calling for admission.

In 1997, the university modified its admissions procedure. Specifically, the
formula for calculating an applicant's G.P.A. 2 score was restructured to
include additional point values under the "U" category in the Scuga factors.
Under this new system, applicants could receive points for underrepresented
minority status, socioeconomic disadvantage, or attendance at a high school with
a predominantly underrepresented minority population, or underrepresentation in
the unit to which the student was applying (for example, men who sought to
pursue a career in nursing). Under the 1997 procedures, Hamacher's G.P.A. 2
score and ACT score placed him in a cell on the in-state applicant table calling
for postponement of a final admissions decision. An underrepresented minority
applicant placed in the same cell would generally have been admitted.

Beginning with the 1998 academic year, the O.U.A. dispensed with the guidelines
tables and the Scuga point system in favor of a "selection index," on which an
applicant could score a maximum of 150 points. This index was divided linearly
into ranges generally calling for admissions dispositions as follows: 100-150
(admit); 95-99 (admit or postpone); 90-94 (postpone or admit); 75-89 (delay or
postpone); 74 and below (delay or reject).

Each application received points based on high school grade point average,
standardized test scores, academic quality of an applicant's high school,
strength or weakness of high school curriculum, in-state residency, alumni
relationship, personal essay, and personal achievement or leadership. Of
particular significance here, under a "miscellaneous" category, an applicant was
entitled to 20 points based upon his or her membership in an underrepresented
racial or ethnic minority group. . . .

Justice Powell, in Bakke, expressed the view that the consideration of race as a
factor in admissions might in some cases serve a compelling government interest.
Respondents contended that the L.S.A.  College of Literature, Science and the
Arts has just such an interest in the educational benefits that result from
having a racially and ethnically diverse student body and that its program is
narrowly tailored to serve that interest. . . .

The district court began its analysis by reviewing this court's decision in
Bakke. Although the court acknowledged that no decision from this court since
Bakke has explicitly accepted the diversity rationale discussed by Justice
Powell, it also concluded that this court had not, in the years since Bakke,
ruled out such a justification for the use of race. The district court concluded
that respondents and their amici curiae had presented "solid evidence" that a
racially and ethnically diverse student body produces significant educational
benefits such that achieving such a student body constitutes a compelling
governmental interest. . . . The court granted petitioners' motion for summary
judgment with respect to the L.S.A.'s admissions programs in existence from 1995
through 1998, and respondents' motion with respect to the L.S.A.'s admissions
programs for 1999 and 2000. Accordingly, the district court denied petitioners'
request for injunctive relief. . . .

Petitioners argue, first and foremost, that the university's use of race in
undergraduate admissions violates the 14th Amendment. Specifically, they contend
that this court has only sanctioned the use of racial classifications to remedy
identified discrimination, a justification on which respondents have never
relied. Petitioners further argue that "diversity as a basis for employing
racial preferences is simply too open-ended, ill-defined and indefinite to
constitute a compelling interest capable of supporting narrowly-tailored means."
But for the reasons set forth today in Grutter v. Bollinger, the court has
rejected these arguments of petitioners.

Petitioners alternatively argue that even if the university's interest in
diversity can constitute a compelling state interest, the district court
erroneously concluded that the university's use of race in its current freshman
admissions policy is narrowly tailored to achieve such an interest. Petitioners
argue that the guidelines the university began using in 1999 do not "remotely
resemble the kind of consideration of race and ethnicity that Justice Powell
endorsed in Bakke." Respondents reply that the university's current admissions
program is narrowly tailored and avoids the problems of the medical school of
the University of California at Davis program (U.C. Davis) rejected by Justice
Powell. They claim that their program "hews closely" to both the admissions
program described by Justice Powell as well as the Harvard College admissions
program that he endorsed. Specifically, respondents contend that the L.S.A.'s
policy provides the individualized consideration that "Justice Powell considered
a hallmark of a constitutionally appropriate admissions program." For the
reasons set out below, we do not agree. . . .

It is by now well established that "all racial classifications reviewable under
the Equal Protection Clause must be strictly scrutinized." This "standard of
review is not dependent on the race of those burdened or benefited by a
particular classification." Thus, "any person, of whatever race, has the right
to demand that any governmental actor subject to the Constitution justify any
racial classification subjecting that person to unequal treatment under the
strictest of judicial scrutiny." To withstand our strict scrutiny analysis,
respondents must demonstrate that the university's use of race in its current
admission program employs "narrowly tailored measures that further compelling
governmental interests." Because "racial classifications are simply too
pernicious to permit any but the most exact connection between justification and
classification," our review of whether such requirements have been met must
entail "a most searching examination." We find that the university's policy,
which automatically distributes 20 points, or one-fifth of the points needed to
guarantee admission, to every single "underrepresented minority" applicant
solely because of race, is not narrowly tailored to achieve the interest in
educational diversity that respondents claim justifies their program. . . .

Justice Powell's opinion in Bakke emphasized the importance of considering each
particular applicant as an individual, assessing all of the qualities that
individual possesses and, in turn, evaluating that individual's ability to
contribute to the unique setting of higher education. . . .

The current L.S.A. policy does not provide such individualized consideration.
The L.S.A.'s policy automatically distributes 20 points to every single
applicant from an "underrepresented minority" group, as defined by the
university. The only consideration that accompanies this distribution of points
is a factual review of an application to determine whether an individual is a
member of one of these minority groups. Moreover, unlike Justice Powell's
example, where the race of a "particular black applicant" could be considered
without being decisive, the L.S.A.'s automatic distribution of 20 points has the
effect of making "the factor of race . . . decisive" for virtually every
minimally qualified underrepresented minority applicant. . . .

Respondents contend that "the volume of applications and the presentation of
applicant information make it impractical for L.S.A.  to use the admissions
system" upheld by the court today in Grutter. But the fact that the
implementation of a program capable of providing individualized consideration
might present administrative challenges does not render constitutional an
otherwise problematic system.

FROM THE DISSENT
By Justice Ginsburg

We are not far distant from an overtly discriminatory past, and the effects of
centuries of law-sanctioned inequality remain painfully evident in our
communities and schools.

In the wake "of a system of racial caste only recently ended," large disparities
endure. Unemployment, poverty and access to health care vary disproportionately
byrace. Neighborhoods and schools remain racially divided. African-American and
Hispanic children are all too often educated in poverty-stricken and
underperforming institutions. Adult African-Americans and Hispanics generally
earn less than whites with equivalent levels of education. Equally credentialed
job applicants receive different receptions depending on their race. Irrational
prejudice is still encountered in real estate markets and consumer transactions.
"Bias both conscious and unconscious, reflecting traditional and unexamined
habits of thought, keeps up barriers that must come down if equal opportunity
and nondiscrimination are ever genuinely to become this country's law and
practice." . . .

Our jurisprudence ranks race a "suspect" category, "not because race is
inevitably an impermissible classification, but because it is one which usually,
to our national shame, has been drawn for the purpose of maintaining racial
inequality." But where race is considered "for the purpose of achieving
equality," no automatic proscription is in order. For, as insightfully
explained, "the Constitution is both colorblind and color conscious. To avoid
conflict with the equal protection clause, a classification that denies a
benefit, causes harm or imposes a burden must not be based on race. In that
sense, the Constitution is colorblind. But the Constitution is color conscious
to prevent discrimination being perpetuated and to undo the effects of past
discrimination." Contemporary human rights documents draw just this line; they
distinguish between policies of oppression and measures designed to accelerate
de facto equality.

The mere assertion of a laudable governmental purpose, of course, should not
immunize a race-conscious measure from careful judicial inspection. Close review
is needed "to ferret out classifications in reality malign, but masquerading as
benign," and to "ensure that preferences are not so large as to trammel unduly
upon the opportunities of others or interfere too harshly with legitimate
expectations of persons in once-preferred groups."

Examining in this light the admissions policy employed by the University of
Michigan's College of Literature, Science and the Arts (College), and for the
reasons well stated by Justice Souter, I see no constitutional infirmity. Like
other top-ranking institutions, the college has many more applicants for
admission than it can accommodate in an entering class. Every applicant admitted
under the current plan, petitioners do not here dispute, is qualified to attend
the college. The racial and ethnic groups to which the college accords special
consideration (African-Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans) historically
have been relegated to inferior status by law and social practice; their members
continue to experience class-based discrimination to this day. There is no
suggestion that the college adopted its current policy in order to limit or
decrease enrollment by any particular racial or ethnic group, and no seats are
reserved on the basis of race. Nor has there been any demonstration that the
college's program unduly constricts admissions opportunities for students who do
not receive special consideration based on race. The stain of generations of
racial oppression is still visible in our society, and the determination to
hasten its removal remains vital. One can reasonably anticipate, therefore, that
colleges and universities will seek to maintain their minority enrollment -- and
the networks and opportunities thereby opened to minority graduates -- whether
or not they can do soin full candor through adoption of affirmative action plans
of the kind here at issue. Without recourse to such plans, institutions of
higher education may resort to camouflage. For example, schools may encourage
applicants to write of their cultural traditions in the essays they submit, or
to indicate whether English is their second language. . . . If honesty is the
best policy, surely Michigan's accurately described, fully disclosed college
affirmative action program is preferable to achieving similar numbers through
winks, nods and disguises.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (92%); SUPREME COURTS (91%); PETITIONS (91%);
LAWYERS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); LAW SCHOOLS (90%); ACADEMIC ADMISSIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EDUCATION (90%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
ADMISSIONS (90%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%);
EVIDENCE (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); INJUNCTIONS (78%);
PUNITIVE DAMAGES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); GRADES & GRADING (76%); STATISTICS
(73%); ETHNIC GROUPS (69%); DAMAGES (67%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (64%) COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  LAW SCHOOLS;  GRADUATE SCHOOLS AND
STUDENTS;  ADMISSIONS STANDARDS;  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION;  MINORITIES (US);  BLACKS

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN (94%) SUPREME COURT (US); UNIVERSITY OF
MICHIGAN

PERSON: RUTH BADER GINSBURG (73%); CLARENCE THOMAS (73%) O'CONNOR, SANDRA DAY
(ASSOC JUSTICE); REHNQUIST, WILLIAM H (CHIEF JUSTICE); THOMAS, CLARENCE (ASSOC
JUSTICE); GINSBURG, RUTH BADER (ASSOC JUSTICE)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1185 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Liberia: Swiss Freeze Leader's Assets

BYLINE:  By Somini Sengupta (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 63 words


Switzerland announced that it had taken steps to freeze the bank accounts in
that country of Liberia's president, Charles Taylor.

The Swiss Federal Office of Justice said it had acted on a request from a United
Nations-backed war crimes tribunal, which has accused Mr. Taylor of crimes
against humanity in connection with the civil war in Sierra Leone.   Somini
Sengupta (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (87%); WAR
CRIMES (86%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (83%); CIVIL WAR (83%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (94%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); AFRICA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1191 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Diplomat Tells Court of Milosevic Influence

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 363 words

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, June 25


Slobodan Milosevic wielded huge influence over Croatian Serbs who drove out
non-Serbs from their breakaway republic in Croatia in the 1990's, a former
American ambassador to Croatia said today at Mr. Milosevic's trial in The Hague.

The ambassador, Peter Galbraith, who was also a peace negotiator in the Balkans,
is the latest international official to testify against Mr. Milosevic, the
former Yugoslav president, at the United Nations tribunal.

Prosecutors have accused Mr. Milosevic of providing money and military support
to the Krajina Serb Republic during a campaign in 1991 and 1992 to expel
non-Serbs from about a third of Croatian territory.

Mr. Galbraith told the tribunal that the Krajina Serb Republic did not deny that
Mr. Milosevic exercised considerable influence over its destiny. He told the
court that the leaders with whom he negotiated "said they regularly consulted
with the defendant, and further, the so-called Republika Srpska Krajina was
itself completely dependent on Serbia."

"The Krajina Serb leadership," he continued, "would not take any substantive
decision for a peace agreement without his approval."

Mr. Galbraith was the United States ambassador to Croatia from 1993 to 1998 and
took part in the Dayton peace talks that ended the Bosnian war in 1995. "It was
apparent to me," he said, "as indeed it was to virtually all the other
international mediators, that the defendant was the key to any peace
settlement."

He said he believed that Mr. Milosevic was behind the rebels' rejection of an
international peace plan in January 1995. Failure of the plan was followed by
renewed fighting in which Croatian troops recaptured rebel-held territory.

Mr. Galbraith said the failure of the plan helped to usher in Operation Storm in
August 1995, which prompted 200,000 Serbs in Krajina to flee their homes, the
largest single exodus of the 1991-95 Balkan wars.

He said he had no doubt that the Krajina Serb leaders, Milan Babic and Milan
Martic, deferred to Mr. Milosevic.

Mr. Milosevic is charged with genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo in the 1990's. He is to cross-examine Mr.
Galbraith on Thursday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (92%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); WITNESSES (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (77%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (72%); ARMED FORCES (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: GALBRAITH, PETER W; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); SERBIA (93%); NETHERLANDS (90%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: CROATIA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company


                             1192 of 1201 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE MIDEAST TURMOIL: PRISONERS;
Arab Bomber, Freed After 27 Years, Longs for Peace but Has No Regrets

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: RAMALLAH, West Bank, June 25


Ahmed Jubarah paused on the busy, steep street here and glanced through the
window of the Miss Young clothing shop at the cherry red walls, the
zebra-striped chairs, the spangled dresses.

"Heliopolis -- it was there 27 years ago," he said, with a wave up the hill at
the faded sign of Miss Young's fustier competitor. Heliopolis was where he went
to buy a dress for his bride, when he returned from running his grocery in
Chicago to get married. That was back when his hair was black, and the
Heliopolis building had just a street level, not six floors and a sign promoting
a "Future Net Cafe."

It was back before July 4, 1975, when Mr. Jubarah helped plant a bomb in a
refrigerator left in Zion Square, in Jerusalem's center. The explosion killed 13
people and wounded more than 60. Israel imprisoned Mr. Jubarah for life.

To Israelis, he is a mass murderer. But Mr. Jubarah -- now 66, the
longest-serving Palestinian prisoner, the parent of children he barely knows and
the grandfather of children he has never met -- was released three weeks ago, in
a concession by Israel to encourage a new peace process. Since then, he has
emerged as the symbol of a popular Palestinian movement for the release of
prisoners.

He is no dusty relic of the gory days of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Like the bell-bottomed hip-huggers hanging in Miss Young, his kind of violence
went out of fashion among Palestinians and came back in during his time in
prison. Airplane hijackings gave way to negotiation; later the Oslo peace
process gave way to suicide bombing.

Now, Mr. Jubarah acknowledged, Palestinian thinking is in turmoil, pulled
between armed struggle and an end to what the first Palestinian prime minister,
Mahmoud Abbas, denounces as terror. While the Palestinian factions may be
inching toward suspending violence, however, that is not necessarily the same
thing as condemning violence.

Trying to adjust to a changed Ramallah and a changing political reality, Mr.
Jubarah, like many Palestinians, is longing for peace. "We have to stop the mad
war, the dirty war, between the two sides," he said.

But if he felt any shame or remorse for randomly killing civilians, he expressed
none. He did not speak of having paid his debts in prison; he appeared to feel
he owed nothing to begin with.

One thing that did not change during his jail time, he said, was the Israeli
occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israel captured those territories in
the 1967 war, eight years before he helped plant the bomb.

"I was in a small jail," Mr. Jubarah likes to say now. "Now I am in a bigger
jail." Only after Israel agrees to a Palestinian state free of settlements, he
said, can the violence end.

Some Jews involved in terrorism before Israel achieved its independence in 1948
were ultimately able to reinvent themselves as politicians and even prime
ministers, noted Tom Segev, the Israeli historian. Yet even before 1948, he
said, there was sharp condemnation of terrorism from the mainstream Zionist
leadership and within the society.

"There was quite a lot of genuine moral outrage, probably more so than among the
Palestinians," he said.

Palestinians overwhelmingly regard attacks on Israeli soldiers and settlers in
the West Bank and Gaza as legitimate. There is more criticism of bombings, like
Mr. Jubarah's, across the West Bank boundary, now that the Palestinian
leadership officially favors a two-state solution and recognizes Israel's right
to exist.

Since his release, Mr. Jubarah has become a symbol of an issue that affects many
Palestinians. More than 5,300 Palestinians were being held by Israel as of the
beginning of the month, according to the Israeli human rights group B'Tselem.
Many thousands more have been through arrest and detention during 33 months of
conflict. Almost every Palestinian seems to know someone -- or claims to know
someone -- who was interrogated.

"If they don't free others, no peace," Mr. Jubarah said. But no release of
prisoners appears in the new peace plan, known as the road map.

Women carrying framed photographs of their imprisoned sons, often in graduation
gowns, have shown up at Prime Minister Abbas's public appearances to demand he
take action. He was widely faulted as failing to emphasize prisoners' issues in
his speech at a peace summit meeting this month in Aqaba, Jordan.

Apparently for that reason, he invited Mr. Jubarah to appear with him at a news
conference earlier this month. Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, has
appointed Mr. Jubarah as his adviser on prisoner affairs.

In prisoner exchanges over the years, Israel released many Palestinians who
committed devastating attacks. But Mr. Jubarah's act was viewed as so heinous
that Israel refused to let him go until this month.

He was gone so long that no one seemed to know just what he looked like. Waiting
for Mr. Jubarah's release at an Israeli checkpoint outside Ramallah, journalists
rushed another gray-haired man, shouting Mr. Jubarah's popular nickname, Abu
Sukar.

The man turned out to be Richard Gere, the actor, according to Daoud Kuttab, a
Palestinian journalist who was accompanying Mr. Gere on a fact-finding trip.

Rather than being a Rip Van Winkle blinking in surprise after a long sleep, Mr.
Jubarah seemed to embody much of the present dissonance in Palestinian society.
He condemned Israeli tactics while fondly recalling his jailers as respectful.
He attacked the American government as biased toward Israel while nostalgically
describing New York City and speaking of his American grandchildren in New
Jersey.

Mr. Jubarah is from Turmus Aya, a West Bank village where many residents hold
American citizenship, earned as generations found work in the United States. Two
of his daughters are American citizens, he said.

He made one brief trip to his village -- "It's now a city," he said with wonder,
if overstatement -- to visit the graves of his parents, who died while he was in
prison. But he is living in a hotel here because, he said, he has received
threats from settlers.

Mr. Jubarah appeared today at a meeting of prisoners' advocates to discuss how
to further their cause. Among those who turned up was Fadwa Barghouti, the wife
of Marwan Barghouti, a Palestinian leader imprisoned more than a year ago on
charges of terrorism. He denies the accusations.

"We need to emphasize that our prisoners are freedom fighters who resist
occupation," Mrs. Barghouti, a lawyer, urged the group.

That is certainly the view of Mr. Jubarah. Asked if, during his years in prison,
he ever regretted the deaths he caused, he said, in effect, that the Israeli
guilt was greater. "They killed many of us, many," he said. "If we killed
hundreds, they killed thousands."

Asked again, he said: "I don't look at what I did as a criminal act. It was a
struggle against occupation, and for people suffering from injustice."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ahmed Jubarah, center, with his wife, Bahia, and his son Rabi,
in Ramallah yesterday. In 1975, he helped to kill 13 people in Jerusalem; now he
is a symbol of a popular Palestinian movement for the release of prisoners.
(Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); PRISONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT
(86%); CLOTHING & ACCESSORIES STORES (78%); MARRIAGE (76%); PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION (73%); PEACE PROCESS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (69%); HIJACKING
(69%); JEWS & JUDAISM (68%); PRIME MINISTERS (62%) PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (53%) BENNET, JAMES; JUBARAH, AHMED

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (93%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (95%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JERUSALEM

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2003


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
