
                               1 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Groups Object to Serbia's Leading Council of Europe

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 8


Human rights groups are objecting to Serbia's taking over the presidency of a
major European political organization this week at a time when Belgrade is in
violation of the international Genocide Convention.

The groups say that having Serbia preside over the 46-nation Council of Europe,
which has long overseen human rights in Europe, will undermine the
organization's credibility. The council, based in Strasbourg, France, was set up
to promote democracy and the rule of law, and it runs the European Court of
Human Rights, the paramount rights tribunal for the region.

The issue of Serbia's heading the council -- it is due to assume the six-month
rotating presidency on Friday -- was spotlighted in February when the
International Court of Justice ruled that it had violated the Genocide
Convention on several counts.

Although the court absolved Serbia of genocide in Bosnia and paying damages for
the war that raged there from 1992 to 1995, it found Belgrade's current
government in breach of the convention on several counts. For one, it failed to
arrest two wartime leaders, Gen. Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, both
indicted on genocide charges. The 1948 Genocide Convention requires the arrest
and punishment of perpetrators.

''It's unprecedented that a state that makes such a mockery of international
justice will head the Council of Europe, the prime human rights agency,'' said
Mabel van Oranje, advocacy director at the Open Society Foundation in London.
''It raises questions,'' she said, including what regard Europe has for
international law.

Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch, said having Serbia in the
chair ''risks undercutting the credibility of the council itself and certainly
suggests abandoning the people who were victims of the genocide.''

''Something is very wrong with this picture,'' he said.

Human Rights Watch is one of several groups that have sent letters to the
foreign ministers who will represent their countries at the council's session on
Friday, when San Marino steps down and Serbia takes its turn in the chair for
six months.

Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor of the Yugoslavia war crimes tribunal, who
has unceasingly called for the arrest of General Mladic and Mr. Karadzic, also
circulated a protest letter saying Serbia was unfit for the post after violating
the Genocide Convention and ignoring several United Nations Security Council
resolutions calling for the men's arrest.

''When I think about the victims of genocide committed by Mladic and Karadzic, I
find it rather embarrassing,'' Mrs. Del Ponte said in her recent letter to the
council members. Both fugitives ''are in Serbia,'' her letter said.

Although Serbia's failure to arrest the men has long been an obstacle to
starting talks on its entering the European Union, some European governments
have favored a more flexible attitude, arguing that Europe is better off
supporting the moderates in Belgrade and enlisting their cooperation in
resolving the status of its southern province, Kosovo, which expects to become
independent soon.

But this task was further complicated Tuesday when a radical nationalist was
elected as the new speaker of the Serbian Parliament.

Members of the Council of Europe remained silent about Serbia's impending
presidency. In London, Paris and Berlin, government spokesmen said their
governments would not oppose Serbia's assuming the chair, seeing it as an
opportunity for Belgrade to demonstrate a commitment to the rule of law.

''No country has challenged Serbia's right to be chairman,'' said Matjaz Gruden,
a spokesman for the council in Strasbourg. He said that when Serbia joined in
2003, it made commitments, including the extradition of fugitives from
international justice. ''It's clear there is still a problem,'' he said. ''It's
not off the table.''

Human rights advocates have called for concrete actions like boycotting
meetings, disqualifying Serbia from holding the chair or suspending it until it
hands over the fugitives. Human rights lawyers said that when Russia, also a
council member, was accused of human rights violations in Chechnya it was not
suspended, but its representatives were temporarily stripped of their voting
rights as a symbolic gesture.

''There is a lot of hypocrisy in European governments about this,'' said Patrick
Baudouin, an official of the International Federation of Human Rights Leagues,
based in Paris. ''They are accepting the unacceptable. This official silence
discredits the council and makes it complicit with Serbia flouting the norms.''

The Council of Europe, which is separate from the European Union, was founded in
1949 to promote democracy and protect human rights and the rule of law in
Europe. It has a staff of 2,100 and a budget of about $370 million.   Serbs Pick
Ultranationalist

(By The New York Times)

LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, May 8 -- Serbia's Parliament elected an ally of the late
President Slobodan Milosevic as its speaker on Tuesday, prompting fears among
European Union officials that the country might revert to its nationalist past.

Tomislav Nikolic, the leader of the ultranationalist Radical Party, was elected
at the end of a 15-hour session with support from the party of the conservative
prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica.

Mr. Nikolic's appointment raised speculation about a possible deal between the
Serbian Democratic Party of Mr. Kostunica and the Radicals to form a new
government, an agreement that advocates of closer ties between Serbia and the
West fear could ruin such prospects. But Mr. Nikolic said Tuesday that his party
would not join in such a coalition.

Radical Party members are widely regarded as the ideological heirs of Mr.
Milosevic, who died in 2006 while on trial on war crimes charges. The party
calls for the unification of all Serbs in the Balkans in one country, opposes
cooperation with the war crimes tribunal in The Hague and has threatened a
renewed conflict over Kosovo if the province declares independence.

Mr. Nikolic's party won the largest number of votes in parliamentary elections
on Jan. 21 but failed to win a majority. Since then Mr. Kostunica has been
negotiating to form a coalition with the pro-Western Democratic Party of
President Boris Tadic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tomislav Nikolic, an ultranationalist, was elected speaker of
the Serbian Parliament yesterday. (Photo by Srdjan Ilic/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); GENOCIDE (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); RULE OF
LAW (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); INDICTMENTS (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (71%); DAMAGES (68%) Freedom and
Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (94%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (83%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (56%) Council of Europe; European
Court of Human Rights

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (77%); SAN
MARINO, SAN MARINO (58%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (92%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); SERBIA (94%); FRANCE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); BOSNIA
& HERZEGOVINA (79%); SAN MARINO (73%)

REGION: Europe; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dismay Over New Human Rights Council

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 9


The United Nations Human Rights Council begins a three-week session in Geneva on
Monday amid expressions of frustration from rights advocates at its early
performance and alarm over proposals that might weaken it further.

''So far it's been enormously disappointing, and the opponents of human rights
enforcement are running circles around the proponents,'' said Kenneth Roth, the
executive director of Human Rights Watch.

The council was created in a 170-to-4 vote of the General Assembly a year ago to
replace the Human Rights Commission, which had been widely discredited for
allowing participation by countries like Sudan, Libya and Zimbabwe who used
membership to prevent scrutiny of their own records.

The commission was long a major embarrassment to the United Nations, with former
Secretary General Kofi Annan, who first proposed its replacement in 2005,
commenting that it ''cast a shadow on the reputation of the United Nations
system as a whole.''

When the 47 members of the new council were elected last March, tighter entry
requirements succeeded in keeping the most notorious rights abusers off the
panel, and there was some hope of less politicized behavior.

But member countries from Africa and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
an association of 57 states promoting Muslim solidarity, have dashed those hopes
by voting as a bloc to stymie Western efforts to direct serious attention to
situations like the killings, rapes and pillage in the Darfur region of Sudan,
which the United Nations has declared the world's worst humanitarian crisis.

Most notably, as happened with the commission, the council has focused its
condemnation almost exclusively on Israel. It has passed eight resolutions
against Israel, and the Islamic group is planning four more for the current
session. The council has cited no other country for human rights violations.

The United States voted against creating the council last year on the basis that
it was not a sufficient improvement over the commission. This past week, it
decided for the second straight year not to seek membership on the panel, and R.
Nicholas Burns, the under secretary of state for political affairs, linked the
decision to the council's focus on Israel.

''It spent the entire year slamming Israel,'' Mr. Burns told the House Foreign
Affairs Committee on Tuesday. He noted that the council had conducted formal
hearings against Israel ''but not against Burma and not against Zimbabwe and not
against North Korea and not against Iran.''

Mr. Annan's successor, Ban Ki-moon, told a human rights gathering in December
that he was ''worried by its disproportionate focus on violations by Israel.''
The council, he said, ''has clearly not justified all the hopes that so many of
us placed on it.''

The new session is the fourth formal meeting in the last nine months, and an
immediate issue attracting attention as a measure of the council's
purposefulness is what it will do about an assessment mission to Darfur that was
barred from entering Sudan last month. The options are to publish a factual
report, publish a report with recommendations or take no action.

''What they do with the Sudan mission will be a bellwether for the future of the
council,'' said Peter G. Splinter, the Amnesty International representative in
Geneva. He indicated that he was not optimistic.

''Sudan took the floor last week and said they rejected the mission entirely,
and they are going to have the backing of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference,'' he said. ''If the council ducks the situation in Darfur, that's
not going to speak highly to its credibility.''

The Islamic group is expected to cite the fact that Israel barred an assessment
mission from entering the Gaza Strip in December and that its leader, Desmond
Tutu, the former South African archbishop and antiapartheid campaigner, decided
to make no formal recommendations.

''It was a mistake for that mission not to write a report, but if you allow
governments to prevent a report by simply not admitting a mission, then you're
giving them a way of silencing the council,'' Mr. Roth said.

In another potential blow to the council's effectiveness, a proposal is
circulating that would do away with many of the council's 41 rapporteurs, the
experts who produce sometimes graphic reports of abuses in individual countries.
The proposal specifically ensures the continuation of the mission that monitors
the Palestinian territories.

Hillel Neuer, executive director of UN Watch, a Geneva-based organization that
follows United Nations human rights activities, said, ''The situation is grim,
and one example is that the one aspect that has always been thought of as a
bright spot -- the experts -- may be eliminated.''

The United States, though not able to vote or offer a resolution, can make
speeches, exercise the right of reply and apply diplomatic pressure.

Mark Lagon, the deputy assistant secretary of state for international
organizations, said the United States would be working to persuade democratic
nations now participating in regional bloc voting to ''vote their consciences.''

He said, ''I think there are some members of the African and Asian groups who
resent being told what to think.''

The United States is intent on ensuring that no rights violators join the panel
when elections for 14 new members are held in the General Assembly in May, Mr.
Lagon said. ''It's essential that this council be manned by firefighters rather
than arsonists,'' he said.

Despite the disappointment with the council's early performance, Mr. Splinter
said that it was premature to give up on the panel because it was still setting
up its rules and procedures. It is supposed to resolve these institutional
matters by the first anniversary of its opening session, in mid-June.

''It's going through its adolescence, and it's awfully painful, but we have to
get past it and see what we have in the end,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RELIGION (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); EXECUTIVES (71%) Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE
(82%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (57%) United Nations; United Nations Human Rights Council; Organization of
the Islamic Conference; United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%) Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); ZIMBABWE (92%); AFRICA (92%); SUDAN (90%); SWITZERLAND
(88%); LIBYA (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Africa

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Groups Hail Arrests Of 3 by U.S. In War Crimes

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, April 4


Latin American human rights groups have reacted with satisfaction and muted
surprise to the arrest in the United States of three Argentine and Peruvian
former military officers accused of human rights abuses who had fled their home
countries to avoid prosecution there.

Of the three men detained over the weekend in Virginia, Maryland and Florida and
charged with violating immigration laws, the most notorious is Ernesto Guillermo
Barreiro of Argentina. During the so-called Dirty War of the late 1970s, he was
the chief interrogator at La Perla, a clandestine prison in Cordoba, Argentina's
second largest city, where more than 2,000 prisoners were tortured or killed.

''This is big news, and deserves to be celebrated both in Argentina and the
United States,'' said Gaston Chillier, director of the Center for Legal and
Social Studies, a leading human rights group in Buenos Aires. ''This is someone
with a long record not just of crimes against humanity, but also of resistance
to efforts to hold him responsible for his actions.''

During the 1980s, the democratic civilian government that came to power in
Argentina tried to bring Mr. Barreiro to justice. But he defied a court summons
to face charges and then quickly helped start a military rebellion that led to
passage of an amnesty law that exempted officers below the rank of colonel -- he
was then a major -- from prosecution in connection with human rights abuses on
the grounds they were merely following orders.

In 2004, a year after Argentina's current president, Nestor Kirchner, came to
power promising to revive such prosecutions, Mr. Barreiro fled to the
Washington, D.C., area and opened an antiques store. The Argentine Supreme Court
overturned the amnesty nearly two years ago, and several hundred people now face
charges, including Mr. Barreiro and Maria Estela de Peron, the former president,
who lives in exile in Spain and is fighting extradition.

The arrests have put the Bush administration in the unaccustomed position of
being praised by human rights groups and news organizations in Latin America.
The former officers were detained by a unit of the Homeland Security Department,
which is traditionally widely criticized in the region for the way it treats
illegal immigrants from Latin America.

''This administration has a very poor record as regards international human
rights law and the Geneva convention,'' Jose Miguel Vivanco, the director of
Human Rights Watch Americas, said in a telephone interview from Washington.
''However, there is nothing on the record that shows that this administration is
interested in protecting individuals responsible for gross violations of human
rights, unless they have some link with intelligence agencies.''

Mr. Vivanco said he was referring to Luis Posada Carriles, a Cuban exile and
former C.I.A. asset who is wanted in Cuba and Venezuela on charges that he blew
up a Cuban airliner in 1976, killing 73 people. The United States has also
declined to extradite Emmanuel Constant, former leader of a right-wing Haitian
paramilitary group who has been convicted in absentia there of organizing a 1994
massacre.

It is not yet clear how American authorities intend to handle Mr. Barreiro's
case. He could either be summarily deported for having lied about his record on
his visa application, tried and jailed in the United States in connection with
that offense, or extradited to Argentina, normally a time-consuming process.

''It would be an irony if an immigration infraction were to delay Barreiro's
return,'' said Horacio Verbitsky, an Argentine author and journalist who has
written several books on human rights issues. ''The United States could impose
no more severe punishment than to send him back to Argentina, where he faces
life imprisonment but will receive due process and the fair trial'' he denied
his victims.

The other two men being held, Telmo Ricardo Hurtado and Juan Manuel Rivera
Rondon, are Peruvians. They are accused of having participated in the massacre
of 69 peasants in an Andean village in 1985, when President Alan Garcia was
trying to suppress the brutal Maoist Shining Path guerrilla movement.

Mr. Garcia is once again president, and the extradition or expulsion of the two
officers to stand trial in Peru could produce embarrassing revelations there.
Concerns about a cover-up or official foot-dragging are among the reasons human
rights advocates say they will monitor the case closely.

''The de facto policy of the Peruvian military has been to provide zero
cooperation in cases of abuses committed in the 1980s,'' Mr. Vivanco said. ''To
send these fellows back is the right thing to do, but I think it would be
important to get assurances at the highest levels of the Peruvian government
that the military are going to break with that pattern.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); EXTRADITION (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); AMNESTY (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); DEPORTATION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); IMMIGRATION LAW (76%);
INTERVIEWS (75%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (72%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (68%); SUPREME COURTS
(66%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); ANTIQUE
DEALERS (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; United
States International Relations; Torture; Extradition; Deportation; Immigration
and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (59%) Shining Path (Guerrilla Orgn)

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (58%) Larry Rohter; Ernesto Guillermo Barreiro; Alan
Garcia; telmo ricardo hurtado; juan manuel rivera rondon

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); ARGENTINA (95%); LATIN AMERICA (93%); SPAIN (79%);
CUBA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Argentina; Peru; Argentina

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Mission Says Sudan Took Part in Rights Crimes

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 12


A United Nations Human Rights Council mission to Darfur said Monday that the
Sudanese government had organized and taken part in human rights crimes against
its own population, and that international action to stop the killings and rapes
had been inadequate.

The government in Khartoum, the Sudanese capital, ''has manifestly failed to
protect the population of Darfur from large-scale international crimes and has
itself orchestrated and participated in these crimes,'' the mission's 35-page
report said. It added that rebels were also to blame for abuses, including the
rape and torture of civilians.

The mission's report urged that all resolutions from the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union be put into effect, ''including those relating to
travel bans and the freezing of funds, assets, and economic resources of those
who commit violations.''

Human rights advocates welcomed the unusually tough tone of the report and its
recommendations, but they warned that steps were already under way to block its
effect when the report comes up for adoption by the Human Rights Council on
Friday in Geneva.

The rights council has been widely criticized for being no more effective than
the discredited Human Rights Commission it replaced this year. Taking action on
Darfur is seen by rights groups as a measure of whether the council can start to
build credibility during its formal session, the fourth it has held, which began
Monday.

So far, all eight of the condemnations of human rights performance it has issued
since its creation in June have been against one country, Israel.

The mission to Darfur, led by Jody Williams, an American campaigner against land
mines and a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, was denied entry to Sudan by the
government, and had to base its report on interviews with refugees and aid
workers, rebels across the border in Chad and officials of the African Union at
its headquarters in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

''This report is Jody Williams and her team members, and this is definitely not
the council,'' said Hillel Neuer, executive director of U.N. Watch, an
organization based in Geneva that monitors United Nations activities. ''The
council will probably throw this report into Lake Geneva.''

Reached at her home in Virginia, Ms. Williams said, ''Given the hostility to the
mission almost from the moment it was born, I would not be shocked if there were
maneuvers not to allow the report to be presented.''

She said she was traveling to Geneva this week to lobby for the report's
adoption. ''But I understand there has already been tabled a resolution to try
to block the presentation of this report and call for a new quote, unquote
balanced and objective mission,'' she said.

The original decision to send the six-person team to Sudan was made only after a
bitter debate among council members, with some Arab and African countries on the
47-member group protesting the singling out of Sudan.

Commenting on that, Ms. Williams said: ''The most difficult part of this mission
was not the travel or the worry about getting visas for Darfur, nor the
interviewing of refugees and listening to 5 women out of 20 in the space of an
hour about being gang-raped. It was dealing with the politics of the Human
Rights Council from the minute I received the call.''

Peter G. Splinter, the Amnesty International representative in Geneva, said:
''Although there is considerable pessimism here, there are a number of key
diplomats who view this as a test of the council's credibility, and no one has
any illusions about Sudan and the seriousness of the matter. So maybe the
council can still do something substantive on Darfur.''

But he added, ''It's still an uphill battle.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); AWARDS & PRIZES (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); TORTURE
(78%); LOBBYING (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); LANDMINES (74%); NOBEL PRIZES (73%); REFUGEES (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (67%)
Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%); AFRICAN UNION (56%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%) United
Nations Human Rights Council; United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: Warren Hoge

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%); ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Accuses Philippine Army of Abuses Against Leftists

BYLINE: By CARLOS H. CONDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: MANILA, June 28


The Philippine military has been waging a ''dirty war'' against leftists that
has resulted in the death or disappearance of hundreds of Filipino activists,
Human Rights Watch said Thursday.

In a report, the group said that the government had failed to prosecute members
of the armed forces implicated in the killings and that witnesses were afraid to
testify, contributing to ''official impunity.''

Human Rights Watch, based in New York, also said that measures by the government
to deal with the killings had been largely unsuccessful and that the
administration of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo had consistently failed  to
uphold international human rights law.

The report came a few days after a Philippine newspaper quoted unidentified
generals who contended that they had been present at meetings in which a
military policy that involved the assassination of leftists was discussed.

An investigation in February by a United Nations human rights envoy, Philip G.
Alston, blamed the military for the killings. A commission created this year by
Ms. Macapagal-Arroyo reached the same conclusion.

The government also created special courts to try such cases but  witnesses have
been afraid to speak out.

The armed forces said the Human Rights Watch report was unfair and one-sided.
''We categorically deny the allegations that there is a dirty war being waged by
the armed forces of the Philippines, particularly against the leftist groups,''
Lt. Col. Bartolome Bacarro, a military spokesman, said Thursday.

Though he conceded that some military elements might have been involved in such
killings, Colonel Bacarro said, ''It is not a policy to commit extrajudicial
activities.''

Sophie Richardson, deputy director of Human Rights Watch's Asia program, said,
''There is strong evidence of a 'dirty war' by the armed forces against
left-leaning activists and journalists.''  She said, ''The failure to prosecute
soldiers or police suspected in these killings shifts the spotlight of
responsibility to the highest levels of the government.''

The report said the killings ''appeared to shift into a higher gear'' in
February 2006, after several leftist groups were accused of participating in a
coup plot led by renegade members of the military. The report also said that
around the same time, Ms. Arroyo also ordered an ''all-out war'' against
Communists.

Karapatan, a Philippine human rights group, some of whose members have been
killed, has documented nearly 900 cases of what it describes as extrajudicial
killings. There has also been a recent spate of abductions of leftists, some of
whose bodies were later found.

The military denies that it goes after unarmed activists, insisting that the
killings have been carried out by the Communists themselves as part of a
long-running purge.

But Human Rights Watch said that while the rebel New People's Army continued to
violate human rights, its investigation did not uncover evidence of the rebels'
participation in any of the killings.

The group urged Ms. Macapagal-Arroyo to issue an executive order  prohibiting
extrajudicial killing and called on the United States to suspend military
assistance to the Philippines until members of the armed forces those implicated
in the killings were prosecuted.

''Actions speak louder than words, and the only real proof of the government's
commitment to end these killings will be when the perpetrators are finally held
to account in a court of law,'' the group said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WITNESSES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); COUPS (77%); JOURNALISM (77%); TESTIMONY (76%);
ASSASSINATION (75%); WRITERS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (74%)

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (98%); UNITED STATES (92%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Guatemala, Officers' Killings Echo Dirty War

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.; Eugene Palumbo contributed reporting from El
Salvador.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1717 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA CITY, March 3


After three Salvadoran congressmen were waylaid and killed on a road in
Guatemala last month, it did not take the authorities long to find the culprits:
they were Guatemalan police officers, and their unmarked police car had a
tracking device that proved they were at the scene.

They quickly confessed, saying they thought their victims were drug dealers, and
were sent to a maximum-security prison.

It is a measure of the weakness of the crime-plagued Guatemalan state that what
happened just four days later remains something of a mystery -- aside from the
indisputable fact that the four who confessed ended up dead.

The police and the interior minister say that rioting gang members inside the
prison shot and stabbed them. But other inmates and their visitors that day say
a group of heavily armed men in military garb and ski masks made their way
through seven locked doors and executed them, with no interference from guards,
removing any possibility that they could identify co-conspirators.

The two sets of brazen killings set off a vicious diplomatic conflict between
Guatemala and El Salvador -- heightened by news reports suggesting that the
congressmen were indeed drug dealers -- and ignited a political scandal here. It
shed light on how corrupt the National Police has become, and raised questions
about links between drug dealers and high-level police officials, as well as
whether the government can contain drug trafficking without international help.

One assistant police chief has been forced to resign and another has been
suspended. On Thursday, the interior minister and top police officials appeared
before Congress, where they were grilled not only on whether death squads exist
inside the police force, but on how the state failed to protect the four
officers.

Perhaps more important, the whole episode has exposed to the world the rampant
police corruption, lawlessness and drug trafficking that plagues much of Central
America, and Guatemala in particular.

This small country of 12.3 million people has more than 5,000 homicides a year,
many of them vigilante killings or gangland murders, human rights advocates say.
Arrests are made in only 2 percent of the cases.

Drug trafficking fuels the violence, and United States officials say Guatemala's
record on taking down drug lords leaves much to be desired. At least two-thirds
of the cocaine used in American cities -- much of it made from coca cultivated
in Colombia and Bolivia -- passes through Guatemala, American officials report,
and several former military officers have been accused of trafficking.

President Oscar Berger and his minister of interior say they are attacking the
problem and point out it was Guatemalan police officers who caught the rogue
officers in the first place. Mr. Berger has also backed a proposal to create an
international commission to investigate human rights abuses by the police.

Since 1993, the United States has twice helped set up special antinarcotics
forces here, only to watch their commanders become embroiled in the drug trade
themselves. President Bush is scheduled to visit next week, and American
diplomats say the lack of public security here is near the top of his agenda.

Human rights advocates and opposition politicians have taken the two sets of
killings as proof that criminal gangs have corrupted Guatemala's national police
force and that groups of officers are operating like drug syndicates, robbing
and killing competing dealers.

The squads of rogue officers, human rights experts and others say, are in a
sense an outgrowth of Guatemala's long internal conflict. Some former military
officers who came of age during the bloody counterinsurgency operations of the
1980's are members of the new rogue squads, according to human rights experts
and opposition politicians. They say other members are younger, but have adopted
the old practices of assassination and terrorism to combat crime and, sometimes,
to line their own pockets.

''The truth, I think, is the problem comes from the end of the armed conflict,
when the state tried to protect itself against rebels,'' said the editor of La
Hora newspaper, Oscar Clemente Marroquin. ''When the war stopped, the apparatus
kept operating the same way but now it doesn't protect the military. Now it
protects organized crime.''

A high-ranking United Nations official here, who requested anonymity to protect
his diplomatic neutrality, said he believed the Interior Ministry and the
National Police created death squads over the last three years, trying to combat
the wave of violent crime by gangs like the notorious Mara Salvatrucha, a group
started in Los Angeles by the children of Central American civil-war refugees of
the 1980s.

The officers in those squads belong to evangelical churches, the official said,
and see the extrajudicial killings of gang members, known here as ''social
cleansing,'' as holy work. But they have also begun to commit crimes for their
own profit. ''It gets out of their hands,'' the official said. ''They create a
Frankenstein.''

Otto Perez Molina, the leader of the Patriotic Party and a candidate for
president, has also charged there are at least two separate groups of rogue
officers operating within the National Police, each controlled by a deputy
commissioner.

Erwin Sperisen, the national police chief, denies that the force harbors death
squads, though he acknowledges that his department is riddled with corrupt
officers who sometimes commit crimes. Because of strong labor laws and poor
vetting procedures, he said, he has not been able to purge the 19,000-member
force of officers who came from the two main police forces that controlled the
country during the civil war and were schooled in torture and assassination.

''One has to break with this kind of schooling,'' he said.

At first, the killings of the Salvadoran congressmen appeared to be politically
motivated. One of the three was Eduardo Jose D'Aubuisson, son of Roberto
D'Aubuisson, the late Salvadoran right-wing leader and founder of the current
governing party. But now many here say Eduardo and the others, along with their
driver, were the latest victims of rogue police officers run amok. The three
were there to attend a meeting of the Central American Parliament, a regional
body.

About 10:30 a.m. on Feb. 19, Luis Arturo Herrera, a decorated officer who was
head of the Guatemalan National Police organized crime unit, and three other
officers used their unmarked sedan to cut off the congressmen's luxury
four-wheel-drive car in front of a shopping center on the outskirts of Guatemala
City, prosecutors say.

They forced the driver and Mr. D'Aubuisson into their sedan, leaving the other
two congressmen in their car, and then drove both vehicles back down the highway
toward El Salvador, where a traffic camera filmed them, according to the
prosecutor in charge of the inquiry, Alvaro Matus.

A short time later, witnesses told prosecutors, they also stopped at a gasoline
station, where they were joined by at least two other police officers and two
people in civilian clothes.

The two cars then continued to an empty stretch of road near the town of Santa
Elena Barilla, where according to statements by the four officers, they searched
the car and beat the victims, Chief Sperisen said. Later in the afternoon,
around 4:30, they went down a dirt road to a farm, where called Las Conchas.
There they executed the four men with gunshots, then burned the car and the
bodies. Some people living nearby found the remains about two hours later,
prosecutors said.

The officers who confessed said they had been told that the congressmen were
Colombian drug dealers carrying cash, according to Chief Sperisen. The whole
episode appeared to be a botched robbery based on misinformation, he said.

El Salvador's chief of national police, Rodrigo Avila, agreed that the officers
probably intended to rob the group and panicked when they learned who their
victims were. ''When they realized they were really congressmen is when they
made the decision to kill them,'' he said.

Mr. Avila said his government had not ruled out the possibility the police
officers were tricked. ''They could have been manipulated by someone to hit the
congressmen, but we don't know,'' he said.

The Salvadoran president, Elias Antonio Saca, and top security officials have
accused Guatemalan authorities of allowing the four officers who confessed to be
killed as part of a cover-up. The Salvadorans have also bristled at theories put
forward by Guatemalan investigators that the congressmen might have been
carrying drugs or illicit cash.

Mr. Matus, the prosecutor, says he still has not determined why the three
congressmen were killed.

Nor have prosecutors made much progress getting to the bottom of what happened
at El Boqueron prison on Feb. 25.

The warden at El Boqueron and more than 20 guards have been arrested but have
shed no light on the matter. The police have discovered pistols hidden in the
inmates' quarters that may have been used in the killings, though some of the
shells recovered inside the prison came from assault rifles.

For their part, the inmates maintain they rioted only after the killings,
fearing they would become scapegoats. They took hostages and forced the
government to send in a television news crew and the country's human rights
ombudsman to hear their version of events.

Family members of the inmates, meanwhile, told local reporters they were ordered
out of the prison before visiting hours were over, which they took as a sign the
guards knew something was about to happen.

The country's top prosecutor, Juan Luis Florido, has promised to get to the
bottom of both crimes, even if they reach to the upper echelons of the police or
government.

But human rights advocates are skeptical. The attorney general's office does not
have the resources, the independence or the strength to investigate the National
Police, they say.

''I wouldn't go so far as to call it a failed state, but it's very
dysfunctional,'' said Dan Wilkinson of Human Rights Watch. ''The main thing is
the drugs and corruption. There is a huge amount of money there. And you have
extremely weak institutions that are no match for these organized crime
groups.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Four Guatemalan police officers confessed to the crime and were
sent to a maximum security prison, where they were killed four days later.
 Three Salvadoran congressmen visiting Guatemala for a meeting of the Central
American Parliament were kidnapped and executed. Then their bodies and car were
burned on an isolated farm east of Guatemala City. (Photographs by Orlando
Sierra/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRUPTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); POLITICAL
SCANDALS (78%); MURDER (78%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%); HOMICIDE (78%);
CONSPIRACY (78%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (76%); CORRECTIONS (76%);
COCAINE (76%); MISCONDUCT (73%); RIOTS (73%); CITY LIFE (71%); SCANDALS (71%);
INVESTIGATIONS (71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (71%); CITY GOVERNMENT (70%); ETHICS
(66%); POLITICS (66%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (64%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION
(50%) Ethics; Police Brutality and Misconduct; Drug Abuse and Traffic; United
States International Relations; Foreign Aid; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL AMERICAN PARLIAMENT (59%)

PERSON: James C Jr Mckinley; Oscar (Pres) Berger; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (92%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); EL SALVADOR (92%); CENTRAL
AMERICA (88%); COLOMBIA (79%)

REGION: Guatemala; El Salvador  ; Guatemala; Guatemala

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 7, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Releases Rights Report, With an Acknowledgment

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 6


The Bush administration acknowledged Tuesday that its treatment of terrorism
suspects was being questioned, even as it used an annual report to criticize the
human rights records of Iraq, Afghanistan and a long list of other countries.

''Our democratic system of governance is accountable, but it is not
infallible,'' Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in releasing the
Congressionally mandated report. It weighs the human rights situation in 193
countries -- but not the United States, and Ms. Rice did not specifically cite
any American violations.

But Barry Lowenkron, an assistant secretary of state, said the State Department
was ''issuing this report at a time when our own record, and actions we have
taken to respond to terrorist attacks against us, have been questioned.'' He
referred to American laws ''governing the detention, treatment and trial of
terrorist suspects.''

Officials from countries that are often cited in the report have complained that
the United States is quick to criticize others for violations that sometimes
occur in America, and the remarks on Tuesday, one White House official said,
were an attempt to answer those charges. In particular, the administration has
come under fire from human rights groups for its treatment of prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The report described serious problems in countries with close ties to the United
States, and cited worsening sectarian violence in Iraq. ''On one side,
predominantly Sunni Arab groups such as Al Qaeda in Iraq, irreconcilable
remnants of the Baathist regime, and insurgents waging guerrilla warfare
violently opposed the government and targeted Shi'a communities,'' the report
said. But on ''the other, predominantly Shi'a militias with some ties to the
Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) targeted Sunnis in large-scale death squad and
kidnapping activities,'' it added.

The report also found that respect for human rights had deteriorated in China,
Russia, Venezuela and Egypt. It said the Chinese government had ''tightened
restrictions on freedom of speech and the press, including stricter control and
censorship of the Internet.'' China also continued to detain members of the
banned Falun Gong spiritual group, as well as other political activists, the
report said.

''There was an increased number of high-profile cases involving the monitoring,
harassment, detention and imprisonment of political and religious activists,
journalists and writers as well as defense lawyers seeking to exercise their
rights under the law,'' the report said. ''Some of their family members also
were harassed and detained.''

China had the dubious distinction of being lumped in one section of the report
alongside a number of governments that are in disfavor with the United States.
That group included North Korea, Myanmar, Iran, Zimbabwe and Cuba, all herded
together under a heading that read, in part, ''Countries in which power remained
concentrated in the hands of unaccountable rulers -- whether totalitarian or
authoritarian.''

North Korea was criticized for controlling citizens' lives and for denying
freedom of speech, the press, assembly and association. The military government
of Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, the report said, ''extensively used
executions, rape, torture, arbitrary detention and forced relocation of entire
villages, particularly of ethnic minorities, to maintain its grip on power.''

Iran ''flagrantly'' violated freedom of speech and assembly, Zimbabwe
''continued across-the-board violations of human rights,'' and Cuba ''continued
to violate virtually all the rights of its citizens, including the fundamental
right to change their government peacefully or criticize the revolution or its
leaders.''

The report raised concern about ''contract style'' murders in Russia, and warned
of political pressure on the judiciary. ''The most notable human rights
developments during the year were the contract-style killings of pro-reform
Central Bank Deputy Chairman Andrei Kozlov and journalist Anna Politkovskaya,
known for uncovering human rights abuses in Chechnya,'' the report said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); TERRORISM (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); JOURNALISM (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CULTS & SECTS (74%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); CENSORSHIP
(70%); LAWYERS (70%); RELIGION (70%); NAVIES (64%) Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: JAMA'AT AL-TAWHID WAL-JIHAD (AL-QAIDA IN IRAQ) (54%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (90%) Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Helene Cooper

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); CHINA (94%); CUBA (94%); AFGHANISTAN
(93%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Groups in Brazil Aim to Call Military Torturers to Account

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: SAO PAULO, Brazil


Frustrated by their own government's timidity but encouraged by recent court
rulings in Argentina and Chile, Brazilian human rights groups are seeking to
overturn an amnesty for human rights abuses that went into effect in 1979, when
a right-wing military dictatorship ruled this nation.

A family of five jailed earlier in the 1970s has filed a civil action against
Col. Carlos Alberto Brilhante Ustra, who was then the commander of Center for
Operations for Internal Defense here. A judge has agreed to hear the complaint,
the first time that a Brazilian military officer has been formally called to
account for the torture of political prisoners during the dictatorship.

''This has a lot to do with historical context, and not just in Brazil,'' said
Cecilia Coimbra, a leader of the human rights group Torture Never Again. ''Other
countries have advanced a lot further, both in terms of punishing those
responsible for abuses and opening their archives. And since our government
still insists on sitting on the wall, we have to take the offensive ourselves.''

The complainants say that they are not seeking to have Colonel Ustra jailed or
forced to pay damages to former prisoners. ''Our objective is merely to
establish the truth, which is that torture was not an isolated practice, but
institutionalized,'' said Crimeia Schmidt de Almeida, one of the plaintiffs.
''We want the state to recognize that he was a torturer, for the sake of the
historical record.''

The original law, approved in 1979 by a compliant Congress, granted amnesty for
all ''crimes related to politics or committed with a political motivation.''
Over the years, that phrase, apparently purposefully ambiguous, has been taken
to mean that neither the leftist opponents of the military dictatorship,
including former armed guerrillas, nor their jailers and torturers, could be
held legally accountable for their actions.

''It was a broad, generalized amnesty, for terrorists and torturers alike,''
said Jarbas Passarinho, a former army colonel, senator and justice minister who
has emerged as one of Colonel Ustra's main defenders. ''I favor the idea of
turning the page and moving on, in the interests of national reconciliation.''

But lawyers here who have volunteered their services to human rights groups
contend that torture cannot be regarded as a political offense and that it is
therefore excluded from the amnesty. And because torture has no statute of
limitations under Brazilian law, Colonel Ustra and others could theoretically be
indicted under a law outlawing torture that was passed in 1997 meant mainly to
prevent police abuses.

The total of those who died or disappeared during the military dictatorship that
ruled Brazil from 1964 to 1985 numbers in the hundreds, rather than the
thousands who perished in Argentina and Chile over a much shorter period. In the
past, governments here had focused on compensating victims and their relatives,
but when the leftist Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva was elected president in 2002,
human rights groups hoped for a more forceful approach.

Mr. da Silva, however, has disappointed those expectations. When, for example,
the military was caught in late 2004 trying to destroy incriminating records and
issued a public statement justifying its mistreatment of political prisoners,
the president declined to fire or even rebuke military commanders, which led his
civilian defense minister, Jose Viegas, to resign in protest.

''Everything depends on the political context and political will, and I don't
see the political will in Lula's administration,'' Jose Miguel Vivanco, the
executive director of the Americas program of Human Rights Watch, said in a
telephone interview from Washington. ''Politicians are rational actors. They are
willing to challenge the status quo only if they have a constituency or some
pressure, and I don't know if that constituency exists in Brazil the way it does
in Argentina and Chile.''

Speaking on behalf of Colonel Ustra, his wife, Joseita, declined a request for
an interview with him, saying he is recovering from surgery. But in recent
speeches made to military groups before his hospitalization, he suggested that
he was not the human rights groups' only target.

''I am the first, but tomorrow there will be others,'' he said in a speech to an
audience of more than 400 fellow officers and sympathizers at the Military Club
in Rio de Janeiro in January. ''I am being judged for a crime I did not commit.
It is the revenge of those who were defeated in 1964, many of whom today find
themselves in power.''

Colonel Passarinho said that among the people Colonel Ustra had in mind was
Dilma Rousseff, Mr. da Silva's chief of staff. As a member of an armed
revolutionary group, Ms. Rousseff, then nicknamed ''the guerrilla Joan of Arc,''
was involved in a $2.5 million robbery in 1969 and was captured the next year,
tortured and held in prison for three years.

Colonel Ustra, 74, is the founder of a group called Terrorism Never Again,
formed as a counterpoint to Torture Never Again, and the author of a book, ''The
Suffocated Truth.'' The book was intended to, in his words, ''undo the myths,
farces and lies to manipulate public opinion'' about the period of the
dictatorship. He acknowledges that some of his subordinates may have committed
abuses, but he insists that he never personally participated in torture
sessions. That claim has been contested by human rights groups and former
prisoners.

''As commander, he not only knew what was going on, but personally tortured me
when I was seven months pregnant,'' said Ms. Schmidt de Almeida, a former
guerrilla. ''He used electricity to shock me not on the anus, mouth and
genitals, which was the standard practice then, but on the hands and feet, and
he beat me about the head.

''It's not just me, but Brazilian society as a whole that is living with the
consequences of that repression,'' she added. ''It's a difficult thing to
confront, but there have been important advances in Argentina, Chile and
Uruguay, and for our own well-being, we need to resolve this issue, too.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, left, and Jose Viegas, who
quit his cabinet job in 2004 in a rights protest. (Photo by Jamil
Bittar/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); AMNESTY (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY
RULE (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); DAMAGES (78%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (78%); ARMIES (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (75%); HISTORY (74%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (73%); JUDGES (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); LEGISLATION
(69%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); PARDONS (64%); TERRORISM (61%) Freedom and Human
Rights; Suits and Litigation; Amnesties and Pardons; Torture; Political
Prisoners

PERSON: LUIZ INACIO LULA DA SILVA (58%) Larry Rohter; Carlos Alberto Brilhante
(Col) Ustra

CITY: SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (58%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%); ARGENTINA (93%)

REGION: Brazil

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tribute to Those Who Bear Witness

BYLINE: By STUART KLAWANS

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; FILM; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1227 words


FILM festival themes are like butterflies in a Rorschach blot -- or are those
elephants? -- coalescing and vanishing in the blink of an eye. Watch two dozen
documentaries and feature films from around the world, and let whatever patterns
you like dance on your retina.

But a more focused experience is available in this year's Human Rights Watch
International Film Festival (Friday through June 28 at Lincoln Center's Walter
Reade Theater). A verifiable theme -- a highly appropriate one too -- has come
together at this festival's core, in films that both praise and challenge the
role of photography in human rights.

Among the films ''The City of Photographers,'' by Sebastian Moreno Mardones,
reveals how a group of brave photojournalists in 1980s Chile encouraged
opposition to Gen. Augusto Pinochet's regime. ''The Devil Came on Horseback,''
by Annie Sundberg and Ricki Stern, tells the story of Brian Steidle, a former
Marine Corps captain who took more than 1,000 horrific photos of the current
genocide in Darfur, then used them to help raise an outcry. ''Manufactured
Landscapes,'' by Jennifer Baichwal, comments and expands on the work of Edward
Burtynsky, an art photographer who visits scenes of vast social and
environmental disruption -- most recently in newly industrialized China -- and
makes large pictures of them.

Though different in setting, subject matter and method, all three films remind
us that the enforcement of rights, or even the recognition of them, often begins
with the click of a shutter. ''The very notion of atrocity,'' Susan Sontag
wrote, ''of war crime, is associated with the expectation of photographic
evidence.'' To understand how this came to be so, you could review several
centuries of history (as Ms. Sontag did in her book ''Regarding the Pain of
Others'') or simply jump to the critical moment. ''If there was one year when
the power of photographs to define, not merely record, the most abominable
realities trumped all the complex narratives,'' she wrote, ''surely it was
1945,'' when films and photographs emerged from Bergen-Belsen, Buchenwald,
Dachau and Hiroshima.

These pictures were crucial not only because of the terrible witness they bore
but also because they circulated everywhere, a fact not lost on the
photographers. In 1947 four distinguished photojournalists founded the Magnum
Photos agency with the goal of working and publishing internationally. ''In
Magnum's voice,'' Ms. Sontag wrote, ''photography declared itself a global
enterprise.''

One year later came the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the first
recognition in international law of the rights of individuals.

No doubt there was as much coincidence as cause and effect in this chain of
events. But if the rights first published in 1948 were to become more than ''a
pious set of cliches'' (as Michael Ignatieff has put it), there had to be
institutions to help enable their exercise: sets of practices and relationships
ready-made for what Mr. Ignatieff called ''the advocacy revolution.'' One such
institution was the new global network of photographers of conscience.

The continuing importance of this network is visible every day in newspapers.
It's demonstrated as well in a sidebar exhibition to this year's Human Rights
Watch Film Festival. A gallery show, ''On the Frontlines,'' in the Walter Reade
Theater's lobby, presents recent photographs by seven photojournalists who have
been working with the festival's parent organization, Human Rights Watch. Faced
with these images, the group maintains, ''no government can say 'it never
happened' or 'we didn't know.' ''

This may be true, as far as it goes, but the festival's movies go even further.
They raise difficult questions about photojournalism and about human rights
advocacy itself.

When you watch Mr. Burtynsky high up on a platform in ''Manufactured
Landscapes,'' directing Chinese workers like extras on a movie set, and then (in
a later scene) view the resulting pictures on an art gallery's walls, you may be
reminded of the persistent accusation that human rights are a parochial
invention of Westerners, imposed for their authors' benefit on other people
around the world. Fortunately ''Manufactured Landscapes'' incorporates something
Mr. Burtynsky excludes: close-ups of people who in his photographs would be
antlike or absent.

In favor of Mr. Burtynsky's artworks, which are so impressive and so impersonal,
you might say that they bring critical realities to light through an inherent
power of photography, its ability to show what the unaided eye cannot see. In
favor of Jennifer Baichwal's documentary (which, after its festival screening,
will open in New York at Film Forum on June 20), you might say that it achieves
its own grandeur without losing the ''human'' in human rights.

Mr. Burtynsky and Ms. Baichwal do bear witness; but what's the use of testimony
if no one acts on it? That's the question tormenting Brian Steidle in ''The
Devil Came on Horseback.'' Still in his 20s when he left the Marines, Mr.
Steidle came to Darfur in 2004 as an employee of the African Union, hired to
monitor a cease-fire in Sudan's civil war. What he found was not a tenuous peace
but wholesale, government-sponsored slaughter. And as an unarmed observer, he
could do nothing but watch and take photographs.

''The Devil Came on Horseback'' presents a sample of the awful evidence he
amassed while tracing Mr. Steidle's metamorphosis from a military man to a
photographer and activist. At the end of the film he remains shocked and angry
that his pictures haven't changed the situation in Darfur. But it's no small
thing that they've changed thousands of people, most of all himself.

As Mr. Steidle has learned, the act of picturing atrocities exacts a price from
photojournalists. This is also a lesson of ''The City of Photographers,'' a
cinematic group portrait of Chile's extraordinary Association of Independent
Photographers. That film's subjects, seen both today and in action 25 years ago,
wanted to record the gathering protests against General Pinochet. So they formed
the association to give themselves press credentials, then went into the streets
in clusters for self-protection.

In this case there was no question about the photographers' efficacy (police
beatings were their testimonials), nor could any of these people have been
called interlopers (though one did come from Brazil). The moral and emotional
toll of their work is another matter. ''I suddenly saw us as a flock of
vultures, drawn to blood,'' one photographer says. Another says: ''I came to
realize that I needed the police. You become addicted to fear, and to overcoming
your fear.''

Today, as they look back, many of these people speak with sorrow as much as
pride. But for the most resilient, the work they began with the association has
never stopped. One man, who maintains an archive of the disappeared, was
disturbed that he had names but not faces for many of Pinochet's victims. In one
of the most moving sequences he travels around Chile, contacting family members
to ask for old photos.

The survivors understand. What's at stake in the request is not a mere image but
the most basic of rights. As one woman says, having earned the knowledge the
hard way, ''Not to have a photograph of your family is like not having a part in
the history of mankind.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A factory in Zhangzhou, China, from ''Manufactured Landscapes,''
a film about the photographer Edward Burtynsky at the Human Rights Watch
International Film Festival. (Photo by Edward Burtynsky)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MOVIE INDUSTRY (90%); FILM (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%);
FESTIVALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VISUAL ARTISTS (90%); PHOTOGRAPHY (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%);
PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (89%); PHOTOJOURNALISM (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (79%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Urge Legal Amnesty for Those Involved in Wars

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 1


Afghanistan's lower house of Parliament has approved a nonbinding resolution
urging the government to grant immunity to all Afghans involved in the wars of
the last 25 years.

The move brought protests on Thursday from human rights advocates and the United
Nations mission in Afghanistan, who had been working with the government on a
plan to address the many abuses over the last three decades.

Lawmakers said the resolution was passed in the interest of peace and stability
and was intended to include even the fugitive Taliban leader, Mullah Muhammad
Omar, and the renegade mujahedeen leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.

It was approved just days after President Hamid Karzai began work on the
government's reconciliation plan. He said he was ready to hold talks with
Taliban leaders as Afghanistan braced for a spring offensive by insurgents
linked to the Taliban, who were ousted from power in late 2001.

The lower house of Parliament, which includes many former militants and
mujahedeen commanders and a handful of former members of the Taliban government
and the earlier Communist leadership, passed the 12-point resolution, called the
Peace and Reconciliation Charter, by a show of hands on Wednesday.

The resolution had been proposed by a group of former mujahedeen leaders and Nur
ul-Hag Ulumi, a former Communist general who served during the Soviet
occupation. A small number of liberal and democratic legislators left the
chamber in protest before the vote.

The resolution is not a law. It was not scheduled to proceed to the upper house
of Parliament or to the president. But it is a public expression of the views of
those who advocate one approach to reconciliation as Afghanistan continues to
grapple with an insurgency in the south and east, legislators said.

''The main point of this scheme is how long should we fight and how long would
we have violence?'' Mr. Ulumi said. Despite the language about immunity, he said
the resolution was not intended to advocate pardoning criminals. ''This is just
an invitation for peace,'' he said.

The measure says that those who took up arms in the past should be free from
prosecution and that those who had fought the current government should be
allowed to join the reconciliation process if they accept the Constitution and
the laws of the land.

The resolution also denounced recent comments by the New York-based Human Rights
Watch. The group, which is based in New York, named several members of
Parliament who it said had been implicated in war crimes and rights abuses.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which has a mandate to
monitor human rights issues, quickly issued a statement questioning the
impartiality of a resolution passed by political and factional leaders.

''For any process of national reconciliation to succeed, the suffering of
victims must be acknowledged and impunity tackled,'' the statement said. ''No
one has the right to forgive those responsible for human rights violations other
than the victims themselves.'' It said it wanted to ensure that ''the rights of
victims remain at the heart of this debate.''

Human Rights Watch has called for the Afghan government to honor promises it
made a year ago to develop a five-year Action Plan for Peace, Reconciliation and
Justice, a process that Mr. Karzai officially initiated last month.

The parliamentary resolution, which was passed soon after the assembly returned
from its winter break, may have been a reaction to Mr. Karzai's move. Several of
the most powerful militant leaders who now hold seats in Parliament have been
blamed for causing civilian suffering during the civil war of the 1990s. Members
of the Communist governments, ousted in 1989, have been blamed for
disappearances and torture in prisons, and indiscriminate bombing of rural
areas. Members of the Taliban rule have been accused of killings and forcing
many people from their homes.

''After three decades of suffering abuses, Afghans have repeatedly called for
accountability for those responsible for serious human rights abuses, whether
Communists, warlords, or the Taliban,'' Sam Zarifi, Asia research director at
Human Rights Watch, said in a statement this week. ''There can be no sustainable
peace and security in Afghanistan without respect for the rule of law.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan examined part of a gift of
military equipment from the United States at a ceremony yesterday near Kabul.
(Photo by Musadeq Sadeq/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); TALIBAN (91%); AMNESTY (90%); APPROVALS
(90%); IMMUNITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); POLITICS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); RELIGION
(75%); PEACE PROCESS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%);
PARDONS (61%) Immunity From Prosecution; Freedom and Human Rights; Legislatures
and Parliaments; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations; Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (74%) Carlotta Gall; Muhammad (Mullah) Omar; Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marines' Actions Called Excessive In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1696 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 14


American marines reacted to a bomb ambush with excessive force in eastern
Afghanistan last month, hitting groups of bystanders and vehicles with
machine-gun fire in a series of attacks that covered 10 miles of highway and
left 12 civilians dead, including an infant and three elderly men, according to
a report published by an Afghan human rights commission on Saturday.

Families of the victims described in interviews this week the painful toll of
the attacks, which took place on March 4 in Nangarhar Province. One victim, a
16-year-old newly married girl, was cut down while she was carrying a bundle of
grass to her family's farmhouse, according to her family and the report. A
75-year-old man walking to his shop was hit by so many bullets that his son said
he did not recognize the body when he came to the scene.

In its report, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission condemned the
suicide bomb attack that started the episode, striking a Marine Special
Operations unit convoy and slightly wounding one American. And the report said
there might also have been small arms fire directed at the convoy immediately
after the blast. But it said the response was disproportionate, especially given
the obviously nonmilitary nature of the marines' targets long after the ambush.

''In failing to distinguish between civilians and legitimate military targets,
the U.S. Marine Corps Special Forces employed indiscriminate force,'' the report
said. ''Their actions thus constitute a serious violation of international
humanitarian standards.''

In the weeks immediately after the episode, the United States military began an
investigation, and it is now exploring possible criminal charges, senior
military officials said. The marines involved in the episode are being kept in
Afghanistan, but the rest of their 120-man company has been pulled out of the
country.

[The Washington Post reported late Saturday that a preliminary United States
investigation had found that the people who were killed and injured were
civilians, and that there was no evidence that the marines involved had come
under small arms fire after the bombing.

[The preliminary findings were reported by Army Maj. Gen. Francis H. Kearney
III, the commander of Special Operations troops in the Middle East and Central
Asia, who ordered a formal investigation in March, The Post reported.]

An American spokesman in Afghanistan, Lt. Col. David A. Accetta, said Saturday
that the military was in the final stages of approving condolence payments for
families of the wounded and dead in the shootings.

The events have had the highest profile of a number of potential human rights
violations by both sides, many by the Taliban and its allies, in the fighting in
Afghanistan that were documented by the Afghan commission, which was established
after the Taliban's ouster and is partly financed by Congress. The commission's
report comes amid resurgent Taliban violence and coalition reprisals that are
costing an increasing number of civilian lives and that have brought harsh
criticism of international forces in the country.

The deputy director of the human rights commission, Nader Nadery, warned that
attacks like the highway shooting had greatly contributed to outrage in
Afghanistan, contradicting efforts by coalition forces to win people's support
away from the Taliban. ''This is not an isolated case'' he said. ''People are
realizing more that they are a victim of the conflict from both sides, from the
Taliban and from the international operations.''

He added, ''What we identified throughout all our investigation is a high level
of frustration among the public and among the civilians.''

A spokesman for the United States Central Command said the Afghan commission's
report had been forwarded to Adm. William J. Fallon, the senior American officer
in the region, for review.

In Washington, the chairman of the House subcommittee that oversees American
Special Operations forces said Saturday that he was concerned by the information
gathered so far, but that he had received assurances that a thorough military
investigation was under way.

''It is a very serious matter, and the evidence is troubling,'' said the
chairman, Representative Adam Smith, Democrat of Washington.

In a telephone interview from his home in Tacoma, Wash., Mr. Smith added:
''There should be a full and complete investigation, and the military is doing
that. That is the purpose of the report done by the Special Operations component
of the Central Command.''

Anger and frustration over the shooting was evident in Spinpul, where the attack
happened, and in the whole province of Nangarhar. Still mourning, the families
of the victims said this week that they had demanded from President Hamid Karzai
and the American generals they had met that those responsible be punished. Some
of them said the soldiers should be tried under Islamic law and face the death
penalty if found guilty of the killings.

''They committed a great cruelty; they should be punished,'' said Gharghashta,
65, whose daughter-in-law was killed at the door of their farmhouse compound,
several hundred yards from the road and the scene of the blast. The American
troops were firing from the road and raked the river bed where workers were
digging a ditch and the surrounding fields with gunfire, he and other witnesses
said.

''She was cutting grass in the field and she was carrying the bundle of grass on
her head back into the house for the animals,'' said his eldest son, Abdel
Muhammad, 25.

''There was a big blast and then I heard firing. I started walking toward my
house,'' he said. ''When I reached the house, my sister called and said my
sister-in-law had been killed,'' he said. The young woman, Yadwaro, 16, was shot
in the back and fell dead across the threshold, he said. Her husband, Tera Gul,
18, sat listening silently to his brother and then got up and walked away.

The suicide bomb attack happened 500 yards along the road from the bridge that
gives the village its name, White Bridge, on the main highway 25 miles east of
Jalalabad. A man driving a minibus in the opposite direction to the Marine unit
exploded his vehicle as he passed the convoy of five or six Humvees, according
to the commission's report, which was drawn from interviews with witnesses,
police officers, community leaders and hospital officials. One marine was
lightly wounded by shrapnel from the blast, it said.

The convoy may then have come under small arms fire from one vehicle on the same
side of the road as the bomber, Mr. Nadery said. In the days after the episode,
the United States military said the convoy had come under a ''complex ambush
from several directions,'' but the human rights panel questioned this.

''If such an attack did indeed occur, as it is claimed by the U.S. military, it
was almost certainly very limited in scope and restricted to the immediate
site'' of the suicide bombing, it said in its report.

The report's description continued: Two Humvees then moved forward 500 yards to
the bridge and opened fire with roof-mounted machine-guns on a car that had
stopped on a side road, some yards from the highway. The gunners then swung
their weapons around and began firing on the nearby river bed and fields. They
killed six people instantly and wounded at least another.

The car's driver, a veteran mujahedeen fighter who goes by the name of Lewanai,
45, was wounded but survived the shooting by diving out of his door and
scrambling behind a mound of earth. But the big guns shredded his car and the
three people inside: his father, Hajji Zarpadshah, 80; his uncle, Hajji Shin
Makhe, 75; and his nephew, Farid Gul, 16.

''It was an illegal action,'' he said. ''I know the army rules, and when I heard
the blast I stopped my car, I was thinking in case they shoot me,'' he said in
an interview at his home nearby. ''They opened fire and were shooting for 10
minutes.''

The car, now parked at a nearby gas station, is torn by gashes from the bullets
over its hood, side and roof and the seats are shredded from the gunfire, the
ceiling is smattered with debris and bits of blood and bone. Mr. Nadery said
that the vehicle had been hit by 250 bullets.

''Their insides were all coming out,'' said Noor Islam, 22, who saw the dead men
in the car after the attack. ''We were very upset. Two of them were old men with
white beards, and one was young,'' he said. ''They had no weapons.''

Near the car was Shin Gul, 70, who was waiting for a ride to the nearby bazaar
of Markoh where the family had a shop selling flour. He was cut down on the spot
and his body so torn apart that his son, Muhammad Ayub, 35, said he could not
recognize him at first. ''I saw a notebook in his pocket and then I knew it was
him,'' he said.

Nearby a 30-year-old shepherd named Farid was shot. He died two weeks later in
the hospital.

Mr. Ayub said he was with a group of workers digging a ditch in the river bed
when they came under fire from the Humvees at the bridge. They all survived by
taking cover in the ditch, but the bullets went over their heads. Those were the
shots that killed the newlywed girl, Yadwaro, about 100 yards beyond.

As the Humvees pulled away across the bridge they opened fire on a gas station
and other vehicles, killing four people in a minibus, including a 1-year-old,
the report said.

In that attack and later ones along the 10-mile stretch of road from Spinpul,
six people were killed and 25 were wounded.

The report covered other civilian killings in recent weeks, including extensive
human-rights violations by Taliban fighters and their allies that involved
beheadings and the mutilation of victims.

In other cases involving coalition troops in Afghanistan, the report detailed an
airstrike in Kapisa Province in March that killed a family of nine people,
including two pregnant women and four children younger than 5.

The report also criticized continuing house raids by American forces, including
one on the house of one of the human rights commission's staff members, who the
report said was hooded and handcuffed to a detonator and told not to move in
case it exploded.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gharghashta, left, and his son Tira Gul, whose wife was killed
by marines. An Afghan panel criticized the marines' use of force.
 Villagers peered into the car of a man named Lewanai, which was hit by at least
250 bullets when American marines reacted to a suicide attack. (Photographs by
Aaron Huey/Atlas Press, for The New York Times)(pg. 16)  Map of Afghanistan
highlighting the area of the March 4th attacks: Afghan civilians were killed by
marines in Nangarhar Province. (pg. 16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); SHOOTINGS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); FAMILY (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); FIREARMS (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%);
INTERVIEWS (76%); TERRORISM (73%); ARMIES (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (64%); SENIOR CITIZENS (57%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Bombs and Explosives

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (53%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (53%)

ORGANIZATION: Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (53%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (53%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (53%)

PERSON: Carlotta Gall

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Nangarhar Province (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Assails Wal-Mart Over Unions

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 901 words


In its first study of how an American company treats its workers, Human Rights
Watch asserted yesterday that Wal-Mart's aggressive efforts to keep out labor
unions often violated federal law and infringed on its workers' rights.

Human Rights Watch, which typically focuses on rights violations in Burundi,
North Korea or other foreign countries, said that when Wal-Mart stores faced
unionization drives, the company often broke the law by, for example,
eavesdropping on workers, training surveillance cameras on them and firing those
who favored unions.

''While many American companies use weak U.S. laws to stop workers from
organizing, the retail giant stands out for the sheer magnitude and
aggressiveness of its anti-union apparatus,'' the human rights group wrote.

Wal-Mart Stores has more than 1.3 million workers at its nearly 4,000 stores in
the United States, and none of its workers belong to a union.

Wal-Mart, in response, vigorously defended its labor practices. David Tovar, a
Wal-Mart spokesman, said that Wal-Mart provided an environment for open
communications and gave its employees ''every opportunity to express their
ideas, comments and concerns.''

''It is because of our efforts to foster such an environment that our associates
have repeatedly rejected unionization attempts,'' he said.

Mr. Tovar said the report used unsubstantiated accusations from as long as seven
years ago.

Two of the five organizing drives that the 219-page report examined took place
in 2005, while the other three campaigns took place more than five years ago.

''Contrary to the allegations in this report, Wal-Mart respects our associates'
right to a free and fair unionization vote,'' Mr. Tovar said. ''We remain
committed to compliance with U.S. laws regarding workers' right to unionize.''

Carol Pier, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch and author of the Wal-Mart
report, said her organization decided to look specifically at Wal-Mart because
of concerns about violations of labor laws.

''When the largest private employer in the United States seems to be able to
violate U.S. labor law with virtual impunity, that's a very serious cause for
concern, both with respect to its impact on its employees, but also on the
conduct by other employers in the United States,'' Ms. Pier said in a telephone
interview.

Wal-Mart called the study ''pro-union.'' Ms. Pier said that only $50 of her
organization's $33 million budget came from labor unions.

Over the last few years, the main union for retail workers, the United Food and
Commercial Workers, has suspended efforts to organize any Wal-Mart stores in the
United States, largely because Wal-Mart's counteroffensive makes that so
difficult, union officials said. Moreover, union officials said they could put
more pressure on Wal-Mart by mounting a sophisticated publicity campaign to
embarrass it over its wages, benefits and overall treatment of its employees.

For the most part, the unionization drives described in the report, at Wal-Marts
in Kingman, Ariz.; Aiken, S.C.; New Castle, Pa.; and Loveland and Greeley,
Colo., grew out of discontent over wages and health benefits.

Wal-Mart says it has increased wages, to an average of $10.51 an hour for
full-time workers, and has improved its health insurance, creating a plan with
premiums of $23 a month anywhere in the country.

''People want to work at Wal-Mart because we offer competitive wages, affordable
health benefits and real career opportunities,'' Mr. Tovar said.

But critics say that even with the increase in wages, many Wal-Mart workers
still live below the poverty line and its low-premium health plan remains
unaffordable to many workers because the deductibles often run to $3,000 a
family.

Human Right Watch issued a report in 2000 saying that America's labor laws and
labor law enforcement were so weak that they made it difficult for workers to
unionize and violate international labor standards.

The report issued yesterday asserted that Wal-Mart took advantage of those weak
laws to push its workers into opposing unions, by, for example, ordering them to
attend meetings with anti-union speakers and videos.

''Wal-Mart assets that respect for the individual is one of the core values that
have made us into the company we are today,'' the report said. ''Wal-Mart's
systematic interference with individual workers' right to freedom of association
flies in the face of this professed core value.''

The report found that unions and workers had brought 292 cases against Wal-Mart,
with the National Labor Relations Board finding that 101 cases had merit. Those
cases were consolidated into 39 complaints, with 17 administrative law judges
ruling that Wal-Mart had violated labor laws. The labor board reversed two of
those decisions.

4 Complaints Were withdrawn before judge hearings. 2 Complaints Are still
pending before judges.  3 Administrative law judge decisions cleared Wal-Mart of
all charges.  17 Administrative law judge decisions found Wal-Mart violated
labor law. 2 Board rulings Reversed decisions against Wal-Mart.* 15 cases In
which N.L.R.B. decisions are still standing, 6 of those are on appeal before the
board.  *The board reversed and remanded one case. On remand, the administrative
law judge dismissed all charges against Wal-Mart; that case is once again on
appeal before the board.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''Tracking the Wal-Mart Labor Cases'' A Human Rights Watch
report accuses Wal-Mart of violating federal labor laws by using aggressive
efforts to keep out unions. Here are how labor cases that were filed against
Wal-Mart from January 2000 to July 2005 ended up.  292 Cases -- Filed with the
National Labor Relations Board (N.L.R.B.) against Wal-Mart, most with multiple
charges, accusing it of violating U.S. labor laws. (4 cases settled before being
reviewed by the N.L.R.B.) 98 cases -- Withdrawn.  190 Cases -- Examined by
N.L.R. lawyers to determine merit.  101 Cases -- determined to have merit.  39
Complaints -- Issued by N.L.R.B. regional directors consolidating the 101 cases
and their charges. 13 Complaints Were settled before judges' decisions

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LABOR UNIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); RETAILERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (89%); SERVICE WORKERS (78%);
LEGISLATION (77%); WIRETAPPING (76%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (71%); WRITERS
(69%); BUDGETS (68%); INTERVIEWS (66%) Retail Stores and Trade; Labor; Organized
Labor; Law and Legislation; Unfair Labor Practices; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods

COMPANY: WAL-MART STORES INC (97%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD (59%)
Human Rights Watch; Wal-Mart Stores Inc

TICKER: WMT (NYSE) (97%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS452910 WAREHOUSE CLUBS & SUPERCENTERS (97%); NAICS452112 DISCOUNT
DEPARTMENT STORES (97%)

PERSON: David Tovar; Steven Greenhouse

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%);
BURUNDI (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Hague Court Inquiry Focuses on Rapes

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and MARLISE SIMONS; Lydia Polgreen reported from
Dakar, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, May 22


The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague said Tuesday
that he would investigate human rights violations committed during a brutal
crackdown after a coup attempt in the Central African Republic in 2002 and 2003.

The investigation by the prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, will focus on at least
600 rapes, along with killings, beatings and other abuses reported during a
five-month period after an unsuccessful revolt against the government of
then-president Ange-Felix Patasse. The coup attempt was led by Francois Boizize,
a general who ultimately seized power in 2003 and remains president.

The investigation is unique in that it focuses primarily on rape rather than on
killings. Sexual violence has been a prominent feature of many conflicts in
Africa in the past 15 years, and countless thousands of women have been raped in
conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Congo, Sudan, Rwanda and Uganda, among other
countries, but prosecutions for such crimes, except in Rwanda, have been rare.

''Rape is the most notorious issue here,'' said Mr. Moreno-Ocampo in a telephone
interview. ''There are killings, but there are four times more rapes than
killings. We are talking about mass rapes, gang rapes, hundreds of cases that
took place within a few days.''

The investigation of abuses in the Central African Republic casts a spotlight on
one of the least known parts of Africa, a landlocked country with a long history
of coups and civil conflict, misrule and government brutality against citizens.
Its porous borders and vast, lawless territory have made it a favored staging
ground for rebellions from neighboring countries, including Chad, Congo and
Sudan. As a result of these and homegrown conflicts, the country is flooded with
weapons.

Human rights organizations in the Central African Republic and the government of
Mr. Boizize have long said that Mr. Patasse's troops, aided by militias from
neighboring Congo loyal to the warlord Jean-Pierre Bemba, terrorized civilians
in areas around the capital, Bangui, in retribution for the coup attempt.

In late 2004, the Supreme Court of the Central African Republic referred the
case to the International Criminal Court because it said it did not have the
means to prosecute those responsible for the attacks on civilians.

Edith Douzima, a lawyer and human rights advocate in Bangui, praised the
announcement, saying that rape had been used for too long ''as a weapon of war
wielded with impunity.'' But she also said the court had taken too long to begin
its investigation.

''We have been waiting a long time for this day,'' Ms. Douzima said. ''Too
long.''

Some human rights advocates had been critical of the delay -- about two and a
half years -- before the prosecutor announced his decision.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said that his office had to make sure there were no other
overlapping investigations by local courts, and that his own analysts had to
assess the credibility of the crime reports reaching his office.

He said initial investigations indicated that the mass rape was the result of an
organized campaign.

''There were several months of crimes, killings, lootings, but there was a peak
of rapes in a few days,'' he said. ''This will be our biggest challenge, to
prove that someone was authorizing them or giving instructions.''

The case was complex, he said, because his office would ''not prosecute the
rapists themselves,'' but the person or people issuing the orders or organizing
the campaign. The International Criminal Court seeks to prosecute the leaders
most responsible for grave human rights violations when national courts are
unwilling or unable to do so at home.

United Nations workers in the area and investigators for human rights groups
provided hundreds of statements, which were very valuable, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
said. But his own team of investigators will now have to start an official
inquiry into the crimes, including killings, lootings and the large-scale rape,
which he expects will take 18 months.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 29, 2007



CORRECTION: An article and picture caption on Wednesday about an International
Criminal Court investigation of atrocities committed in the Central African
Republic in 2002 and 2003 misspelled the surname of a general who seized power
there in 2003 and remains president. He is Francois Bozize, not Boizize.

GRAPHIC: Photos: In 2003, Francois Boizize, a general, seized power in the
Central African Republic and is still president. In March 2003, the escort of
the then-new president was hailed by residents of a suburb of Bangui, above.
(Photo by Desirey Minkoh/Agence France-Presse)
 A crackdown followed a coup attempt against Ange-Felix Patasse. (Photo by Pius
Utomi Ekpei/Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUPS (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Women; Sex
Crimes; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and Human
Rights; Coups D'Etat and Attempted Coups D'Etat

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Marlise Simons

CITY: BANGUI, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);
DAKAR, SENEGAL (54%)

COUNTRY: CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (95%); SUDAN (92%); RWANDA (92%); AFRICA
(92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); UGANDA (79%); SENEGAL (79%);
LIBERIA (79%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Central African Republic

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kin and Rights Groups Search for Pakistan's Missing

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1543 words

DATELINE: RAWALPINDI, Pakistan, Jan. 9


Amina Masood Janjua has been fighting for some word on the fate of her husband
since he vanished from a bus station here in July 2005. In recent months, she
and her two teenage sons and 11-year-old daughter have begun a campaign of court
petitions, protests and press releases.

More than 30 families of other missing men have joined her, all seeking to
locate what they and human rights groups say are hundreds of people who have
disappeared into the hands of the country's feared intelligence agencies in the
last few years.

The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, an independent group, estimates that
400 citizens have been abducted and detained across the country since 2001.
Amnesty International says many have been swept up in a campaign against people
suspected of being extremists and terrorists. But some here also charge that the
government is using the pretext of the war on terror to crack down on opponents.

In addition to some with ties to extremist groups, those missing include critics
of the government, nationalists, journalists, scientists, researchers and social
and political workers, the groups say. Mrs. Janjua says she has compiled a list
of 115 missing persons, and says the list could grow as more families gain the
courage to come out in the open.

Pakistani officials deny any involvement in extrajudicial detentions or any
knowledge of the men's whereabouts.

This week a Supreme Court judge nonetheless ordered the government to speed up
the process of finding 41 men listed as missing by Mrs. Janjua and her
supporters after the court took up their cases in an unprecedented decision in
October.

At the court hearing on Monday, the government acknowledged that it had located
25 of the 41 men listed by Mrs. Janjua, ''who are now free,'' according to Nasir
Saeed Sheikh, the deputy attorney general, though it refused to say from where
they had been released.

Mrs. Janjua and others said the men were held in detention centers and safe
houses of military intelligence, though most of those freed were reluctant to
talk about their experiences. Mrs. Janjua maintained that only 18 persons had
actually been freed.

Her husband, Masood Ahmed Janjua, 45, an educator and businessman, was not among
them. Mr. Sheikh told the court that, according to a report by the Interior
Ministry, all intelligence agencies had denied detaining Mr. Janjua.

Mr. Janjua left his home around 9:30 a.m. on July 30, 2005. He was heading to
Peshawar in the northwest to attend a religious gathering with a friend, Faisal
Fraz, 26, a mechanical engineer from the eastern city of Lahore.

Both had reservations on a 10 o'clock bus bound for Peshawar, but never made it
to their destination, according to the families. ''Before even reaching the bus
stop, somewhere on the way, they were picked up,'' Mrs. Janjua says.

Relatives of missing persons and rights advocates here say Mr. Janjua and the
others are among the many ''forced disappearances'' or ''illegal detentions''
that were rare before 2001. In many cases, family members have received no news
of the presumed detainees for months and even years.

''Hundreds of people suspected of links to Al Qaeda or the Taliban have been
arbitrarily arrested and detained,'' a report by Amnesty International issued in
September said. ''Scores have become victims of enforced disappearances; some of
these have been unlawfully transferred (sometimes in return for money) to the
custody of other countries, notably the U.S.A.,'' the report said.

''The clandestine nature of the arrest and detention of terror suspects make it
impossible to ascertain exactly how many people have been subjected to arbitrary
detention or enforced disappearance,'' it added.

I. A. Rahman, director of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, said the
government was using the cover of a war on terrorism to flout the law.
''Unstable states like Pakistan are taking full advantage of 'war on terror,' ''
Mr. Rahman said. He said the government was using the antiterror campaign to
crack down on its opponents and critics, especially in Baluchistan, where
government forces are fighting a nationalist insurrection.

''It is correct that many of those arrested or detained were connected with Al
Qaeda or extremist organizations,'' he said. ''But a number of people have been
taken into custody whose only crime seems to be that they are nationalists in
Baluchistan or Sindh. In Baluchistan, there is no Al Qaeda activity,'' he said.

In cases that are brought before a court, he noted, a government denial of
detention basically closes the case on a habeas corpus petition. ''It was only
in the end of 2006 that the Supreme Court said the government must find out
where are these people,'' he said.

While many of those missing persons were suspected of having links to extremist
or terrorist activities or have been involved in them, many among them were
innocent, the relatives maintained.

Majid Khan, 26, a computer engineer, disappeared from of Karachi, a southern
port city, four years ago and is now in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, said his wife,
Rabiya Majid. ''We don't why he was arrested,'' she said.

Mrs. Janjua, too, says she has no clue as to why her husband disappeared. The
Janjua family lives in Rawalpindi, in the neighborhood of Westridge, a
relatively well-off enclave inhabited mostly by active and retired military
officers.

Before his disappearance, Mr. Janjua, who holds a bachelor's degree in marine
engineering, was working as managing director of a private institute here, the
College of Information and Technology. He was also running a travel agency and
involved in charity work, his wife said.

''He had no links with any extremist organization,'' Mrs. Janjua said, though
she acknowledged that he worked ''off and on'' with Tablighi Jamaat. The group
characterizes itself as a nonpolitical, nonviolent movement that seeks to spread
Orthodox Islam by proselytizing, but it has also come under suspicion by
authorities as a potential recruiting ground for extremists.

Since her husband's disappearance, Mrs. Janjua has taken over his business and
his work at the college in addition to leading the drive, with the other
families, to find the missing. Together they have formed a group called Defense
of Human Rights.

In the last week of December, wives, daughters and sisters of dozens of missing
men, led by Mrs. Janjua, gathered in Rawalpindi, holding up posters and
portraits of the missing men and shouting, ''Give our loved ones back.''

But their protest was quickly thwarted by the police. The photographs of the
missing men were snatched. The posters were confiscated.

Mrs. Janjua's eldest son, Muhammad, 17, was beaten by the police, who removed
his pants to humiliate him before they whisked him away in a police van. He was
freed that evening but the next morning the image of Muhammad with his baggy
trousers pulled down by the police appeared in newspapers across the country.
Op-ed columnists and editorials expressed outrage at police ''brutality'' and
sympathy for the missing people's families surged.

Some of those released, like Muhammad Tariq, 35, have returned home. He is one
of the few willing to talk. Mr. Tariq acknowledges that he formerly belonged to
Jaish-e-Muhammad, a banned extremist group, but says he just gave the group
money and was not an active member.

Mr. Tariq, a business owner from Gujranwala in the east who sells iron pipe, was
''picked up in broad daylight on June 14, 2004, by around a dozen
plainclothesmen and elite police commandos,'' his father, Nizamud Din, said in
aninterview.

Mr. Din said he had been unsuccessful in locating his son through the courts,
police officials and even the Senate's Standing Committee on Human Rights. ''He
was portrayed as a big catch -- a big terrorist,'' Mr. Din said.

President Pervez Musharraf even alluded to the case, without mentioning Mr.
Tariq by name, in his book ''In the Line of Fire'' in connection with a failed
assassination attempt in December 2003, Mr. Din said.

General Musharraf wrote in his memoirs that a person from Gujranwala gave refuge
to Abu Faraj al-Libbi, the No. 3 Qaeda leader. He was arrested in Pakistan in
May 2005 and accused of organizing the failed assassination.

''It is all nonsense,'' Mr. Tariq said. ''I have no link. I don't even know
Libbi.''

Mr. Tariq says he was singled out because in 2003 he briefly put up a family,
introduced to him through a friend, of an Arab man who had been arrested in
Quetta.

Mr. Tariq, a father of five, stammers while recounting his time in detention.

''For two years, I did not see the sky, the sun or the moon,'' he said. He said
he was kept in a 4 foot by 7 foot cell in this city, was interrogated by
Pakistani military officers, mostly about Mr. Libbi, and endured ''all kinds of
imaginable torture.''

He was released Nov. 27 and pushed from a vehicle at night at an intersection
near Islamabad. He said he had never been brought before a court. Mr. Din and
Mr. Tariq said they believed the release was a result of the pressure from Mrs.
Janjua's group and the Supreme Court case.

Mrs. Janjua hopes her husband will return the same way, some day soon. ''At
every doorbell,'' she said, ''I think he is back.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mrs. Janjua's son Muhammad, 17, was beaten as police officers
broke up the march. They lowered his trousers as a means of humiliating him.
 Amina Masood Janjua, with two of her children, protested in Rawalpindi last
month over the disappearance of her husband, Masood Ahmed Janjua. Rights groups
say intelligence agencies have detained hundreds. (Photographs by Faisal
Mahmood/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MISSING PERSONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); BUS STATIONS & TERMINALS (89%); JOURNALISM (77%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); POWS & MIAS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(76%); WAR ON TERROR (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (75%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);
JUDGES (72%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (72%); PETITIONS (72%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%) Missing Persons; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: Salman Masood

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%)

REGION: Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Ex-President Charged With Rights Abuses

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Jan. 12


Acting at the request of Argentine officials, the Spanish police on Friday
detained Maria Estela de Peron, the former president of Argentina and the widow
of the founder of the ruling party, as part of a broadening investigation by the
Peronist government of Argentina into past human rights abuses there.

A judge in the provincial city of Mendoza had issued an order on Thursday that
Ms. Peron, known as Isabel, who lives in exile in Spain and gives her age as 75,
be detained there for questioning regarding the disappearance of a student
during her time in power. Almost simultaneously, a judge in Buenos Aires
authorized the arrest of two other officials with ties to the late Jose Lopez
Rega, who was Gen. Juan Peron's private secretary and later Ms. Peron's closest
adviser.

Those moves were made less than two weeks after Argentina requested that Spain
extradite another notorious figure from that era. In each case, the proceedings
focus on the Argentine Anti-Communist Alliance, or ''Triple A,'' a shadowy
right-wing paramilitary death squad controlled by Mr. Lopez Rega that first
emerged when General Juan Peron was in power and accelerated its activities
during his widow's tenure.

Ms. Peron governed Argentina for less than two years, from her husband's death
in July 1974 until she was overthrown by a military coup on March 24, 1976.
Human rights groups have blamed the Triple A for the killings of at least 1,500
political opponents, most of which occurred when Ms. Peron, a former cabaret
dancer who was the general's third wife, was in power.

Ms. Peron's defense has always been that as ''a poor ignorant woman'' with no
political experience or skills, as she put it in testimony in Spain in 1997, she
had no idea what was being done in her name. But the Mendoza judge rejected that
argument, saying in an interview with a local radio station that ''she was the
chief executive of the nation'' and the abductions of people later killed ''were
made on the basis of decrees'' she had signed.

Civilian democratic rule in Argentina was restored nearly 25 years ago. At that
time, human rights and political leaders said, political parties negotiated an
agreement that, at the insistence of the Peronists, effectively made human
rights abuses that occurred before the military coup off limits to official
investigations.

But President Nestor Kirchner, himself a Peronist, has taken a different
attitude, which the judges have apparently heeded. ''When the president said he
hadn't left his convictions at the entrance of the seat of government and that
there weren't going to be deals on impunity with anybody, that included
everyone, Ms. Peron too,'' Interior Minister Anibal Fernandez said in an
interview on Friday with a Buenos Aires radio station.

The Peronist movement is a broad one containing some factions that are regarded
as right-wing and others that lean left, with Mr. Kirchner belonging to the
latter group. At the time Ms. Peron was in power he and his wife, Cristina, now
a powerful senator, were college students with friends who belonged to the
leftist Montonero group and were later abducted and killed.

A presidential election is scheduled for this year in Argentina, and while Mr.
Kirchner has not declared himself as a candidate for re-election, he has been
trying to build an alliance that would include left-wing groups outside his own
movement. The move against Ms. Peron, which enhances his credentials as a
crusader and nonconformist who fears nothing and no one, helps cement his ties
with the left.

''No federal judge would make rulings like that of requesting the capture of
former president Isabel Peron or to investigate the crimes of the Triple A if he
perceived that such acts would perturb the national government,'' Fernando
Laborda wrote Friday in the conservative Buenos Aires daily La Nacion. The
timing ''is not coincidental,'' he added, but stems from what ''is clearly a
political decision.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ms. Peron, who was overthrown in 1976, with Carlos Menem, a
political ally, in Buenos Aires in 1988, the year before he was elected
president. (Photo by Reuters)
 Isabel Peron, center, former president of Argentina, arriving at court
yesterday in Madrid, where she lives, after a provincial court ordered her
arrested on charges of human rights abuses during her administration. (Photo by
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); MILITARY RULE (89%); COUPS (89%); JUDGES (89%); POLITICS (89%); MARTIAL
LAW (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); EXTRADITION (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (67%); ARMED FORCES (65%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (58%) Larry Rohter; Isabel Martinez De Peron

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (93%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (96%); SPAIN (95%)

REGION: Argentina; Spain

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Court Affirms Order to Deport Cleric to Jordan

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 26


A British court ruled Monday that the government could deport a radical Islamic
cleric to Jordan, setting the stage for the deportation of other foreign
terrorism suspects in Britain to countries with poor human rights records.

The case of the cleric, Abu Qatada, which has been watched closely in
Washington, is the first involving foreigners in Britain accused of posing
threats to national security whom the government wants to deport rather than put
on trial. Mr. Qatada, a Jordanian citizen of Palestinian background who has been
living in Britain since 1994, has been convicted in absentia by a Jordanian
court on bombing and conspiracy charges.

Mr. Qatada has been described by the British authorities as a spiritual guide to
Al Qaeda. Tapes of his preaching encouraging violence against the West were
found among the belongings of Mohamed Atta, the leader of the Sept. 11
hijackers, and he met with Richard C. Reid, the failed shoe bomber, the police
say.

He is regarded as one of 10 foreign-born extremists who, the British government
says, have helped to radicalize young British Muslims, encouraging them to carry
out terrorism attacks.

The ruling on Monday by the Special Immigration Appeals Court rejected an appeal
by Mr. Qatada that argued that the cleric would be subjected to torture while in
prison in Jordan.

Mr. Qatada's lawyers said they would appeal the decision. Human rights advocates
criticized the ruling on the ground that it set a precedent for allowing
suspects to be turned over to countries where torture is used to extract
evidence.

A lawyer for Human Rights Watch, Julia Hall, said a memorandum of understanding
between Britain and Jordan that torture would not be used on terrorism suspects
returned to Jordan was an insufficient guarantee.

The British government has negotiated agreements that are intended to prevent
the torture of suspects returned to their homeland with Lebanon and Libya as
well as Jordan.

Ms. Hall said an August 2005 agreement between Britain and Jordan empowered a
private Jordanian organization to monitor the conditions under which Mr. Qatada
is held in prison once he returned to Jordan and to report on any abuses against
him.

But Ms. Hall described the group assigned to monitor him, Al Adaleh Human Rights
Center, as ''a tiny organization, a local organization that has no influence
with the government.''

In documents presented to a parliamentary committee, the British government said
it was working with the Adaleh center, established in 2003, to improve its
''capacity.''

Ms. Hall said the British government had ''poured tens of thousands of pounds''
to strengthen the fledgling group. But that investment would not overcome what
Manfred Nowak, the United Nations special investigator on torture, found to be
''institutional impunity'' of the Jordanian intelligence services regarding
torture, Ms. Hall said.

Mr. Nowak's report on torture in Jordan was issued by the United Nations in
January.

The British government praised the court decision, saying it upheld a policy to
deport foreign terrorism suspects after the subway and bus terror attacks in
2005 that killed 56 people, including 4 bombers.

''We welcome the decision of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission that Abu
Qatada presents a threat to our national security and can be deported,'' said
John Reid, the home secretary. ''We are also pleased that the court has
recognized the value of memoranda of understanding.''

The court concluded its ruling, saying, ''There is no real risk of persecution
of the appellant were he now to be returned with the safeguards.''

For the Bush administration, Mr. Qatada's deportation to Jordan would mean
easier access to a prisoner with potentially valuable information.

The issue of torture to extract evidence from terrorism suspects returned to
their home countries for interrogation became an issue last year when the
Canadian government found that Maher Arar, a Canadian citizen, who was sent to
Syria by American officials because of suspected links to Al Qaeda, was tortured
while in a Syrian prison for 10 months.

Mr. Arar was cleared of all terrorism charges by a Canadian commission of
inquiry last year. The commission found that even though a Canadian diplomat
visited Mr. Arar during his imprisonment in Syria, Mr. Arar was too afraid of
retribution from prison officials to discuss the torture against him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abu Qatada, shown in a 2001 interview, has denied terrorism
charges. (Photo by ABC News)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); DEPORTATION (93%); RELIGION (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (85%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (78%); LAWYERS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%);
APPEALS COURTS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); APPEALS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
CONSPIRACY (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); HIJACKING
(73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%) Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts;
Deportation; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights; Palestinians; Terrorism; United
States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist
Group); Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Jane Perlez; Abu Qatada

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (99%); JORDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Great Britain; Jordan

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Visits Colombia Amid Tight Security and Protests

BYLINE: By JIM RUTENBERG and SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, March 11


The risky nature of President Bush's trip to this violent country was spelled
out on a television monitor aboard Air Force One en route from Uruguay:
''Colombia presents the most significant threat environment of this five country
trip!''

Listing the terrorist and criminal threats as ''high,'' the message -- meant for
Mr. Bush's security detail but seen by reporters on the plane -- underscored the
complications Mr. Bush is confronting during his visit to South and Central
America.

Mr. Bush came to Colombia, a focal point of the war on drugs, to pledge support
for his closest South American ally, President Alvaro Uribe, as leftist leaders
in the region seek to counter United States influence. Mr. Bush also came to
highlight signs of progress in the Colombian capital, where no American
president has visited in more than two decades.

But, as the message on Air Force One showed, it is by no means safe; Mr. Bush
stayed here for only seven hours before heading to his next stop, Guatemala.
Security officials here even sent a phony airport motorcade as a decoy to flush
out any potential attackers on the route to the presidential palace. (There were
none.)

Mr. Bush's host is weathering a scandal linking some close supporters to
paramilitary drug traffickers and death squads that are on the United States'
list of terror groups.

And growing allegations of human rights abuses have led groups like Human Rights
Watch -- with new cachet in a United States Congress now under Democratic
control -- to oppose approval of a trade deal with Colombia that has already
been signed by Mr. Bush.

Anti-Bush protesters battled the police and burned American flags a mile from
the presidential palace where they met. At a news conference afterward, Mr. Bush
and Mr. Uribe waded directly into questions about the scandal and human rights
that are clouding Mr. Uribe's international reputation.

''I appreciate the president's determination to bring human rights violators to
justice,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He is strong in that determination; It's going to be
very important for members of my United States -- our United States Congress to
see that determination. And I believe, if given a fair chance, President Uribe
can make the case.''

Asked whether the scandal racking Mr. Uribe's administration had shaken Mr.
Bush's confidence in him, Mr. Bush said no, because Mr. Uribe had told him that
Colombia's judicial independence would hold people to account regardless of who
they are.

Investigations have pointed to kidnappings and the compilation of an
assassination list within Colombia's secret police targeting union officials and
academics. These actions, according to investigators, may have been carried out
by political supporters of Mr. Uribe working with paramilitary leaders.

Mr. Uribe addressed what he called the ''revelations'' about his administration
in his opening remarks, saying, they were happening because ''our law on justice
and peace requires and demands truth.'' He repeated his argument that the
scandal had come to light because of actions promoted by his government, an
argument that critics had rejected.

''This spin has no basis in fact,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas director
of Human Rights Watch in Washington. Mr. Vivanco said the scandal's disclosures
were made public through independent investigations by the news media, which Mr.
Uribe's government have actively resisted and criticized, and by the attorney
general's office and the Supreme Court.

Mr. Bush's aides said he came in part to highlight improvements made under Mr.
Uribe, including a more than 30 percent drop in homicides in the last four years
and a larger percentage drop in kidnappings and terrorist attacks, according to
the State Department.

But the pull of war continues to interrupt daily life here. Just this weekend
the State Department confirmed a report in the local news media that United
States troops played a supporting role in an operation in January in a part of
Colombia under the sway of a Marxist-inspired rebel group holding three American
contractors kidnapped in 2003.

The hostages, Marc Gonsalves, Tom Howes and Keith Stansell, Northrop Grumman
employees here on a drug eradication mission, were taken when their plane
crashed in the jungle. Marshall Louis, a spokesman for the United States Embassy
here, declined to provide details on the military operation.

Asked about the operation -- the sort relatives of the hostages have warned
against -- Mr. Bush said, ''I've obviously discussed this with the president,
and he's developing strategies that will hopefully bring them out safely and
that's all I ask.''

Mr. Bush arrived to the pomp of a state visit. The importance of each man to the
other -- Mr. Uribe as an ally in a region with shifting allegiances; Mr. Bush as
Colombia's single largest outside benefactor -- was on full display.

The welcoming ceremonies were far more lavish than anything that has greeted Mr.
Bush so far on this trip. He and the first lady, Laura Bush, exited Air Force
One to a phalanx of soldiers in full dress as a military band played. They were
feted again in the central square of the presidential palace, Casa de Narino,
where the president reviewed Colombian troops, and stood for the playing of both
national anthems, before entering the palace for meetings with Mr. Uribe.

Mr. Bush's visit to Bogota was in itself a statement of support for Mr. Uribe:
No American president has visited the capital city since 1982, largely because
of security concerns.

Aides said Mr. Bush chose to come to illustrate that under Mr. Uribe it was now
possible for an American president to visit without incident.

But his hosts were not taking any chances. After the empty decoy motorcade left
the airport, the real one traveled to the palace at speeds of up to 60 miles an
hour under heavy military guard, with 20,000 troops and police assigned to his
protection, lining his route with submachine guns visible on the street and on
rooftops. The motorcade passed nearby protesters carrying a large sign that read
''Yankee Go Home'' and another banner displaying the Communist hammer and
sickle.

The leading local newspaper here, El Tiempo, griped that Mr. Bush's visit was
too short, featuring a front-page headline that read, ''Bush: Seven hours are
enough?'' Above it read a smaller headline listing the visits by the last two
United States president to visit the city: ''Kennedy (1961, 13 hours) and Reagan
(1982, 5 hours).''

Aides traveling with the president said the headline was indicative of the
push-pull relationship between the United States and its southern neighbors --
showing how upon Mr. Bush's arrival here he could at once be criticized for not
staying long enough and for daring to come at all.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Uribe took questions from reporters under a portrait of Simon
Bolivar, the South American liberation hero at the heart of the militaristic
populism of President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, a populism that is often
described as ''Bolivarianism.''

Mr. Chavez, on his own tour of the region, gave a speech at a military base in
Bolivia in which he accused Mr. Bush of plotting to assassinate him. Mr. Chavez,
while pledging financial support for Bolivian flood victims, said capitalism was
''the road to hell.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Demonstrators in Colombia clashed with the police yesterday
after President Bush arrived in Bogota. (Photo by Daniel Munoz/Reuters)Map of
Central and South America highlighting countries President Bush visited: Mr.
Bush headed to Guatemala City after his trip to Colombia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SCANDALS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); ASSASSINATION
(78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); AIRPORTS
(76%); LIBERALISM (74%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); DRUG POLICY (70%); SUBSTANCE
ABUSE (70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (70%); APPROVALS (66%); ETHICS (65%); RIOTS (63%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; Drug Abuse and Traffic;
United States International Relations; Ethics; Demonstrations and Riots;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (94%); ALVARO URIBE (89%) Alvaro (Pres) Uribe Velez; Jim
Rutenberg; Simon Romero

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%); GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); GUATEMALA (92%); SOUTH AMERICA
(92%); URUGUAY (92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (72%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (69%)

REGION: Colombia; Bogota (Colombia); Colombia

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foregone Conclusion Appears To Keep Egyptian Voters Home

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Mona el-Naggar and an Egyptian employee of The New
York Times contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, March 26


There were two views of reality in Egypt on Monday: one on the state-run Nile
News that showed voters streaming to the polls for a constitutional amendment,
another on the streets where polling places were largely empty, according to
independent monitoring groups and random checks.

Despite opposition organizations calling for a boycott, the outcome was nearly
certain, since no referendum has ever been defeated in modern Egypt. The
government announced that the turnout was 23 to 27 percent -- the exact figure
that officials said one day earlier would mark success and legitimacy.

Independent organizations put it far lower. ''The turnout will be somewhere
between 5 and 7 percent,'' said Gasser Abdel Razeq, a board member of the
Egyptian Organization for Human Rights. ''That is a very generous and optimistic
figure.''

Information Minister Anas el-Fiqqi said the turnout was as high as 27 percent,
in part because of increased participation of women. ''What we are witnessing in
Egypt and what we are living in Egypt now is real democratic participation,''
Mr. Fiqqi said.

The public was asked to vote on 34 amendments, covering a wide array of
economic, security and political issues. Among other things, they give the
president power to suspend all civil protections in connection with whatever the
government deems terrorism, weaken judicial oversight of elections and ban all
religious political parties.

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch condemned the amendments. ''No
referendum can legitimize these constitutional amendments or bring them in
compliance with Egypt's international obligations,'' Sarah Leah Whitson, the
Middle East director at Human Rights Watch, said in a statement.

The mirror-image quality of the day began with the very word ''to vote,'' which
in Arabic also means ''to scream.'' Across the city, people played on that.
''Well, I scream every day!'' said Ahmed Maher, a parking attendant on 26th of
July Street in the teeming neighborhood of Boulaq, when asked if he had voted.

The government said it supported democracy and the opposition's right to express
itself, yet it stationed police officers throughout Tahrir Square in central
Cairo to head off demonstrations. Government officials said opposition was fine,
as long as it did not interfere with traffic and people's lives.

The government talked about its effort to educate the public about the
amendments. But over and over, throughout the city in conversations with
reporters and poll watchers, Egyptians said they had no idea what they were
being asked to vote for.

''Because I don't understand, I voted no,'' said Ahmed Fedawi. Mr. Fedawi was
not just a voter, but also a poll watcher, who had hours to sit and pore over
the four-page ballot that listed the 34 amendments.

''It's too much,'' he said. ''Most people don't understand this.''

Hassan Ahmed Ibrahim, a security guard at an electric company, said, ''You
should explain to people what the Constitution is and then ask them to go vote.
I am one of the people who don't understand what the articles are about.''

The governing National Democratic Party, which promoted the referendum as a step
toward democracy, relied on thousands of its members to get out the vote. And
the government said they succeeded nationally, with a turnout in Cairo, for
example, of about 20 percent.

Ghada Shahbandar, head of a monitoring organization, said, ''Hardly at all,''
when asked about turnout in Cairo. Then like others she ticked off the polling
places her organization had visited. Manyal, no voters. Maadi, few voters.
Sayeda Zeinab, government workers bused in.

At two polling stations in Dokki, there were no voters when reporters
spot-checked them in the morning and again in the evening. Shopkeepers in the
neighborhood said they had not seen many people show up at any point during the
day.

In the late afternoon there were no more than 10 people inside the polling
station at the Saadiya Preparatory School in Giza, a stark contrast to the
crowded campus nearby.

Inside the polling place, Ahmed Muhammad Selmaan, 19, said everyone was for the
president and the amendments. But when he stepped outside he said, ''The only
people who vote for the government do it for financial and political
interests.''

In Mohandesein, a leafy middle-class neighborhood, Sarah Sobhy, 20, said:
''Whatever we say, it doesn't matter. It will be a yes.''

Her girlfriend, Sarah Abdel Nasser, 21, nodded in agreement. ''This is this
policy of the state,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Cairo resident in the impoverished neighborhood of Manshiyet
Nasser after voting yesterday in a referendum on 34 proposed amendments to
Egypt's Constitution. A trickle of Egyptians voted on the amendments. (Photo by
Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); CHURCH & STATE (90%); REFERENDUMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTION MONITORING (89%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); POLITICS
(78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); BOYCOTTS (76%); RELIGION (69%); TERRORISM (65%)
Elections; Referendums; Constitutional Amendments; Freedom and Human Rights;
Church-State Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%) Amnesty
International; Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Michael Slackman

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (91%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Egypt; Cairo (Egypt); Egypt

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Talking Darfur to Death

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 548 words


The world has been discussing the genocide in Darfur for more than three years.
But some 200,000 deaths later, it has yet to take effective action to force the
Sudanese government to stop sponsoring the mass murder, rape, torture and
forcible evictions being carried out on its orders in the region.

Yesterday, the United Nations Human Rights Council at last expressed its deep
concern over human rights violations in Darfur. That modest advance was made
possible by the welcome willingness of several African countries to set aside
their usual reluctance to talk about their continent's human rights problems.

But in practical terms, it was only a baby step. Despite an earlier finding by
the council's own investigative team that the Sudanese government
''orchestrated'' and took part in ''large-scale international crimes,'' the
resolution failed to identify the Sudanese government as the author of these
crimes.

Slow progress is also visible in the Arab League, where other leaders reportedly
subjected Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, to tough questioning over
Darfur at this week's summit meeting. Their voices are crucial. Khartoum cannot
dismiss Arab critics as colonialists or crusaders against Islam. But it will
take more than discreet conference diplomacy to end the slaughter.

Once again, there are reports that Sudan will allow a United Nations-African
Union force in Darfur. Concerted international action, including a strong
protective force, would be the best response. But until now, Sudan has done all
it can to delay that. The remaining people of Darfur cannot wait much longer. It
is past time for other countries to insist that Khartoum end its obstructionism,
which has cost thousands of additional lives.

The diplomatic timidity of the handful of governments that have denounced the
horrors in Darfur has been almost as frustrating as the callousness of the many
that will not. The European Union, for example, has no meaningful sanctions of
its own against the responsible Sudanese leaders. The United States, which has
been enforcing financial sanctions against a list of companies and individuals
linked to the Darfur genocide, needs to expand the list, toughen the sanctions
and persuade its allies, in Europe and elsewhere, to apply similar restrictions.

The United Nations has repeatedly disgraced itself by its halfhearted and
inadequate response to the gravest human rights challenge it has faced since it
failed the same genocide test in Rwanda more than a decade ago. The Security
Council, which has authorized an international force, must now see to it that it
is actually dispatched. The Human Rights Council, which should focus moral
pressure on the Sudanese government, holds back from doing so. And Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon and his representatives have too often been taken in by Mr.
Bashir's hollow assurances.

China and a shrinking bloc of nonaligned nations have repeatedly put the
sovereign right of Sudan's rulers to annihilate minorities ahead of the
international community's legal responsibility to prevent genocide and protect
human rights.

Other international leaders need to demonstrate that they can act as well as
talk, or else fine words and empty deeds will be the epitaph for the dwindling
survivors of Darfur.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); REFUGEES (77%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); TORTURE (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); IMMIGRATION (73%);
SEX OFFENSES (72%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%);
POLITICS (67%); RELIGION (51%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Politics and Government; Sex Crimes; Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); AFRICAN UNION (82%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
(56%) United Nations; African Union

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (56%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); AFRICA (93%); EUROPE (92%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (67%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Human Rights Panel Is Criticized

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 499 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, June 9


An international panel appointed by the government of Sri Lanka has issued a
stark indictment of a presidential commission impaneled to investigate serious
human rights violations, saying that its activities so far ''do not satisfy
international norms and standards.''

The appointment last fall of the panel, the International Independent Group of
Eminent Persons, was widely seen as an effort by President Mahinda Rajapakse to
stave off moves to deploy international human rights monitors to his country.

As Sri Lanka has descended into full-fledged civil war over the past year, there
have been a spate of mysterious abductions, extrajudicial killings and other
human rights abuses. Security forces and their allied paramilitary groups have
been blamed for some of the abuses.

The 11-member international panel has a limited mandate: to ''observe'' the
workings of a commission of inquiry, which the president's office appointed last
fall.

The commission is to carry out independent investigations into 16 high-profile
cases in which there have been accusations of human rights abuse, starting with
the killings last August of 17 employees of a Paris-based aid group, Action
Against Hunger, in the eastern town of Mutur. The killings are also under
investigation in a criminal court in the eastern part of the country.

In its first statement, issued late Sunday, the international group faulted the
commission of inquiry, saying that it had dawdled since its inception last
November and that its independence had been compromised by interference from the
attorney general's office, which acts as the legal counsel to the commission. As
the government's top law enforcement authority, the group said, the attorney
general's office faces a conflict of interest in investigating crimes in which
government officials, including security forces, are suspected.

''We consider these to be serious conflicts of interest, which lack transparency
and compromise national and international standards of independence and
impartiality,'' the statement said.

The panel went further to say that the commission of inquiry ought not to be
seen as ''a substitute for robust, effective measures including national and
international human rights monitoring.''

The attorney general's office issued a sharp retort to that last observation,
calling it ''inappropriate'' and urging the group to stick to making
''observations and recommendations in terms of its mandate.''

The commission of inquiry, for its part, disputed that its reliance on the
attorney general undermined its independence. It said it expected that the
government would soon enact a witness protection law, enabling witnesses to come
forward without fear.

In an interview last month, the chairman of the commission of inquiry, Nissanka
Kumara Udalagama, said the commission had not heard from a single witness in the
killings of the aid workers, its first case. ''There are witnesses, but they are
frightened to come forward,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
APPOINTMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); LAWYERS (88%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (77%); WAR
& CONFLICT (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); FOOD CHARITIES
(71%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (71%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (66%)

ORGANIZATION: ACTION AGAINST HUNGER (55%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 10, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Dissident Says Confession Was Forced

BYLINE: By JOSEPH KAHN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, April 9


Gao Zhisheng, one of China's most outspoken dissidents until his conviction on
sedition charges late last year, said in a recorded statement made available
over the weekend that while his confession had resulted in a light sentence, it
had been made under mental and physical duress.

Mr. Gao's remarks, recorded by a close friend and offered to journalists in
Beijing, were his first public statement since he was convicted in December. He
was given a suspended sentence.

His confession brought criticism from some other human rights advocates.

Mr. Gao lives in Beijing with his wife and children. But he said he remained in
nearly total isolation, surrounded by plainclothes security forces and forbidden
to leave his home, use his telephone or computer or otherwise communicate with
the outside world.

He also said that a lengthy confession letter released to the public by the
authorities after his conviction, while genuine, had come only after he had been
subjected to torture. He said his interrogators repeatedly threatened to punish
his wife and children unless he admitted the crimes they said he had committed.

''Although in the past I had some idea of how this group ignores justice, how
they nakedly and impudently use evil means to realize their objectives, I really
did not understand well enough,'' Mr. Gao said, referring to Chinese public
security forces.

He said his captors had forced him to sit motionless in an iron chair for
extended sessions that totaled hundreds of hours, surrounded him with bright
lights and used other torture techniques aimed at breaking his will. He said he
had agreed to their terms because they repeatedly intimated that the well-being
of his wife and children could not be guaranteed unless he cooperated.

''In the end I decided I could not haggle about my children's future,'' he said.

Mr. Gao, a lawyer, gained prominence among human rights advocates and
grass-roots organizers in China and their supporters overseas for his
uncompromising denunciations of police and judicial abuses and his scathing open
letters to senior Communist Party leaders.

He called attention to what he described as systematic abuses against members of
the Falun Gong spiritual sect, which is banned in China. He also helped organize
a hunger strike against intimidation tactics used by the country's State
Security forces.

Mr. Gao lost his license to practice law in late 2005, and in August of last
year he was arrested while traveling in Shandong Province.

The authorities repeatedly described Mr. Gao's cooperative attitude in custody.
A few months after he was arrested, they released a letter in which Mr. Gao
declared that he had severed all ties with his former colleagues working for
human rights and that he did not desire to have a defense lawyer represent him
in court.

Judicial officials said in announcing the verdict in his case that Mr. Gao not
only admitted his own crimes but had also provided information about other
outstanding cases.

Those claims prompted a mixed reaction among Mr. Gao's friends and supporters.
Some said they worried that he had betrayed former colleagues and expressed
disappointment that he had compromised with the authorities after a short stint
in captivity.

Others said they suspected that officials had elicited a confession from him by
using extreme pressure and that the public release of documents in his case was
intended to ruin his reputation and divide his allies.

Mr. Gao issued his remarks, the first explanation of his confession, through Hu
Jia, a longtime friend and fellow human rights organizer who managed to reach
him by telephone. Mr. Hu recorded the conversation with Mr. Gao's consent,
according to the tape.

Attempts to reach Mr. Gao directly were unsuccessful.

In the recording, he denied that he had betrayed any secrets that could harm
other dissidents. But he acknowledged that he had let down his colleagues by
confessing.

''I don't have the ability to get news from outside, but I bet much of it is
about my so-called surrender and open declaration,'' he said, referring to
documents released by the authorities. ''When these matters are raised, my heart
is flooded with unbelievable shame.''

He said he had decided to earn a decent living for his family instead of seeking
to change China's political system. ''In the future I don't aspire to be much
use to society, but rather to be of more use to my family,'' he said.

But he said intensive security had turned his house into a new jail for him and
his family, making it impossible for him to earn a living and forcing him to
speak out once again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gao Zhisheng, a Chinese human rights lawyer, drafting a letter
in 2005 protesting the government's treatment of the Falun Gong spiritual sect.
(Photo by Miranda Mimi Kuo for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); CULTS & SECTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAWYERS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); DISBARMENT (76%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (75%); LICENSES
& PERMITS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (50%) Torture  ; Freedom and Human Rights;
Freedom of Speech and Expression; Hunger Strikes; Confessions

ORGANIZATION: Falun Gong (Spiritual Movement)

PERSON: Joseph Kahn; Gao Zhisheng

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); SHANDONG, CHINA (78%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%)

REGION: China; China

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Groups Call for End to Secret Detention of Suspects

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE; Thom Shanker contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


Six human rights groups on Wednesday released a list of 39 people they believe
have been secretly imprisoned by the United States and whose whereabouts are
unknown, calling on the Bush administration to abandon such detentions.

The list, compiled from news media reports, interviews and government documents,
includes terrorism suspects and those thought to have ties to militant groups.
In some suspects' cases, officials acknowledge that they were at one time in
United States custody. In others, the rights groups say, there is other
evidence, sometimes sketchy, that they had at least once been in American hands.

The list includes, for instance, Hassan Ghul, a Pakistani who is accused of
being a member of Al Qaeda and whose capture in northern Iraq in January 2004
was announced by President Bush. At the other extreme, two unnamed Somali
nationals are on the list because they were overheard in 2005 by another
prisoner who was later released, Marwan Jabour, in the cell next to his at a
secret American detention center, possibly in Afghanistan.

Meg Satterthwaite, of the Center for Human Rights and Global Justice at New York
University, one of the six groups, said the recent American practice mimiced
''disappearances'' of political opponents under Latin American dictators.
''Enforced disappearances are illegal, regardless of who carries them out,'' she
said.

The other groups that compiled the list were Amnesty International, the Center
for Constitutional Rights, Human Rights Watch and two British groups, Reprieve
and Cageprisoners. Three of the groups are suing under the Freedom of
Information Act to learn what became of the prisoners.

The Bush administration has defended secretly detaining some suspects as a
necessity of the fight against terrorism because officials do not want to tip
off terrorist groups that their operatives are in custody. They say the
comparison with past Latin American regimes is unfair, because those seized by
the Americans are not killed and their whereabouts will eventually be revealed.

A Central Intelligence Agency spokesman, Paul Gimigliano, would not comment on
the names on the list. But he said ''there is no shortage of myth about what the
C.I.A. has done to fight terror.''

''The plain truth is that we act in strict accord with American law,'' he said,
adding that the agency's actions ''have been very effective in disrupting plots
and saving lives.''

In a reminder that the handling of captured terrorism suspects remains a
pressing issue, Pentagon officials said Wednesday that a courier linking
terrorist cells in the Horn of Africa and Al Qaeda officials in Pakistan was
captured recently in East Africa and transported this week to Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.

Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman, said the suspect, Abdullahi Sudi Arale, was
suspected of providing terrorist cells in East Africa with explosives and
weapons. He traveled from Pakistan to Somalia in September 2006 and held a
leadership role in the Islamic Courts Council, which held power in part of
Somalia until earlier this year, according to a Pentagon statement.

''We believe him to be an extremely dangerous member of the Al Qaeda network,''
Mr. Whitman said. But he said Mr. Arale, whose age and nationality were not
released, would not be part of the ''high value'' group in the Guantanamo
prisoner population of about 385.

Even before the secret detentions were officially confirmed, the practice drew
widespread objections, including from within the Bush administration. William H.
Taft IV, legal adviser at the State Department from 2001 to 2005, opposed it
while in office and on Wednesday said he had not changed his view.

''I believe the United States should always account for people in its custody,''
said Mr. Taft, who had not reviewed the human rights groups' report. ''When our
own people are missing, we want to be able to insist on an accounting from their
captors,'' Mr. Taft said. He added that keeping prisoners secret could tempt
their jailers to abuse them and to cover up their deaths in custody.

In September, President Bush for the first time officially acknowledged the
C.I.A.'s secret overseas detentions, saying that the 14 prisoners then in the
agency's hands had been moved to Guantanamo. A 15th so-called high-level
prisoner, an Iraqi Kurd named Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, alleged to be a top aide to
Osama bin Laden, was moved to Guantanamo in April after being held secretly by
the C.I.A. for several months.

Mohammed Khan, 31, a Pakistani banker who was held in secret in Pakistan and
questioned by Americans for 56 days in 2003, described the experience in an
interview from Karachi on Wednesday. Mr. Khan's brother, Majid Khan, who was
arrested along with him but held in secret C.I.A. custody for the next three
years, is among the high-level prisoners at Guantanamo. He is accused of
plotting to blow up gas stations in the United States and planning other
terrorist acts, charges his brother said he denies.

After their imprisonment, ''Our family members had no idea where we were,'' Mr.
Khan said. He said his brother was questioned by Americans for up to eight hours
while confined to a small chair and eventually signed false confessions.

Later, Mr. Khan said, he and other family members, including some who live in
the Baltimore area, believed for a time that Majid Khan was dead and learned of
his whereabouts only from President Bush's September speech.

''How can there be any justification for this?'' Mr. Khan said. ''You can't
kidnap people and hold them somewhere in the world and torture them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Majid Khan, held in secret C.I.A. custody for three years, was
charged with terrorist plots. (Photo by The Khan Family/Center for
Constitutional Rights)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); GLOBALIZATION (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (75%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (72%); LITIGATION (65%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (82%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFRICA (93%); EASTERN AFRICA (93%); CUBA (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); SOMALIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); LATIN AMERICA
(72%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

3 Sierra Leone Rebels Found Guilty In First Verdicts by War Tribunal

BYLINE: By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 340 words


FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, June 20 (Agence France-Presse) -- A United
Nations-backed war crimes court in Sierra Leone handed down its first verdicts
on Wednesday, convicting three rebel leaders of crimes against humanity during
the country's decade-long civil war.

The court found the three, Alex Tamba Brima, 35; Brima Bazzy Kamara, 39; and
Santigie Borbor Kanu, 42, guilty of 11 of 14 charges against them. They were
convicted of murder, rape and enlisting child soldiers.

The court and human rights monitors said it was the first time an international
tribunal had ruled on the conscription of children who were forced into combat
or marriages during an armed conflict.

''This is a landmark decision because it is the first time an international
tribunal has ruled on the charge of recruitment of child soldiers,'' said
Corinne Dufka, a Human Rights Watch researcher based in Dakar, Senegal.

Judge Julia Sebutinde set a sentencing hearing for July 16.

The former Liberian president, Charles G. Taylor, is on trial in The Hague,
accused of providing support for Sierra Leone rebels, often in exchange for
diamonds.

Human rights groups say thousands of children were forcibly recruited and made
to commit atrocities by all three warring factions in the conflict, which
started in 1991.

''These convictions are a groundbreaking step toward ending impunity for
commanders who exploit hundreds of thousands of children as soldiers in
conflicts worldwide,'' Human Rights Watch said.

Jo Becker, a children's rights advocate for the group, said, ''Now that child
recruiters are being brought to justice, their impunity is no longer so
certain.''

The three commanders were acquitted on one charge of sexual slavery and two of
inhuman acts.

By the time the war ended in 2001, about 120,000 people had died and fighters
had mutilated thousands of others by chopping off their arms, legs, ears or
noses.

Peter Andersen,  the court's chief spokesman, said all three of the defendants,
who had pleaded not guilty, had the right to appeal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CHILD SOLDIERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ACQUITTAL
(78%); SENTENCING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CHILD WELFARE (75%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (75%);
SLAVERY (73%); MURDER (58%)

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (74%); DAKAR, SENEGAL
(55%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (96%); SENEGAL (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); LIBERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ruling on Shining Path Rebels Angers Peru

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Jan. 10


A ruling by an international human rights court telling Peru's government to
honor 41 leftist rebels killed in a 1992 prison raid has provoked public
indignation, and the government is considering withdrawing from the court.

The ruling has reopened scars of a rebellion that raged from 1980 to 1998.
Javier Velasquez, leader of the governing APRA party in Congress, said after
meeting with President Alan Garcia on Monday that the authorities were mulling
Peru's withdrawal from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which issued
the ruling.

The court serves to uphold and promote human rights in the Americas under the
1969 American Convention on Human Rights.

The court demanded in December that the government apologize for the bloody 1992
raid on the Miguel Castro prison, pay compensation to the families of 41 rebels
from the Maoist Shining Path group killed there and put their names on a
monument to thousands of victims of hostilities in Peru.

The verdict set off a wave of anger in Peru over what many see as honoring
terrorists and killers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS (87%); TERRORISM (73%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (53%) Freedom and Human Rights; Decisions and Verdicts

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (93%) Inter-American Court of Human Rights; Shining
Path (Guerrilla Orgn)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (58%)

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Peru

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indian Army and Police Implicated in Kashmir Killings

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Yusuf Jameel contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1342 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR, Kashmir, Feb. 3


Amid a grove of poplar trees in a village just north of here, a grave was
unearthed Thursday afternoon. Out came the body of a man, shot dead nearly two
months ago, whom the Indian police described at the time as an anti-Indian
militant from Pakistan.

An elderly man, who had been searching for his missing son for nearly two
months, was summoned for the exhumation. He stared at the horror dug out of the
ground and told the police what he had refused to believe all this time. ''He is
my son,'' he said. Then he sat on the bare ground and shook.

As it turned out, the dead man, Abdul Rehman Paddar, was not a Pakistani at all,
nor a militant. He was a Kashmiri carpenter from a village south of here. The
Indian police are now investigating whether he was killed by some of their own
men, for motives that could range from personal revenge to greed. A suspected
militant's body, after all, comes with a handsome cash reward. By Saturday, four
police officers were under arrest in connection with Mr. Paddar's killing.

S. M. Sahai, the chief of police for Kashmir, said his investigators were
looking into whether at least two other bodies were part of the same ring;
setups like the killing of Mr. Paddar are known here as ''encounter killings.''
Each of the victims had been killed in operations conducted jointly by the
police and either an Indian Army unit or a paramilitary force that operates
under army command, he said.

By the end of the day on Saturday, as the investigation snowballed, a total of
five bodies had been exhumed, all in the area surrounding Sumbal, and their
identities were being checked.

The exhumations have not only unearthed a deep well of resentment among the
people of Indian-administered Kashmir, but have also forced the Indian
government to face anew long-simmering charges of abuse by Indian soldiers and
the police.

Kashmiris have long accused the Indian authorities of disappearances and
extrajudicial killings; one local human rights group estimates that 10,000
people have disappeared since the anti-Indian insurgency began here in 1989. Nor
have civilians been immune to the savagery of militants; beheadings are among
their favored tactics.

India blames its rival and neighbor, Pakistan, for aiding and arming the
insurgents. Pakistan denies the charge, and does not recognize India's claim to
Kashmir. Claimed by both countries, Kashmir has been a center of strife for
nearly 60 years.

While the violence has calmed considerably since a 2004 peace deal between India
and Pakistan, it has hardly ended the bloodshed or diminished the presence of
Indian troops here. India says troop reduction can begin only when the militants
lay down their weapons.

Those troops have been blamed repeatedly for human rights abuses here, most
recently by a 156-page report released last October by Human Rights Watch, which
detailed dozens of cases in which, it said, the state had failed to hold its
security forces accountable for suspected abductions, killings and detentions.

Among the most infamous of those cases were the March 2000 killings in the
southern village of Pathirabal of five men, whom the army identified as foreign
terrorists responsible for a massacre of Sikh civilians. The men, whose bodies
had been burned and badly mutilated, turned out to be civilians abducted by the
army, according to relatives and a subsequent federal investigation.

In a rare instance of prosecution, five Indian soldiers were charged with the
killings, but the case remains stuck in the courts nearly seven years later, and
the accused remain on the job. The army insists that they be tried by an
internal court martial, and not a civilian court.

Human Rights Watch blamed the Indian government for what it called its ''lack of
commitment'' to accountability and a series of Indian laws that shield soldiers
in conflict zones like Kashmir. ''This has led to a serious climate of
impunity,'' the report concluded.

Indian officials have explicitly sought to use the latest cases of encounter
killings to rebut accusations of impunity, pointing out that they have taken the
lead in investigating army and police officials linked to what they call
isolated abuses of power.

''This is an aberration,'' Mr. Sahai, the police chief, said in an interview in
his office here in the summer capital of Indian-run Kashmir. ''This is not the
rule. We have not tried to suppress anything. Whatever are the facts of the case
have come out in the open. If we are trying to set our house in order, that
should increase public confidence.''

Mr. Sahai said the police were also investigating whether members of the Indian
Army were complicit in Mr. Paddar's killing. [Indian newspapers reported Monday
that the army said it would conduct an internal investigation into whether its
soldiers were involved.]

The Kashmir state chief minister, Ghulam Nabi Azad, has likewise called for a
judicial inquiry into the killings, promising a transparent investigation.
Whether it will expand to include other suspected encounter killings remains a
mystery; if it does expand, it could prove to be a public relations headache for
New Delhi.

Last year, the prime minister promised zero tolerance of abuse by Indian forces
in Kashmir, a pledge clearly intended to win the hearts-and-minds battle there.

The carpenter, Mr. Paddar, seems to have unwittingly instigated a test of that
promise. According to interviews with the police as well as the man's friends
and relatives, Mr. Paddar appears to have been well acquainted with at least one
of the policeman charged with his murder, Farooq Ahmad Paddar, a native of the
same village.

In fact, the carpenter had given the policeman roughly $1,650 in exchange for a
promised government job, and for months, according to one of his relatives, the
carpenter had pursued the policeman to keep his promise. The job never
materialized.

One Friday last December, the policeman summoned the carpenter to a neighborhood
of Srinagar, where the carpenter lived, said a co-worker who accompanied him
part of the way. That's when Mr. Paddar disappeared.

The carpenter's family filed a missing person report, which would have gone
nowhere, like hundreds of other missing person reports in Kashmir, were it not
for a police investigator who found Mr. Paddar's cellphone in the hands of a man
several miles north of here last week.

According to investigators, the policeman gave away the carpenter's cellphone,
but only after, it seems, he and an unknown number of his colleagues shot him
and gave his body to some villagers in Sumbal, a hamlet about an hour's drive
from Srinagar. They buried him.

The police, in a joint operation with a paramilitary unit called the Central
Reserve Police Force, meanwhile, issued a statement claiming responsibility for
having killed a militant of Pakistani origin.

The discovery of the cellphone led police investigators to Mr. Paddar, the
police officer, and three of his colleagues. Eventually, it also led
investigators to other graves suspected of being linked to the same murder ring.

According to the police, one victim was a perfume seller, who was picked up last
February by the local police, the Central Reserve Police and an army unit known
as the Rashtriya Rifles. Another was a local Islamic cleric, who was picked up
from his home in October 2005 by the police and the Rashtriya Rifles.

On Thursday afternoon, as teams of police and forensic investigators dug for Mr.
Paddar's remains, hundreds of angry villagers, kept away by a ring of concertina
wire, shouted familiar slogans. ''Azadi,'' or freedom, went one chant. ''Hang
him,'' they also yelled, referring to the killer.

In the angry tussle, bricks were thrown at the police. Tear gas was fired back.
Mr. Paddar's body, pocked with four bullets, including one that tore apart his
face, was plucked out of the ground, shrouded in a white cloth, and put inside a
simple wooden coffin, all before his grieving father. From the village women
came songs of mourning, a familiar chorus in Kashmir.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abdul Rehman Paddar, whose body was exhumed Thursday, was a
local carpenter, not a Pakistani militant. (Photo by Yawar Nazir/Reuters)Map of
Kashmir highlighting Sumbal: The police are examining five bodies buried near
Sumbal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
ARMED FORCES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); SHOOTINGS
(78%); DEATHS (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); MISSING PERSONS (76%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (73%); ARRESTS (72%); MISCONDUCT (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (63%); PEACE PROCESS (50%)
Police Brutality and Misconduct

PERSON: Somini Sengupta

STATE: KASHMIR (97%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (93%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (97%); INDIA (96%); PAKISTAN (94%)

REGION: India; Kashmir and Jammu; Sumbal (Kashmir); Pakistan; India

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 28, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Face Trials at The Hague Over Atrocities in Darfur

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 27


International prosecutors on Tuesday designated their first suspects in
atrocities in the Sudanese region of Darfur, selecting a government minister and
a militia commander to bring to trial.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
said he had presented close to 100 pages of evidence and asked the judges to
issue summonses for the two men, Ahmad Harun and Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman.

Mr. Harun, currently Sudan's deputy minister for humanitarian affairs, was a
senior government official in charge of the military and police and intelligence
forces in Darfur as civilians were killed, raped and chased from their homes in
the region, the prosecutors said.

His ''unlimited'' budget, the prosecutors said, allowed him to arm and finance
Mr. Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, the militia leader who led fighters in a
brutal campaign of violence against civilians. ''We have focused on some of the
most serious incidents,'' Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said.

The announcement came after 20 months of criminal investigation into Darfur's
enormous bloodshed and humanitarian disaster. Human rights activists described
the two suspects as powerful but not among Sudan's top leaders.

At a news conference in The Hague, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo declined to say whether the
most important figures in Sudan's political or military hierarchy would be held
accountable for the mass killing, looting, rape and general devastation in
Darfur, which has uprooted more than two and a half million people, according to
the United Nations.

The prosecution is believed to be investigating crimes by the government, the
militias aligned with the government and the rebel forces they oppose.

Court officials said the prosecutor favored a strategy of focusing on specific
events to which he can link individuals, rather than pursuing broad, ambitious
indictments. He may also be following the path of other war crimes tribunals,
building a base of evidence with lesser cases before moving up the chain of
command. But the arrival of any Sudanese suspects at the court is far from
assured.

In Khartoum, the Sudanese minister of justice immediately said the nation did
not recognize the court's jurisdiction, did not intend to hand over anyone and
would try any cases itself. Sudan has told Mr. Moreno-Ocampo that it has already
arrested 14 people for human rights violations, including Mr. Rahman. Even so,
human rights groups said most of those arrested in Sudan have been low-level
fighters.

The prosecutors' decision, and the reaction from Khartoum, raised the basic
difficulty the court faces: how to investigate, let alone put on trial,
officials from sitting governments.

The International Criminal Court, embraced by 104 countries but independent from
the United Nations, has a broad mandate to investigate war crimes and crimes
against humanity. But it has no police to enforce its summonses or arrest
warrants, leaving it dependent on the very governments it may be investigating,
as in the case of Sudan.

Such issues have confronted United Nations war crimes tribunals for a decade,
with prosecutors for Uganda's genocide and the wars in the Balkans still begging
for the arrests of important suspects.

For the first Darfur case -- the court is handling cases in three other African
nations -- the prosecution has focused on violence in four villages and towns,
starting in the summer of 2003.

In April of that year, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said, rebels attacked Al Fasher airport
in Darfur, destroying planes, killing government soldiers and kidnapping the
Sudanese air force commander. That was a turning point in the conflict, the
prosecutor said, and led to intense recruiting of Arab militiamen, or janjaweed,
who have been aligned with the Arab-dominated government.

The janjaweed focused on the civilian population, he said, on the rationale that
they were supporters of the rebels.

''This strategy became the justification for the mass murder, summary execution
and mass rape of civilians,'' Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said.

At the time, Mr. Harun was the minister of state for the interior, and oversaw
the Darfur Security Desk.

Mr. Harun was seen traveling with well guarded boxes of cash and was observed
distributing money, weapons and ammunition throughout Darfur, according to the
prosecutor's statement, and worked closely with the militia leader, Mr. Rahman.

On one occasion, in early August 2003, Mr. Harun arrived by helicopter in the
Darfur town of Mukjar as janjaweed militia were moving in and gave a public
speech. According to the prosecutor, Mr. Harun said that since the children of
the Fur tribe had become rebels, the Fur people and their possessions had become
booty for the militia. Immediately upon his departure, the janjaweed ''looted
the entire town,'' the prosecution statement said.

Mr. Rahman personally led the attack on Mukjar and three other villages and
towns, the statement said. By mid-2003 he was commanding thousands of janjaweed.
His forces pillaged and burned homes and shops, killed hundreds of people and
tied women to trees and repeatedly raped them. According to the prosecution, Mr.
Rahman took part in a number of summary executions.

He was arrested in Sudan in November and is being held on a different set of
human rights violations.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said his staff tried to meet with him, and with Mr. Harun, in
recent weeks, but the Sudanese government prevented it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ahmad Harun, a Sudan deputy minister, faces trial at The Hague.
(Photo by Abd Raouf/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); JURISDICTION (77%); BUDGETS (74%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (67%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Luis Moreno-Ocampo; Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al- Rahman; Ahmad (Deputy Prime
Min) Harun; Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); NETHERLANDS (94%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Putin Picks Premier Tied to Abuse as Chechen Leader

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 1


President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Thursday appointed Ramzan A. Kadyrov, a
widely feared young official whose security forces have been accused of
kidnappings, torture and other abuses, to be president of Chechnya, the battered
southern republic.

The appointment, while expected, cemented Mr. Kadyrov's position as the dominant
political figure in Chechnya, where Russian and Chechen forces have largely
quashed a separatist movement after two wars, beginning in 1994.

Mr. Putin announced his decision in his residence outside Moscow during a
meeting with Mr. Kadyrov.

In Chechnya on Thursday, Europe's senior human rights official, Thomas
Hammarberg, attended a human rights conference organized by the government and
denounced ''a real widespread pattern of serious ill treatment and many cases of
torture against those who have been arrested,'' the British Broadcasting
Corporation reported.

Russia's most prominent advocacy groups boycotted the conference in Grozny, the
Chechen capital, saying it was a sham intended to obscure the fact that security
forces loyal to Mr. Kadyrov have been blamed for more of the violence in
Chechnya recently than have the remaining separatists.

Suspicions about Mr. Kadyrov and his subordinates have also figured in the
investigation of the killing of Anna Politkovskaya, a journalist shot to death
in Moscow in October, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, which
is based in New York City, whose leaders met with Russian officials in Moscow in
January.

Ms. Politkovskaya's last article, published posthumously, asserted that Chechen
police officers routinely tortured people detained as separatist suspects.
Speculation about Mr. Kadyrov's involvement in her killing, which remains
unsolved, was so intense that he denied it publicly.

''I did not kill women,'' he said last year, ''and I never kill them.''

Mr. Putin, in brief televised remarks, praised Mr. Kadyrov for his efforts ''to
restore the republic'' of Chechnya, first as deputy prime minister and then as
prime minister. Mr. Kadyrov replied that he would continue to carry out Mr.
Putin's policies there. The appointment is subject to the endorsement of the
Chechen Parliament, but that is a formality given Mr. Putin's control and Mr.
Kadyrov's power in the region.

Mr. Kadyrov's rise to the presidency has been predicted since rebels killed his
father, Akhmad, the first pro-Moscow leader installed by the Russians, in a
bombing at a soccer stadium in 2004.

At the time, the son was too young to succeed his father as president under the
republic's new constitution, which sets a lower minimum age, 30, which he
reached last October. Like his father, he fought federal forces in the first
Chechen war, which ended in Russia's humiliating withdrawal in 1996, but joined
with pro-Kremlin forces when fighting resumed in 1999.

For a time he commanded thousands of soldiers known as ''kadyrovtsy,'' who
fought the rebels and for the spoils of war. They have since been absorbed into
government security forces but are believed to remain more loyal to Mr. Kadyrov
than to Moscow.

In recent months he openly quarreled with his father's successor, Alu D.
Alkhanov, who stepped down in February.

Mr. Kadyrov's appointment is the culmination of Mr. Putin's policy of giving
significant autonomy to Chechens willing to display fealty. Critics say that Mr.
Putin has ignored reports of abuses because Mr. Kadyrov's tactics have succeeded
in helping to contain separatist sentiment.

''In Chechnya now, the active phase of the war is over, and the separatists are
weakened,'' said Lev A. Ponomaryov, director of For Human Rights, an
organization in Moscow, warning, as others have, that Mr. Kadyrov had unchecked
control. ''But at the same time Chechnya has become a place where Russian law
effectively does not exist.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Women with photos of missing relatives protested yesterday in
Grozny at a human rights conference sponsored by Chechnya. Critics said the
meeting was meant to obscure abuses linked to Ramzan A. Kadyrov. (Photo by Said
Tsarnayev/Reuters)
 Parliament was expected to approve Mr. Kadyrov, 30, as president. (Photo by
Sergei Karpukhin/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); ARRESTS (73%); BOYCOTTS (72%); BOMBINGS (71%); WRITERS
(71%); RIOTS (67%); SHOOTINGS (67%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (60%); SOCCER (60%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Demonstrations and Riots; Torture; Kidnapping

COMPANY: BRITISH BROADCASTING CORP (69%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (92%) Steven Lee Myers; Ramzan Kadyrov; Vladimir V (Pres)
Putin

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED
STATES (76%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 Serbs Guilty In Execution Of 6 Bosnians

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, April 10


A Serbian war-crimes court on Tuesday convicted four former paramilitary
officers in the July 1995 killings of six Bosnian Muslims from Srebrenica, where
thousands of Muslims were killed the same week.

The ruling was the first time anyone had been convicted in a Serbian court for
crimes that human rights groups linked to the killings in Srebrenica, in eastern
Bosnia.

The trial, which began in Belgrade 15 months ago, was prompted by a videotape
that surfaced in June 2005 showing the Serb security men, part of a unit known
as the Scorpions, taking six Muslim prisoners from a truck near the Bosnian
village of Trnovo and executing them.

The judge, Gordana Bozilovic-Petrovic, said the killers acted against
defenseless civilians, ''showing off their power and showing no remorse.'' Yet
she also said no evidence tied the killings to the massacre of nearly 8,000
Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica, 90 miles away.

The judge imposed 20-year sentences on Slobodan Medic, the commander of the
unit, and his assistant, Branislav Medic. The only defendant to plead guilty,
Pera Petrasavic, was given a sentence of 13 years, and another, Aleksander
Medic, received a five-year term. A fifth defendant, Aleksander Vukov, was
acquitted.

The video was first shown in June 2005 during the trial of the former Serbian
president Slobodan Milosevic at the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in The Hague. The tape was regarded as a watershed within
Serbia because it confronted Serbs with firsthand evidence of the involvement of
their security forces in Bosnian killings. Until then, most Serbs did not
believe that the massacre had taken place.

But a leading Serbian human rights lawyer and relatives of the dead said they
were disappointed by the verdict and accused the judge of trying to distance the
killings in Trnovo from the massacre.

''Both from a moral and factual point of the view, this is not justice,'' said
Natasa Kandic, the human rights lawyer who first uncovered the videotape and
passed it on to prosecutors in The Hague.

Ms. Kandic, the director of Serbia's leading human rights group, the
Humanitarian Law Center, said that wherever Serbian security forces have faced
charges of war crimes -- whether in Croatia, Bosnia or Kosovo -- the government
has rebutted accusations that the state was in any way responsible.

She said the judge seemed to follow the same line of thought. ''It's a pity,''
she said. ''The tape changed Serbian society, and the trial could have had a
similar role.''

The video shows the unit traveling from a part of Croatia under Serb control to
central Bosnia. Before they leave, each member is blessed by a Serbian Orthodox
priest.

The tape shows what happened to the six captives. They are told to jump from the
back of a truck with their hands cuffed behind them and forced to lie in a ditch
while the Scorpions shout obscenities. The prisoners are led to a clearing where
the four younger men are shot, one by one, in the back. The two older men are
told to drag the bodies to a nearby building where they, too, are shot.

The judge said it was not clear that the victims came from Srebrenica,
dismissing prosecutors' contentions that they had been taken from there after it
was seized by Serbian forces, and handed over to the Scorpions.

The release of Mr. Vukov -- which the judge said was because of insufficient
evidence -- and the sentence for Aleksander Medic also dismayed relatives of the
victims. The two men were not shown shooting the prisoners but were seen with
them shortly before they died. The convicted have a right to appeal within 30
days.

The tribunal in The Hague has convicted members of the Serb security forces of
taking part in the Srbebrenica massacre, but no other cases are before the
Serbian court.

Safeta Muhic was one of about 30 relatives of the victims to attend the verdict.
Her brother, Safet Fejze, was 16 when he died; she said she only learned of his
fate when the video was broadcast.

Referring to Aleksander Medic's sentence, she said in a telephone interview, ''I
can't understand how it's possible to release someone after just five years.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nura Alispahic, foreground, waited yesterday outside the
courtroom in Belgrade for the verdict in the death of her son Azmir. Below, a
scene from the video that helped convict four former Serbian paramilitary
officers. (Photo by Srdjan Ilic/Associated Press)
 (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); RELIGION (91%); SENTENCING (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); VERDICTS
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); MEN
(75%); ACQUITTAL (73%) Decisions and Verdicts; Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (54%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA
(58%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%);
SLOVENIA (92%); CROATIA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); NETHERLANDS (69%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Report Criticizes Iraq On Detainees' Treatment

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE; Reporting was contributed by Qais Mizher in Baghdad,
Iraqi employees of The New York Times in Kut and Kirkuk, and Nazila Fathi in
Tehran.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, April 25


The United Nations accused the Iraqi government on Wednesday of failing to
''seriously address'' problems of detainee abuse, including torture, and to
ensure the timely and fair prosecution of detainees.

In its latest human rights report on Iraq, the organization expressed special
concern about the ''apparent lack'' of judicial guarantees for suspects arrested
during the latest security plan for Baghdad, which went into effect in
mid-February. The emergency regulations governing the joint Iraqi and American
crackdown permit arrests without warrants and open-ended pretrial detentions,
the report said.

More than 3,000 people were taken into custody under the security plan during
its first seven weeks, the United Nations said. An Iraqi government monitoring
group reported late last month that hundreds of people detained in the security
crackdown had been jammed into woefully overcrowded detention centers.

The United Nations report also criticized the government for failing to monitor
its security forces sufficiently for human rights violations and to prosecute
military and police officials suspected of torturing and abusing detainees.

''The continuing failure to take decisive action in this regard can only serve
to encourage a climate of impunity that prevails today, undermining the
government's own efforts to restore law and order and ensure respect for the
rule of law,'' said the report, released here by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq.

The Iraqi government immediately criticized the report, saying it ''lacks
credibility in many of its points and lacks balance in its presentation of the
human rights situation in Iraq,'' according to a statement issued by the office
of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. The government did not offer a more
specific critique of the document.

The report was also notable for what it did not include.

Beginning last summer, reports from the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq became the only publicly accessible source of information regarding
civilian death tolls in Iraq. But for the first time in nine months, the report
issued Wednesday did not contain the death statistics.

In explaining the omission, United Nations officials said the Iraqi government
was now withholding the information.

The government did not provide the United Nations with an official reason for
its decision, Said Arikat, a United Nations spokesman, said in an interview. In
''private conversations,'' the government said it believed that the figures were
being used to convey a grim picture of Iraq, Mr. Arikat said, adding, ''But we
don't buy that.''

''It's very important that the public -- the Iraqi public, above all -- knows
what's going on,'' he said. ''It's the government's way of showing the public
that it's transparent and accountable.''

In its last human rights report, in January, the United Nations said more than
34,000 Iraqis were killed in 2006. The organization arrived at its figure using
reports from morgues, hospitals and municipal authorities across Iraq, though
the government called it exaggerated.

The United Nations said its concerns about the Iraqi detention system also
extended to the Kurdish autonomous region in northern Iraq, where, according to
the report, hundreds of detainees in have been held ''for prolonged periods,
some for several years'' without referral to an investigative judge or without
charges being brought against them.

The report also reiterated the United Nations' long-held concerns about the lack
of due process in Iraq's judicial system, saying the criminal courts
''consistently failed to meet minimum fair trial standards.''

Also on Wednesday, President Jalal Talabani, a Kurd, and the anti-American
Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr added their voices to the chorus of criticism
concerning a three-mile-long, 12-foot-high wall of concrete barriers the
American and Iraqi militaries had begun building along one side of the
predominantly Sunni Arab neighborhood of Adhamiya.

''I do not agree on such barriers,'' Mr. Talabani said while visiting the
Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya, according to Agence France-Presse. ''I don't
believe this is something good. We can set up less harsh barriers.''

Mr. Sadr said in a statement read by an aide in Najaf that the wall was
''sectarian, racist and unjust.''

The plan has provoked a multisectarian groundswell of opposition, prompting Mr.
Maliki to order a temporary halt to the wall's construction. On Wednesday, he
issued a statement saying that the government was studying alternative solutions
to providing security for the neighborhood.

In Tehran, Iran's foreign minister, Manouchehr Mottaki, said that his country
had not decided whether to join a May summit meeting in Egypt about Iraqi
security but that it would announce its decision in a few days.

Hoshyar Zebari, the Iraqi foreign minister, was in Tehran on Wednesday as part
of an effort to persuade Iran to take part in the conference. He is also
scheduled to meet with President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

The American military command said Wednesday that American forces had killed a
top operative of the Islamist insurgent group Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia on Friday.
The operative, Muhammad Abdullah Abbas al-Issawi, was the organization's
''security emir'' in the eastern part of Anbar Province, the military said in a
statement, adding no further details or confirmation.

In Diyala Province on Wednesday, a suicide bomber detonated his charge near the
front gate of a police station in Baladruz, killing four police officers and
wounding 16 people, a police official said. Elsewhere in the province, gunmen
killed an Iraqi Army captain, a police official said.

At least five people were killed and more than a dozen wounded in assorted
attacks around Baghdad, including a shooting in the Hurriya neighborhood, a
roadside bombing in Shaab and a mortar shell explosion in Disheer, an Interior
Ministry official said. An Iraqi soldier died in clashes between the Iraqi Army
and insurgents in Amiriya, the official added, and at least 18 bodies were found
around the city.

Two police officers were killed by a roadside bomb south of Kirkuk, police
officials said, and two headless bodies, both with multiple bullet holes and
signs of torture, were found floating in the Tigris River near the southern city
of Kut.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Iraqi soldiers detained a man in the Dora section of Baghdad
last month after he was seen reaching for a grenade during a search of his
vehicle. (Photo by David Furst/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
 Iraqis walked past a newly installed concrete wall in the Adhamiya
neighborhood. Leaders around Iraq have protested the wall's presence. (Photo by
Mohammed Jalil/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); STATISTICS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); POLICE FORCES (67%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (61%); TERRORISM (59%)
Terrorism; Torture  ; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom
and Human Rights; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (78%) Kirk Semple; Qais Mizher; Nazila Fathi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Perfect Weapon for the Meanest Wars

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1379 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


IN the early 1980s, in the lowlands of Mozambique, a new technology of warfare
emerged that would sweep across Africa and soon the rest of the world: the child
soldier.

Rebel commanders had constructed a four-foot tall killing machine that cut its
way through village after village and nearly overran the government. Its trail
was smoking huts and sawed off ears.

The Mozambicans learned that children were the perfect weapon: easily
manipulated, intensely loyal, fearless and, most important, in endless supply.

Today, human rights groups say, there are 300,000 child soldiers worldwide. And
experts say the problem is deepening as the nature of conflict itself changes --
especially in Africa.

Here, in one country after another, conflicts have morphed from idea- or
cause-driven struggles to warlord-led drives whose essential goal is plunder.
Because those new rebel movements are motivated and financed by crime, popular
support becomes irrelevant. Those in control don't care about hearts and minds.
They see the local population as prey.

The result is that few adults want to have anything to do with them, and
manipulating and abducting children becomes the best way to sustain the
organized banditry.

This dynamic has fueled some of the longest-running conflicts on the continent,
and it could be seen this month alone in at least three countries:

In Somalia, within the last month, more than 1,000 people have been killed in
Mogadishu, the capital, in a complex civil war compounded by warlords who
command armies of teenagers. The war traces to 1991, when the central government
was brought down by clans fighting over old grievances. But soon it became a
contest among the warlords for control of airports, seaports and access to
international aid. Sixteen years later, they are still blasting away.

In Congo, a civil war that started a decade ago to oust the cold-war-era tyrant
Mobutu Sese Seko is now a multiheaded fight in which only one of the players is
the government. The rest are rebel posses fighting among themselves for a share
of the timber, copper, gold, diamonds and other resources. All sides, according
to a report issued this month by Human Rights Watch, rely on child soldiers.

In Uganda, the latest in a series of peace talks -- none successful so far --
resumed last week, in an effort to end a reign of terror in rural areas by the
Lord's Resistance Army. That group was mustered in the late 1990s in the name of
the oppressed Acholi minority, but it soon degenerated into a drugged-out street
gang living in the jungle with military-grade weaponry and 13-year-old brides.
Its ranks are filled with boys who have been brainwashed to burn down huts and
pound newborn babies to death in wooden mortars, as if they were grinding grain.

Africa didn't invent the modern under-age soldier. The Nazis drafted adolescents
when they got desperate. So did Iran, which gave boys 12 to 16 years old plastic
keys to heaven to hang around their necks as they cleared minefields during the
Iran-Iraq War. Young teenagers have fought in religion-driven or nationalistic
fights in Kosovo, the Palestinian territories and Afghanistan.

But here, in Africa, armed movements that survive on children as young as 9 have
acquired a special character, nourished by breakdowns of state power or
ideology. Many of these movements are about raw greed, power and brutality, with
no effort to make excuses for it.

''There might have been a little rhetoric at the beginning,'' said Ishmael Beah,
a former child soldier in Sierra Leone and author of the best seller ''A Long
Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier.'' ''But very quickly the ideology gets lost.
And then it just becomes a bloodbath, a way for the commanders to plunder, a war
of madness.''

Neil Boothby, a Columbia University professor who has worked with child soldiers
across the world, said this new crop of movements lacked the features associated
with the winning insurgencies of yesteryear -- a charming, intelligent leader,
persuasive vocabulary, the goal of taking cities.

The typical rebel leader emerging today wants most of all to run his criminal
enterprise deep in the bush. ''These are brutally thuggy people who don't want
to rule politically and have no strategy for winning a war,'' Dr. Boothby said.

This is a sharp change from the liberation movements of the 1970s and 1980s and
the cause-driven conflicts that followed -- for example, those in Zimbabwe or
Eritrea. Even Rwanda's 1994 genocide followed some familiar patterns: It
remained a contest, however gruesome, for political power between two ethnic
groups. And children, by and large, were the victims of atrocities by adults,
rather than the other way around.

William Reno, a political scientist at Northwestern University who studies armed
movements, said: ''If you look back 30 years at how wars were fought in Africa,
they were liberation movements -- freeing their countries from apartheid or
colonial rule. They had to plug into Soviet aid or American aid, and the
superpowers wanted to see a state, a vision of the future.''

''The people who ended up doing well,'' he said, ''were the college-educated
ideologues.''

Their plans may have been dreamy. But at least, they had plans.

''We saw a lot of that in the 1980s,'' said Chester Crocker, who was assistant
secretary of state for Africa in the Reagan administration from 1981 to 1989.
''For marketing reasons, leaders would dress themselves up in ideas.''

''Of course,'' he added, ''we always took it with a grain of salt.''

This charade ended with the cold war. Weak states that had been propped up by
foreign aid and outside military assistance quickly collapsed. And Eastern bloc
countries that had been cranking out Kalashnikovs for the Soviet Army had to
find new markets. Africa, with its unpatrolled skies and endless shorelines, its
gold mines and diamond mines and free-flowing cash economies, beckoned.

The result, Dr. Reno said, was that the political landscape opened up to
well-armed opportunists, no longer inconvenienced by state regulations, state
security or moral principles. ''When there isn't that big barrier anymore,'' he
said, ''all these weird things start to happen.''

Like the use of child soldiers, who are often drawn into these movements, or
kept there, with magic and superstition.

In many armed movements, children are taught that life and death depend on
spirits, which are conjured up by their commanders and distilled in oils and
amulets. Magic can spur children to do unspeakable things. It also bestows
otherwise lackluster leaders with a veneer of supernatural respectability. ''The
commanders would wear certain pearls and said that guns wouldn't hurt us,'' Mr.
Beah recalled. ''And we believed it.''

Renamo, the South African-backed rebel army that terrorized Mozambique in the
1980s as it tried to destabilize the Marxist government, was among the first to
turn to magic; it carved out a special role for witch doctors, whom the Marxists
had marginalized.

By the time groups in Congo took that technique to its lowest depths in the late
1990s -- some child soldiers there were instructed that eating their victims
made them stronger -- the world started paying attention. Advocates succeeded in
placing the child soldier issue on the United Nations agenda and passing
protocols that called for the age of combatants to be at least 18 (the United
States and the United Kingdom are among the countries that have refused to
sign).

But renegade armed groups continue to be a stumbling block. As lawlessness
spreads, they too are spreading, from the bush to urban-area slums, where
violent, quasi-religious movements seem to be taking root.

''It's ridiculous to appeal to human rights with these groups because they are
so far on the criminal end of the spectrum,'' said Victoria Forbes Adam,
director of the London-based Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers.

Just this month, in a shantytown near Nairobi, Kenya's capital, enforcers from a
group called the Mungiki -- essentially a street gang that uses teenage muscle
-- hacked up several opponents in an effort to control the minibus racket. True
to form, their leader has told his young henchmen that he rolled to earth in a
ball of stars.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Free-For-All -- Militias are fighting one another in Congo.
This boy's group is one. (Photo by Lionel Healing/Agence-France Presse -- Getty
Images)(pg. 1)
 Lethal -- Children can be taught bloodthirsty behavior. A boy loyal to Charles
Taylor, then president of Liberia, fought on a bridge littered with shell
casings in 2003. (Photo by Nic Bothma/European Pressphoto Agency)(pg. 4)
Chart/Map: ''Warfare Waged by the Young'' Conflicts in these nations are notable
for their brutality and the participation of child soldiers.  Recent Wars ...
SIERRA LEONE -Young soldiers terrorized civilians by hacking off hands and even
arms.  LIBERIA -- Many children were abducted to become fighters for the warlord
Charles Taylor, who became president. The war lasted 14 years.  MOZAMBIQUE --
Children fought by the thousands in its long civil war.  ... And Those Still
Raging  SOMALIA -- War profiteers, including teenage gunmen for hire, are
fighting to prevent the formation of a stable government, which could collect
taxes and curb illegal businesses.  UGANDA -- An army of kidnapped children led
by a messianic rebel leader have brutalized thousands.  CONGO -- Boy soldiers in
the employ of warlords keep conflicts alive in regions far beyond government
control.  Map of Africa highlighting areas listed above. (pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WAR CRIMES (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (72%); ADOLESCENTS (72%); GENOCIDE (70%);
HARBORS & PORTS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); GANGS (69%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (68%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (50%); PEACE PROCESS (50%) Children
and Youth; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and Human
Rights

PERSON: Jeffrey Gettleman

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (78%); MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (73%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (95%); MOZAMBIQUE (94%); SOMALIA (93%); KENYA (92%); UGANDA
(92%); LIBERIA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%)

REGION: Africa; Africa

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canada and Afghanistan Reach Accord on How to Treat Detainees

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA, May 3


The government announced Thursday that it had reached an agreement with
Afghanistan on the treatment of detainees captured by Canadian troops.

Human rights groups are seeking to prevent the Canadian military from placing
prisoners in Afghan custody after catching them in raids or in combat, saying
the practice leaves the detainees vulnerable to torture by the Afghan
authorities. Government lawyers disclosed the new agreement minutes before a
court hearing on the issue began.

For almost two weeks, the fate of Afghan detainees handed over by Canadian
forces has been a major political issue here and something of a surrogate debate
about Canada's role in Afghanistan.

Human rights groups have long argued that placing prisoners in Afghan custody
violates Canada's Constitution and the country's commitments under international
law because it leads to abuse.

The controversy has been fueled by confusing and contradictory statements by
several cabinet ministers.

Under the new arrangement, Canadian officials have ''full and unrestricted''
access to any detainees transferred to the Afghan authorities. They will be able
to speak with the prisoners in private, and those turned in by Canada will be
held in a limited number of prisons, to make monitoring of their treatment
easier.

The announcement was a surprise, partly because Prime Minister Stephen Harper
had continued to maintain that the previous system was working well.

Human rights groups want to permanently ban the transfers, but Judge Michael
Kelen of the Federal Court of Canada said at the hearing that the agreement
meant that there was no need for immediate action.

Before suspending the hearing, Judge Kelen said the agreement's timing was not
coincidental.

''It probably wouldn't have happened if this court case hadn't been happening,''
he told the court.

Alex Neve, the secretary general of Amnesty International in Canada, said that
while he welcomed improved oversight, monitoring could not prevent the torture
of detainees.

''The fact is that torture can deliver devastating harm in 90 seconds,'' he
said. ''You simply cannot have enough monitors available all the time to fend
that off.''

In the debate over the treatment of Afghan prisoners, Defense Minister Gordon
O'Connor has retracted some of his initial claims about the protections offered
under an earlier agreement with Afghanistan. Then last week he announced that a
new agreement had been reached, only to be contradicted later by the prime
minister.

The public security minister, Stockwell Day, told Parliament that Canadian
correction officials in Afghanistan had not heard any complaints of torture. But
he later said two such complaints had been received.

Further undermining the government were reports in The Globe and Mail of
Toronto. Last week it detailed the abuse of 30 detainees who said they had been
tortured after being captured by Canadian troops. The newspaper also obtained a
report by Canada's Foreign Ministry that included comments that the Afghan
government and its police force engaged in torture and human rights abuses.

As the political debate wore on, Mr. Harper and other members of his government
said the abuse allegations were fabrications of the Taliban and suggested that
raising them undermined Canada's military effort. Unusually, the chief of the
defense staff, Gen. Rick Hillier, entered the political debate on Wednesday when
he arrived in Afghanistan with several retired hockey players and the Stanley
Cup.

Using a mildly vulgar expression, General Hillier told reporters that the debate
in Canada about detainees had angered troops, because ''these allegations have
detracted from the overall mission here.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); PRISONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); LAWYERS (73%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (71%) Torture  ; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: Globe & Mail (Canadian Newspaper)

PERSON: STEPHEN HARPER (58%) Ian Austen; Stockwell Day

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (73%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (73%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); AFGHANISTAN (97%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Canada; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Uzbekistan: Rights Worker Freed After Confession

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 160 words


An appeals court freed a well-known human rights defender, Umida Niyazova, after
she read out a damning confession that also impugned Human Rights Watch, the
independent New York-based group she worked for. Ms. Niyazova, an independent
Uzbek journalist who worked as a translator for the group, was convicted of
distributing Islamic extremist propaganda and sentenced to seven years in prison
last week after a two-day trial that was condemned by the European Union and the
United States. Standing in a cage in the courtroom yesterday, she pleaded guilty
and said: ''I sincerely regret the crimes I have committed unintentionally. I'm
deeply disappointed in some people and international organizations I have worked
with.'' Pointing at Andrea Berg, who heads the Human Rights Watch office in the
country, Ms. Niyazova continued: ''And our work, Andrea, was biased and harmed
my people.'' Ms. Berg sat stony-faced, and afterward was crying and refused to
comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); GUILTY PLEAS (88%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%); RELIGION (87%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
EUROPEAN UNION (54%) Freedom and Human Rights; Islam; Confessions; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%) Human Rights Watch;
European Union

PERSON: Umida Niazova

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (69%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Coptic Christian Fights Deportation to Egypt, Fearing Torture

BYLINE: By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 835 words


An Egyptian Coptic Christian who was permitted to stay in the United States
because of the probable threat of torture back home is now fighting deportation
on a murder charge in Egypt.

The office of Immigration and Customs Enforcement has decided to deport the man,
Sameh Khouzam, 38, of Lancaster, Pa., because Egypt's government has given
diplomatic assurances that Mr. Khouzam will not be tortured upon his return.

In fleeing to the United States nine years ago, Mr. Khouzam maintained that he
was repeatedly detained and tortured because he refused to convert to Islam. He
denies the murder accusation.

Human rights organizations, including Human Rights Watch and the American Civil
Liberties Union, argue that the use of torture in Egypt is so routine and
well-documented that deporting Mr. Khouzam would expose him to harsh treatment
and would amount to a violation of the Convention Against Torture.

Under the convention, foreign citizens cannot be repatriated to countries where
they stand a reasonable chance of being tortured.

Mr. Khouzam's lawyers have won a temporary stay of deportation in federal court
until tomorrow. The A.C.L.U., which has taken his case, is trying to get the
stay prolonged so that it might argue for Mr. Khouzam's ultimate release. He is
being detained in Pennsylvania.

''The fundamental issue is whether the United States government can circumvent
its obligation under CAT by obtaining inherently unreliable diplomatic
assurances from the government of Egypt,'' said Amrit Singh, staff lawyer at the
A.C.L.U.'s immigrants' rights project. ''It's particularly outrageous when the
record is replete with evidence that he has been repeatedly tortured.''

According to court documents, Mr. Khouzam is accused of killing Zaki Mohammed
Youssef, but the circumstances are not specified. Mr. Khouzam first heard of the
accusation when he arrived in the United States in February 1998. He was
detained for the next eight years by immigration authorities.

Karim Haggag, press attache for the Egyptian Embassy, said that Mr. Khouzam had
been tried in absentia in Cairo and found guilty of murder, and that he would
serve a prison term upon his return.

''We have been involved with the Department of Justice regarding the evidence we
had,'' Mr. Haggag said. ''They wanted to have the full facts of the case, so
that is why it took such a long time.''

Marc Raimondo, a spokesman for Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said that
the nature of the diplomatic assurances made by Egypt were confidential but that
there were extensive deliberations within the government about deporting Mr.
Khouzam.

''The determination was made that under our regulations about implementing the
torture convention, these assurances were sufficiently reliable,'' Mr. Raimondo
said.

Mr. Haggag also denied Mr. Khouzam's accusations of religious persecution.

Yet according to Kathleen Lucas, a friend of Mr. Khouzam's in York, Pa., and a
volunteer for Amnesty International, Mr. Khouzam said that from 1992 to 1998,
various members of his family in Cairo were detained and tortured to force them
to convert to Islam. When Mr. Khouzam's mother, Georgette Shehata, came to the
United States to testify on his behalf during his eight years in detention, she
was granted asylum because of fears of reprisal and religious persecution in
Egypt, Ms. Lucas said.

An accountant who worked for American firms and who had a multi-entry visa to
the United States, Mr. Khouzam fled to New York one night after he was taken to
the hospital for treatment for injuries he had sustained during detention, he
said. Mr. Khouzam's account could not be independently verified, but a
Pennsylvania doctor signed an affidavit that he showed signs of torture.

In 2004, a federal appeals court denied Mr. Khouzam asylum, but allowed him to
stay in the United States because he risked being tortured in Egypt. In early
2006, Mr. Khouzam was released and has recently worked as the controller for a
real estate developer in Lancaster.

He was detained when he went to immigration authorities for a routine visit on
May 29, after he was told that he would be deported because Egypt had provided
diplomatic assurances that he would not be harmed.

The Egyptian government so far seems to have a mixed record in adhering to its
anti-torture pledge. Mr. Raimondo, of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said
that the government has monitored an Egyptian who was deported under a
diplomatic assurance and has found no evidence of torture. But the Egyptian
government failed to adhere to such assurances in the case of two men deported
from Sweden, the United Nations found.

The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, an agency
created by Congress, placed Egypt on its watch list of countries, noting that it
had ''a poor overall human rights record.''

Mr. Haggag denied the prevalence of torture or its sanction by state
authorities, asserting that if it did occur, it was only in ''isolated acts.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 7, 2007



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about Sameh Khouzam, a man accused of murder
who says he will be tortured if he is deported back to Egypt, misspelled the
surname of a spokesman for Immigration and Customs Enforcement who said there
were extensive deliberations within the government about deporting Mr. Khouzam.
He is Marc Raimondi, not Raimondo.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Khouzam of Lancaster, Pa., was convicted of murder in Egypt
in absentia. He denies the charge.
 Sameh Khouzam's mother, Georgette Shehata, was granted asylum because of fears
of religious persecution in Egypt, a family friend said. (Photographs by Kalim
A. Bhatti for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (94%); TORTURE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MURDER (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); RELIGION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); HOMICIDE (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); LAWYERS (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
LITIGATION (73%); VERDICTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

CITY: LANCASTER, PA, USA (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (97%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Offers Plan To Ease Rules On Asylum

BYLINE: By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


After months of pressure from lawmakers, conservative groups and advocates for
immigrants, the Bush administration announced plans on Thursday to seek
legislation that would provide relief to thousands of refugees and asylum
seekers who have been inadvertently denied refuge because of antiterrorism laws.

The laws, including the USA Patriot Act and the Real ID Act, deny entry to
anyone who belongs to or has provided material support to armed rebel groups,
even if that support was coerced and even if the armed groups fought alongside
American troops or opposed authoritarian governments criticized by the Bush
administration.

The new legislative proposal would allow the resettlement of combatants and
members of those armed groups, including refugees fleeing the authoritarian
government of Myanmar, formerly known as Burma; hundreds of refugees from
Vietnam and Laos who fought alongside American troops in the Vietnam War; and
dozens of Cubans who supported armed groups opposed to Fidel Castro in the
1960s.

The Bush administration would also exercise its authority to provide waivers to
allow the resettlement of thousands of refugees from Myanmar, Vietnam, Tibet and
Cuba who provided material support to rebel groups. It would also, for the first
time, provide relief to the 5,600 people from those countries whose asylum
claims have been placed on hold here or who have been admitted as refugees but
prevented from becoming permanent residents here because of the antiterrorism
laws.

The administration would also allow some individuals who were forced to provide
support to groups deemed as terrorist to be resettled or granted asylum here.
Many were barred because the statutes broadened the definition of terrorist
groups to include any group of two or more people who take up arms against a
state, even if the group supports the aims of American foreign policy and do not
appear on the government's designated list of terrorist groups.

Refugee advocacy groups, including Human Rights First and Human Rights Watch,
and conservative groups like Concerned Women for America and the National
Association of Evangelicals, had pressed for such changes for months. And
officials acknowledge that many refugees suffered from the ''unintended
consequences'' of the antiterrorism laws, remaining stranded in bleak refugee
camps or in American jails while immigration courts debated their fates.

But Paul Rosenzweig, acting assistant secretary for international affairs at the
Department of Homeland Security, told reporters that the administration expected
to present legislation to Congress by the end of the month and to exercise most
of its waivers within a day or so. The waivers allowing for relief for Hmong and
Montagnard refugees, who fought with American troops in Vietnam, are also being
processed.

''There isn't anybody in this room who doesn't wish we could have moved more
quickly than we have,'' Mr. Rosenzweig said.

Advocacy groups hailed the decision as an important step forward, but warned
that it would still leave many people vulnerable.

Under the new plan, for instance, refugees and asylum seekers forced to
cooperate with groups on the government's list of terrorist groups would be
ineligible for resettlement or asylum here. That would affect Colombians forced
to support their country's largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia, among others.

The process would also leave out individuals who do not belong to the ethnic
groups named in the waivers.

''I think they have made some real progress, and as a result more people will be
protected,'' said Jennifer Daskal of Human Rights Watch. ''But many people will
continue to be barred and put at real risk. There's a need to go further.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (94%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); LEGISLATION
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (78%); US REAL ID ACT OF 2005 (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); VIETNAM WAR (74%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (60%);
RELIGION (50%) Terrorism; Asylum (Political); Law and Legislation; Immigration
and Refugees

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (52%) Rachel L Swarns; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: XIZANG, CHINA (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MYANMAR (93%); VIET NAM (93%); LAO PEOPLE'S
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (79%); TIBET (79%); CHINA (57%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Egypt, Rice Speaks Softly

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Jan. 15


In the days before Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice met with officials in
Egypt, the news media here were filled with stories detailing charges of
corruption, cronyism, torture and political repression.

Cellphone videos posted on the Internet showed the police sodomizing a bus
driver with a broomstick. Another showed the police hanging a woman by her knees
and wrists from a pole for questioning. A company partly owned by a member of
the governing party distributed tens of thousands of bags of contaminated blood
to hospitals around the country. And just 24 hours before Ms. Rice arrived, the
authorities arrested a television reporter on charges of harming national
interests by making a film about police torture. The reporter was released, but
the authorities kept the tapes.

Ms. Rice, who once lectured Egyptians on the need to respect the rule of law,
did not address those domestic concerns. Instead, with Foreign Minister Ahmed
Aboul Gheit by her side, she talked about her appreciation for Egypt's support
in the region.

It was clear that the United States -- facing chaos in Iraq, rising Iranian
influence and the destabilizing Israeli-Palestinian conflict -- had decided that
stability, not democracy, was its priority, Egyptian political commentators,
political aides and human rights advocates said.

But the calculus of stabilization is complicated and fraught in a region as
fragile as the Middle East, where interests are defined by religion, geography,
geopolitics and political opportunism. And it is not at all clear that the new
(old) approach will work. The United States is so unpopular in the region now,
many here say, that its support is enough to undermine a government's legitimacy
with its public.

''The former pressure was an illusion and the lack of any pressure now will push
the crisis between the people and their rulers to the edge,'' said Ibrahim
Eissa, the editor of Al Dustoor, a weekly independent newspaper in Egypt that is
critical of the government. That eliminates ''all false appearances that the
Arab regimes are against the United States in defense of their independent
sovereignty and that the United States is supporting democracy when it is in
strict alliance with the oppressive regimes,'' he added.

The dynamics of the region have also changed over the years, and it is no longer
clear what the payoff is for Washington in return for overlooking rights
violations. It is not certain, for example, that the Egypt of 2007 can deliver
the kind of influence it once wielded when it was seen as the political and
cultural center of the Arab world. Egypt has failed to calm fighting between
Palestinian factions, or to help negotiate the release of Palestinian prisoners
in exchange for an Israeli soldier held by Palestinian militants.

At the same time, where Washington was criticized in the past for supporting
repressive governments, it risks even sharper criticism now because it made such
a public commitment to promoting democracy.

Ms. Rice raised the bar herself when she visited American University here in
2005 and said in a speech: ''We are all concerned for the future of Egypt's
reforms when peaceful supporters of democracy -- men and women -- are not free
from violence. The day must come when the rule of law replaces emergency decrees
-- and when the independent judiciary replaces arbitrary justice.''

Since then, Egypt's government has piled up a long list of repressive actions,
including ordering the police to block people from voting in parliamentary
elections; delaying local elections by two years; imprisoning an opposition
leader, Ayman Nour, on charges widely seen as politically motivated; battling
with judges who have demanded oversight of elections; and imprisoning Talaat
el-Sadat, a member of Parliament and the nephew of President Anwar el-Sadat, for
a year in a military jail after he criticized the armed forces on television.

Recently, President Hosni Mubarak proposed amending the Constitution in ways
that would make it easier for Egypt's toothless opposition parties to field
candidates for president. But the proposals would ban truly independent
candidates from running, limit the role judges play in monitoring elections and
permanently outlaw any party with a religious bent.

Perhaps more to the point, the government has done little if anything to improve
a climate across the country that discourages participation in opposition
politics, many political analysts said.

''The government has said to us, 'Stop, we are closing all the windows and doors
we had opened,' said Hafez Abu Seada, secretary general of the Egyptian
Organization for Human Rights.

Three hours north of Cairo, in Kafr Ghamam, a village of about 40,000 people, a
small group of men said they had tried to build a following for the Wafd Party,
which would seem to be uncontroversial. It is, after all, a legal opposition
party and, like other government-sanctioned parties, has virtually no influence.

To win support from the village, the men tried to persuade the government to
cover a pit where raw sewage was dumped and to repair a bridge that ran over the
pit. But the men said no one would sign a letter to the government requesting
the aid because they were afraid to be identified with an opposition party.

''My father threatened to kick me out of the house if I got involved with this
party,'' said Mustafa Ibrahim Abdel Hamid, a 21-year-old in the village.

What are people afraid of? A knock at the door, many people there said. Last
month, after a group of party organizers gathered to discuss who would hold
which position in the nascent organization, two men who took over leading posts
were visited by state security, they said.

''I got scared and I wanted to resign,'' said one of the men, Al Sayed Muhammad
Ibrahim. ''I wanted to resign. I have daughters. I don't want any problems. My
daughters, my son, my wife, all asked me to resign.''

In Luxor on Monday afternoon, the Egyptian authorities organized a news
conference with Ms. Rice and Mr. Aboul Gheit.

''I especially want to thank President Mubarak for receiving me and for spending
so much time with me to talk about the issues of common interest here in the
Middle East,'' Ms. Rice said. ''Obviously the relationship with Egypt is an
important strategic relationship -- one that we value greatly.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mustafa Ibrahim Abdel Hamid, left, at a Wafd Party office.
People are afraid to join the group even though it is sanctioned by the
government. (Photo by Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CORRUPTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ARRESTS (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (72%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (72%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES
(72%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (71%); RULE OF LAW (68%) United States
International Relations; Public Opinion; Freedom and Human Rights; Political
Prisoners; Palestinians

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (93%) Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Michael Slackman

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); ISRAEL (93%); IRAQ (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: Egypt; Iraq; Middle East; Israel; Egypt; Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 28, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canadian Parliament Decides to Let 2 Measures Passed After 9/11 Expire

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN; Christopher Mason contributed reporting from Toronto.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA, Feb. 27


Canada's Parliament voted Tuesday not to extend two measures that were passed as
part of a sweeping package of antiterrorism laws weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks on the United States.

The measures will expire Thursday. One allows the police to arrest people
suspected of preparing to commit an act of terrorism and hold them for 72 hours
without charges, and the other enables courts to compel witnesses to testify at
special hearings similar to grand jury proceedings in the United States.

Neither has ever been used.

The vote took place just days after the Supreme Court struck down a law allowing
the government to detain foreign-born terrorism suspects indefinitely using
secret evidence and without charges while their deportations were being
considered.

But the debate reflected the fractious politics of Canada's Parliament, which is
not controlled by any single party, as much as a national reassessment of
antiterrorism measures.

The Liberal Party was in power when the legislation was passed. But on Tuesday,
with the Conservative Party in power and pushing to extend the two measures, all
but two of the Liberal members present voted against the extension, as
instructed by their new leader, Stephane Dion. That, combined with the no votes
of two smaller opposition parties, ensured the overwhelming defeat of the
Conservatives' hopes.

After the vote, the Conservatives portrayed their opponents as unwilling to
protect national security.

''Any party that doesn't take the national security of Canadians seriously will
never be chosen by Canadians to form the government of Canada,'' Prime Minister
Stephen Harper said.

The harsh words began long before the vote. In the House of Commons last week,
Mr. Harper suggested that the Liberal opposition to the measures stemmed from
the possibility that they could be used to compel a relative of a Liberal Party
member of Parliament to testify at a special hearing to look into the bombing of
an Air India flight in 1985.

A prolonged criminal trial in the deaths of 329 people as a result of that
bombing ended in two acquittals in 2005. Mr. Harper was jeered down before he
could finish his remarks.

Canadians who lost relatives in the 9/11 attacks held a news conference in
Ottawa on Tuesday morning, before the vote, to urge that the provisions be
extended. The laws, said one widow, Cindy Barkway, ''allow law enforcement
officials to prevent terrorism from turning people like you into victims like
us.''

There was some disappointment that the issue of public safety had become
politicized by Liberals and Conservatives alike.

Errol Mendes, who teaches human rights law at the University of Ottawa, said
that without the preventive arrest provision there could be circumstances when
the police would be unable to stop an attack in progress. He said judicial
oversight of the arrests and the investigative court hearings would prevent
human rights abuses.

''It has been incredibly destructive of national security in Canada to make this
area into a partisan issue,'' Professor Mendes said.

Canada has a long history of allowing preventive detention. In 1970, under the
now defunct War Measures Act of 1914, 453 people were jailed without charges
after the kidnapping and killing of a Quebec cabinet minister and the abduction
of a British diplomat. That episode remains controversial throughout the
country, especially in Quebec.

Amnesty International and other human rights groups urged Parliament let the
measures expire. Amnesty argued that conventional criminal laws allowed the
police and courts to stop imminent terrorist acts without jeopardizing civil
liberties, a position largely shared by Mr. Dion.

After the vote, Alex Neve, Amnesty International's Canadian secretary general,
said: ''This by no means should be interpreted or misunderstood that Canada is
somehow going soft on terrorism. What I think this is an affirmation of is that
Canada is increasingly concerned that its approach to terrorism is fully
grounded in respect to fundamental human rights.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prime Minister Stephen Harper was cheered by his party in
Parliament yesterday after a vote rejected extending two antiterrorism measures.
(Photo by Chris Wattie/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); POLITICS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%);
LIBERALISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); WITNESSES (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GRAND JURY (76%); TESTIMONY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); DEPORTATION (74%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (72%);
ACQUITTAL (71%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (50%) Terrorism; Law
and Legislation; Search and Seizure; Self-Incrimination; Terrorism

PERSON: STEPHEN HARPER (89%); STEPHANE DION (58%) Ian Austen

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (93%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (93%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Canada

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Women Are Arrested After Protests Outside Court

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 456 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, March 5


Iranian authorities arrested 33 women on Sunday after protests outside a court
where five of them were being tried for leading a campaign to gain more legal
rights for women, newspapers reported Monday.

The five women were put on trial after they organized a demonstration for
women's rights last June, the ILNA news agency reported. The agency said the
women had been charged with endangering national security, agitating against the
government and taking part in illegal gatherings.

The arrests on Sunday were part of a crackdown against political activity by
women and protests in general since President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad' came to power
in 2005.

Authorities broke up last June's demonstration and arrested 70 people. The five
organizers now on trial are Noushin Ahmadi Khorassani, Parvin Aradalan, Shahla
Entesari, Soosan Tahmassebi and Fariba Davoudi Mohajer.

The five, who have not been in custody, were arrested Sunday after they left the
court. The daily newspaper Etemad Melli reported Monday that all 33 of the women
were taken to the notorious Evin prison, which has the largest number of
political prisoners in the country and where many prisoners say they have been
tortured.

Women have been pursuing two major campaigns since last year. One calls for
authorities to change a law that permits stoning women to death if they are
convicted of adultery. The other is an ambitious project to collect a million
signatures for a petition that calls on authorities to change laws that
discriminate against women.

Iran's laws codify traditions that place little value on a woman's life and give
only slight credence to women's opinions. For instance, a woman's testimony in
court is worth half that of a man and, if a woman is killed, the compensation
due her family is also half that required for a man's death. The laws also deny
women equal rights in divorce, custody and inheritance.

Both campaigns have been publicized worldwide and have drawn support from some
well-known Iranians. Shirin Ebadi, the Iranian Nobel Peace Prize winner, has
supported the campaigns. Zahra Eshraghi, the granddaughter of the founder of
Iran's revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, has signed the petition on
discriminatory laws, the daily newspaper Kayhan wrote Monday.

Human Rights Watch condemned the arrests and called for the women's immediate
release.

''By targeting peaceful advocates, the government is demonstrating its
intolerance for civil action,'' said Sarah Leah Whitson, the head of the group's
Middle East and North Africa division. ''The authorities should listen to
women's rights advocates and work with them to reform discriminatory laws,
instead of persecuting them and perpetuating a system of discrimination.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (93%); ARRESTS (92%); WOMEN (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%);
PETITIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); RIOTS (73%); TESTIMONY (73%); TORTURE (72%); NOBEL PRIZES (66%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (66%); GRANDCHILDREN (63%) Demonstrations and Riots; Freedom and Human
Rights; Women; Law and Legislation

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (74%) Nazila Fathi; Mahmoud (Pres) Ahmadinejad

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (59%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); IRAN (59%)

REGION: Iran; Iran

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The General And the Housewife

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Gen. Pervez Musharraf is facing angry street demonstrations around the country
in the most serious crisis of his presidency -- and that's partly because he
picked a fight with a middle-class housewife who is proving tougher and shrewder
than he is.

This drama is playing out in extraordinary scenes on Pakistani streets: crowds
of roly-poly lawyers in dark suits braving clouds of tear gas to demand that Mr.
Musharraf resign -- or even be tried for treason. It's impossible to know
whether the protests will lead to a democratic revolution that topples Mr.
Musharraf, to a military crackdown, or to a political deal that causes the
protests to fizzle.

And behind it all is the saga of the general and the housewife.

''The nation is ready to rise up; there is a revolution behind me,'' says Amina
Masood Janjua, a mother of three who has emerged as a nemesis of General
Musharraf. Mrs. Janjua says she was a ''very timid person,'' uninvolved in
politics and content to be ''queen of my house.'' But then two years ago, her
husband disappeared, presumably kidnapped by government security agents.

The government has regularly ''disappeared'' people it doesn't like, apparently
keeping them in secret detention centers to be tortured and interrogated for
months or years. Human rights groups count at least 400 such disappearances
since 2002, when Mr. Musharraf began using the war on terror as cover to
eliminate troublesome nationalists, religious activists and human rights
organizers.

Mrs. Janjua's husband, Masood Janjua, may have been picked up because of ties to
a Muslim organization, but there is no indication he had broken any law. Mrs.
Janjua says her family received a phone call from Mr. Musharraf's military
secretary last year promising that her husband would be freed soon. But nothing
happened, and officially the government knows nothing of his whereabouts.

Terrified that her husband was being tortured, Mrs. Janjua began organizing
other family members of the disappeared. They held a public demonstration -- but
the police attacked the group and beat and publicly stripped Mrs. Janjua's
17-year-old son. As the police dragged him off, Mrs. Janjua's 11-year-old
daughter screamed: ''You've taken my father; don't take my brother!'' He was
freed that evening. The aim of the assault presumably was to warn Mrs. Janjua to
be quiet -- just as relatives of other missing people have been warned that
their loved ones will be harmed if they protest or speak to the press.

One of the missing is Safdar Sarki, a Pakistani-American doctor and American
citizen seized a year ago while campaigning for the rights of people in Sindh
Province.

''I was crying today; I was thinking of him,'' his wife, Rukhsana, said by phone
from California. Her voice breaking, she promised that if Pakistan would just
release her husband, she would make him stop fighting for human rights. She
added: ''My sons are asking every day, 'Where is Papa? Where is Papa? ' ''

Likewise: Where is the U.S.? The Bush administration has stuck more solidly with
Mr. Musharraf (''a solid friend'' is the current State Department formulation)
than with its principles. President Bush needs to make clear that the U.S. sides
with Pakistan's democratic future, not its autocratic past.

That future is being shaped by Mrs. Janjua, who sued the government over the
disappearances. To everyone's astonishment, the Pakistani Supreme Court took up
the case and ordered the government to account for those who are missing.

Perhaps partly as a result -- and also to prevent the Supreme Court from
complicating his election-fixing plans -- Mr. Musharraf this month suspended the
chief justice of the Supreme Court. That's what has set off nationwide outrage
and protests.

Ordinary Pakistanis seem increasingly fed up with the president's lies and
thuggery. Mr. Musharraf's contributions to Pakistan are enormous -- he rescued
Pakistan's economy, fostered 7 percent growth rates, promoted education and
nurtured an expanding middle class. But those same accomplishments are now
raising aspirations for genuine democracy rather than the sham he offers.

The risk is that a replacement would be worse: Pakistan has been one of the
world's worst-ruled nations over the last 50 years, and Mr. Musharraf is better
than his predecessors. But if the Pakistani public demands better government,
that is ultimately a bullish sign for Pakistan and a useful warning to other
autocrats.

And maybe the movement will bring Mrs. Janjua and Mrs. Sarki their husbands home
again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (87%); RIOTS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%);
TREASON (75%); LAWYERS (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TERRORISM (64%); RELIGION (64%) Freedom and Human Rights;
Demonstrations and Riots; Judges; Kidnapping; Courts; Security and Warning
Systems; Politics and Government; United States International Relations

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (92%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush; Pervez
(Pres) Musharraf; Amina Masood Janjua; Masood Janjua; Iftikhar Muhammad (Chief
Justice) Chaudhry

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (77%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Pakistan; Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bombing Kills 9 Police Officers in Northern Afghanistan

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 16


A suicide bomber struck a group of police officers in the normally peaceful
north of Afghanistan on Monday, killing nine policemen and wounding 25,
officials said.

''According to eyewitnesses, the suicide bomber was wearing a black turban and
ran toward our policemen, who were exercising on the main road outside their
base, and blew himself up,'' said Muhammad Omar, the governor of Kunduz
Province. No civilians were harmed, he said.

The attack happened just before 9 a.m. outside a district police station in the
city of Kunduz. Northern Afghanistan is generally much more peaceful than the
south and southeast of the country where insurgents are operating, but there has
been a steady trickle of attacks on aid workers and occasionally on NATO troops
stationed in the north.

Kunduz Province suffered one suicide bombing last year, and the police thwarted
two others, said Muhammad Ayub Salangi, the provincial police chief.

The governor said the police had recently caught a man with remote control
equipment who was planning attacks in the area. He added that there was still
some sympathy for the Taliban in the area, which was once the Taliban center of
operations in the north.

Hayatullah Khan, who is believed to be a Taliban commander, claimed
responsibility for the Taliban for the bombing on Monday, Reuters reported. He
also said more bombers were ready to strike. ''They are present in all Afghan
cities and waiting for orders,'' he said.

The attack was the third suicide bombing in Afghanistan in three days. All were
aimed at police officers and security guards and seem to be part of a trend in
recent weeks toward more suicide attacks and roadside bombs, kidnappings and
even drive-by shootings of people working with foreign troops.

While there has been fighting in several provinces, in particular in Helmand in
the south and the border provinces of Zabul and Paktika, the Taliban do not seem
to be staging a conventional offensive so much as mounting smaller individual
attacks aimed at sapping public morale, said Gen. Zaher Azimi, spokesman for the
Defense Ministry.

Also on Monday, the New York-based organization Human Rights Watch published a
study detailing the growing human cost of the Taliban insurgency and the
devastating psychological toll the violence is taking on the population.
Civilian deaths from insurgent attacks skyrocketed in the last 15 months, the
report said.

Attacks by the Taliban and other insurgent groups accounted for nearly 700
deaths, while at least 230 civilians died in operations of the American-led
coalition or NATO. The report labeled some of the Taliban attacks war crimes
because they aimed directly at civilians.

It also said some coalition and NATO operations broke the rules of war. Although
there was no evidence that coalition forces intentionally singled out civilians,
the report said, they have conducted a number of indiscriminate attacks and
failed to take adequate precautions to protect citizens.

Hundreds more civilians suffered serious injuries, including burns, severe
lacerations, broken bones and severed limbs, the report said. Suicide bombings
soared to at least 136 in 2006, from 21 in 2005. Bombings and arson at schools
doubled in 2006.

The violence has continued this year, with 25 armed attacks resulting in
civilian casualties in the first two months of 2007. The attacks, including
suicide bombings, kidnappings and executions, killed at least 52 civilians and
wounded 83 more, the report said.

''Trends are worsening dramatically,'' said Joanne Mariner of Human Rights Watch
during a visit to Kabul. ''Insurgent attacks are clearly increasing and the
number of civilians getting killed is clearly increasing too.''

The kidnapping and killing of aid workers, teachers and government employees,
which the Taliban have often claimed responsibility for, implicates Taliban
leaders in war crimes, Human Rights Watch said. The Taliban say the victims are
spies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A television image showed the bodies of Afghan police officers
being carried away in a truck after a suicide attack in Kunduz yesterday
morning. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (92%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (92%); TALIBAN (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); TRENDS (77%); LAW OF
WAR (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (74%); RELIGION (74%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); ARMED FORCES (74%); SHOOTINGS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (63%);
POLICE FORCES (58%); REMOTE CONTROL DEVICES (53%) Bombs and Explosives

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)
Taliban (Afghan Group); Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Carlotta Gall; Hayatullah Khan; Muhammad (Mullah) Omar

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kunduz (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Political Prisoner Sues in U.S. Court, Saying Yahoo Helped Identify
Dissidents

BYLINE: By MIGUEL HELFT

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 18


A Chinese political prisoner and his wife sued Yahoo in federal court Wednesday,
accusing the company of abetting the commission of torture by helping Chinese
authorities identify political dissidents who were later beaten and imprisoned.

The suit, filed under the Alien Tort Claims Act and the Torture Victims
Protection Act, is believed to be the first of its kind against an Internet
company for its activities in China.

Wang Xiaoning, who according to the suit is serving a 10-year prison sentence in
China; his wife, Yu Ling; and other unnamed defendants seek damages and an
injunction barring Yahoo from identifying dissidents to Chinese authorities.

''I hope to be able to have Yahoo promise that in the future they will stop this
kind of wrongdoing,'' said Ms. Yu, speaking through an interpreter in a
telephone interview from San Francisco.

Yahoo said it had not yet seen the suit, filed in the Federal District Court for
the Northern District of California, and could not comment on the allegations.

''Companies doing business in China are forced to comply with Chinese law,''
said Jim Cullinan, a Yahoo spokesman. When government officials present the
company with a lawful request for information about a Yahoo user, he said,
''Yahoo China will not know whether the demand for information is for a
legitimate criminal investigation or is going to be used to prosecute political
dissidents.''

Several American Internet companies, including Cisco Systems, Google and
Microsoft, have come under fire, with some politicians and human rights groups
accusing them of helping the government monitor and censor the Internet in
China.

But Yahoo has come under particularly sharp criticism. Human rights groups say
that Yahoo has helped identify at least four people, including the journalist
Shi Tao in 2004, who have since been imprisoned for voicing dissent in
cyberspace.

''Our concern is that Yahoo, as far as we know, is continuing this practice,''
said Morton Sklar, executive director of the World Organization for Human Rights
USA and a lawyer for the plaintiffs.

According to the suit, Mr. Wang distributed online several journal articles
calling for democratic reform and a multiparty system in China. He did so
anonymously by posting the articles in a Yahoo Group in 2000 and 2001. The suit
contends that Yahoo HK, a wholly owned Yahoo subsidiary based in Hong Kong,
provided police with information linking Mr. Wang to the postings.

Mr. Cullinan of Yahoo disputed those claims. ''Yahoo HK does not exchange info
with Yahoo China or give information to mainland Chinese security forces,'' he
said. Yahoo transferred its mainland China operations to Alibaba.com in 2005,
and owns a minority stake in that company, which is based in China.

On Sept. 1, 2002, Mr. Wang was arrested by Chinese authorities, according to the
suit, which says he was later kicked and beaten and was detained until September
2003, when he was sentenced to 10 years.

The suit says that the Chinese court's judgment noted that Yahoo HK told
investigators that the e-mail account used to disseminate the postings belonged
to Mr. Wang.

The Alien Tort Claims Act, enacted in 1789, lets foreigners sue in American
courts for fundamental violations of international law, like torture and
genocide. It has been used in recent years to sue people who have violated basic
human rights.

But legal specialists say that Mr. Wang and Ms. Yu face significant hurdles.

Allen S. Weiner, a professor of international law at Stanford, said it was
unclear whether the law would apply to a company like Yahoo, which is only
accused of having contributed indirectly to Mr. Wang's predicament. Further,
Professor Weiner said that Yahoo might be excused by courts by virtue of its
obligation to comply with Chinese law.

The Torture Victims Protection Act, which was enacted in 1991, allows
plaintiffs, including foreign citizens, to file civil suits in the United
States. Under either law, the plaintiffs would have to prove that Mr. Wang was
subject to torture, Professor Weiner said.

''The plaintiffs in this case have a lot of barriers to overcome,'' he said.
Suit Against Google Stands

SAN FRANCISCO, April 18 (Reuters) -- A federal judge refused on Wednesday to
dismiss a lawsuit contending that Google's AdWords program abuses trademarks.

Judge Jeremy D. Fogel ruled that the public had an interest in whether AdWords,
the company's popular pay-per-click advertising system, violated trademark law.

American Blind and Wallpaper Factory, the top American retailer of window
blinds, charged that Google had abused trademarks by allowing rivals of a
company to buy ads that appear when users search the Web for information on its
business.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNET & WWW
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (89%); SENTENCING
(89%); POLITICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PRISONS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); COMPANY STRUCTURES &
OWNERSHIP (78%); TORTS (78%); CENSORSHIP (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
COMPUTER & INTERNET LAW (77%); LAWYERS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); DAMAGES
(73%); ARRESTS (73%); INJUNCTIONS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Suits and Litigation; Political Prisoners; Politics and
Government; Torture; Computers and the Internet; Law and Legislation

COMPANY: YAHOO! INC (95%); GOOGLE INC (91%); CISCO SYSTEMS INC (57%);
ALIBABA.COM LTD (50%)

ORGANIZATION: Yahoo Inc

TICKER: YHOO (NASDAQ) (95%); GOOG (NASDAQ) (91%); CSCO (NASDAQ) (57%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (95%); NAICS519130 INTERNET
PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (95%); NAICS517110 WIRED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (95%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN
(95%); NAICS334210 TELEPHONE APPARATUS MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3661 TELEPHONE &
TELEGRAPH APPARATUS (57%); NAICS522320 FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS PROCESSING,
RESERVE & CLEARINGHOUSE ACTIVITIES (50%); NAICS454112 ELECTRONIC AUCTIONS (50%);
NAICS454111 ELECTRONIC SHOPPING (50%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (50%)

PERSON: Wang Xiaoning; Yu Ling; Miguel Helft; Jim Cullinan

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); HONG KONG (79%)

REGION: China; China; China

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Ethiopian Desert, Fear and Cries of Army Brutality

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Will Connors contributed reporting from Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2216 words

DATELINE: IN THE OGADEN DESERT, Ethiopia


The rebels march 300 strong across the crunchy earth, young men with dreadlocks
and AK-47s slung over their shoulders.

Often when they pass through a village, the entire village lines up, one sunken
cheekbone to the next, to squint at them.

''May God bring you victory,'' one woman whispered.

This is the Ogaden, a spindle-legged corner of Ethiopia that the urbane
officials in Addis Ababa, the capital, would rather outsiders never see. It is
the epicenter of a separatist war pitting impoverished nomads against one of the
biggest armies in Africa.

What goes on here seems to be starkly different from the carefully constructed
up-and-coming image that Ethiopia -- a country that the United States
increasingly relies on to fight militant Islam in the Horn of Africa -- tries to
project.

In village after village, people said they had been brutalized by government
troops. They described a widespread and longstanding reign of terror, with
Ethiopian soldiers gang-raping women, burning down huts and killing civilians at
will.

It is the same military that the American government helps train and equip --
and provides with prized intelligence. The two nations have been allies for
years, but recently they have grown especially close, teaming up last winter to
oust an Islamic movement that controlled much of Somalia and rid the region of a
potential terrorist threat.

The Bush administration, particularly the military, considers Ethiopia its best
bet in the volatile Horn -- which, with Sudan, Somalia and Eritrea, is fast
becoming intensely violent, virulently anti-American and an incubator for
terrorism.

But an emerging concern for American officials is the way that the Ethiopian
military operates inside its own borders, especially in war zones like the
Ogaden.

Anab, a 40-year-old camel herder who was too frightened, like many others, to
give her last name, said soldiers took her to a police station, put her in a
cell and twisted her nipples with pliers. She said government security forces
routinely rounded up young women under the pretext that they were rebel
supporters so they could bring them to jail and rape them.

''Me, I am old,'' she said, ''but they raped me, too.''

Moualin, a rheumy-eyed elder, said Ethiopian troops stormed his village,
Sasabene, in January looking for rebels and burned much of it down. ''They hit
us in the face with the hardest part of their guns,'' he said.

The villagers said the abuses had intensified since April, when the rebels
attacked a Chinese-run oil field, killing nine Chinese workers and more than 60
Ethiopian soldiers and employees. The Ethiopian government has vowed to crush
the rebels but rejects all claims that it abuses civilians.

''Our soldiers are not allowed to do these kinds of things,'' said Nur Abdi
Mohammed, a government spokesman. ''This is only propaganda and cannot be
justified. If a government soldier did this type of thing they would be brought
before the courts.''

Even so, the State Department, the European Parliament and many human rights
groups, mostly outside Ethiopia, have cited thousands of cases of torture,
arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings -- enough to raise questions in
Congress about American support of the Ethiopian government.

''This is a country that is abusing its own people and has no respect for
democracy,'' said Representative Donald M. Payne, Democrat of New Jersey and
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Africa and global health.

''We've not only looked the other way but we've pushed them to intrude in other
sovereign nations,'' he added, referring to the satellite images and other
strategic help the American military gave Ethiopia in December, when thousands
of Ethiopian troops poured into Somalia and overthrew the Islamist leadership.

According to Georgette Gagnon, deputy director for the Africa division of Human
Rights Watch, Ethiopia is one of the most repressive countries in Africa.

''What the Ethiopian security forces are doing,'' she said, ''may amount to
crimes against humanity.''

Human Rights Watch issued a report in 2005 that documented a rampage by
government troops against members of the Anuak, a minority tribe in western
Ethiopia, in which soldiers ransacked homes, beat villagers to death with iron
bars and in one case, according to a witness, tied up a prisoner and ran over
him with a military truck.

After the report came out, the researcher who wrote it was banned by the
Ethiopian government from returning to the country. Similarly, three New York
Times journalists who visited the Ogaden to cover this story were imprisoned for
five days and had all their equipment confiscated before being released without
charges.  Ethiopia's Tiananmen Square

In many ways, Ethiopia has a lot going for it these days: new buildings, new
roads, low crime and a booming trade in cut flowers and coffee. It is the second
most populous country in sub-Saharan Africa, behind Nigeria, with 77 million
people.

Its leaders, many whom were once rebels themselves, from a neglected patch of
northern Ethiopia, are widely known as some of the savviest officials on the
continent. They had promised to let some air into a very stultified political
system during the national elections of 2005, which were billed as a milestone
on the road to democracy.

Instead, they turned into Ethiopia's version of Tiananmen Square. With the
opposition poised to win a record number of seats in Parliament, the government
cracked down brutally, opening fire on demonstrators, rounding up tens of
thousands of opposition supporters and students and leveling charges of treason
and even attempted to kill top opposition leaders, including the man elected
mayor of Addis Ababa.

Many opposition members are now in jail or in exile. The rest seem demoralized.

''There are no real steps toward democracy,'' said Merera Gudina, vice president
of the United Ethiopian Democratic Forces, a leading opposition party. ''No real
steps toward opening up space, no real steps toward ending repression.''

Ethiopian officials have routinely dismissed such complaints, accusing political
protesters of stoking civil unrest and poking their finger into a well-known
sore spot. Ethiopia has always had an authoritarian streak. This is a country,
after all, where until the 1970s rulers claimed to be direct descendants of King
Solomon. It is big, poor, famine-stricken, about half-Christian and half-Muslim,
surrounded by hostile enemies and full of heavily armed separatist factions. As
one high-ranking Ethiopian official put it, ''This country has never been easy
to rule.''

That has certainly been true for the Ogaden desert, a huge, dagger-shaped chunk
of territory between the highlands of Ethiopia and the border of Somalia. The
people here are mostly ethnic Somalis, and they have been chafing against
Ethiopian rule since 1897, when the British ceded their claims to the area.

The colonial officials did not think the Ogaden was worth much. They saw thorny
hills and thirsty people. Even today, it is still like that. What passes for a
town is a huddle of bubble-shaped huts, the movable homes of camel-thwacking
nomads who somehow survive out here. For roads, picture Tonka truck tracks
running through a sandbox. The primary elements in this world are skin and bone
and sun and rock. And guns. Loads of them.

Camel herders carry rifles to protect their animals. Young women carry pistols
to protect their bodies. And then there is the Ogaden National Liberation Front,
the machine-gun-toting rebels fighting for control of this desiccated wasteland.
Rebels Live Off the Land

Lion. Radio. Fearless. Peacock. Most of the men have nicknames that conceal
their real identities. Peacock, who spoke some English, served as a guide. He
shared the bitter little plums the soldiers pick from thorn bushes -- ''Ogaden
chocolate,'' he called them. He showed the way to gently skim water from the top
of a mud puddle to minimize the amount of dirt that ends up in your stomach --
even in the rainy season this is all there is to drink.

He pointed out the anthills, the coming storm clouds, the especially ruthless
thorn trees and even a graveyard that stood incongruously in the middle of the
desert. The graves -- crude pyramids of stones -- were from the war in 1977-78,
when Somalia tried, disastrously, to pry the Ogaden out of Ethiopia's hands and
lost thousands of men. ''It's up to us now,'' Peacock said.

Peacock was typical of the rebels. He was driven by anger. He said Ethiopian
soldiers hanged his mother, raped his sister and beat his father. ''I know, it's
hard to believe,'' he said. ''But it's true.''

He had the hunch of a broken man and a voice that seemed far too tired for his
28 years. ''It's not that I like living in the bush,'' he said. ''But I have
nowhere else to go.''

The armed resistance began in 1994, after the Ogaden National Liberation Front,
then a political organization, broached the idea of splitting off from Ethiopia.
The central government responded by imprisoning Ogadeni leaders, and according
to academics and human rights groups, assassinating others. The Ogaden is part
of the Somali National Regional State, one of nine ethnic-based states within
Ethiopia's unusual ethnic-based federal system. On paper, all states have the
right to secede, if they follow the proper procedures. But it seemed that the
government feared that if the Somalis broke away, so too would the Oromos, the
Afar and many other ethnic groups pining for a country of their own.

The Ethiopian government calls the Ogaden rebels terrorists and says they are
armed and trained by Eritrea, Ethiopia's neighbor and bitter enemy. One of the
reasons Ethiopia decided to invade Somalia was to prevent the rebels from using
it as a base.

The government blames them for a string of recent bombings and assassinations
and says they often single out rival clan members. Ethiopian officials have been
pressuring the State Department to add the Ogaden National Liberation Front to
its list of designated foreign terrorist organizations. Until recently, American
officials refused, saying the rebels had not threatened civilians or American
interests.

''But after the oil field attack in April,'' said one American official who
spoke on the condition of anonymity, ''we are reassessing that.''

American policy toward Ethiopia seems to be in flux. Administration officials
are trying to increase the amount of nonhumanitarian aid to Ethiopia to $481
million next year, from $284 million this year. But key Democrats in Congress,
including Mr. Payne, are questioning this, saying that because of Ethiopia's
human rights record, it is time to stop writing the country a blank check.

In April, European Commission officials began investigating Ethiopia for war
crimes in connection to hundreds of Somali civilians killed by Ethiopian troops
during heavy fighting in Mogadishu, Somalia's capital.  Women Are Suffering the
Most

In the Ogaden, it is not clear how many people are dying. The vast area is
essentially a no-go zone for most human rights workers and journalists and where
the Ethiopian military, by its own admission, is waging an intense
counterinsurgency campaign.

The violence has been particularly acute against women, villagers said, and many
have recently fled.

Asma, 19, who now lives in neighboring Somaliland, said she was stuck in an
underground cell for more than six months last year, raped and tortured. ''They
beat me on the feet and breasts,'' she said. She was freed only after her father
paid the soldiers ransom, she said, though she did not know how much.

Ambaro, 25, now living in Addis Ababa, said she was gang-raped by five Ethiopian
soldiers in January near the town of Fik. She said troops came to her village
every night to pluck another young woman.

''I'm in pain now, all over my body,'' she said. '' I'm worried that I'll become
crazy because of what happened.''

Many Ogaden villagers said that when they tried to bring up abuses with clan
chiefs or local authorities, they were told it was better to keep quiet.

The rebels said thats was precisely why they attacked the Chinese oil field: to
get publicity for their cause and the plight of their region (and to discourage
foreign companies from exploiting local resources). According to them, they
strike freely in the Ogaden all the time, ambushing military convoys and raiding
police stations.

Mr. Mohammed, the government spokesman, denied that, saying the rebels ''will
not confront Ethiopian military forces because they are not well trained.''

Expert or not, they are determined. They march for hours powered by a few
handfuls of rice. They travel extremely light, carrying only their guns, two
clips of bullets, a grenade and a tarp. They brag about how many Ethiopians they
have killed, and every piece of their camouflage, they say, is pulled off dead
soldiers. They joke about slaughtering Ethiopian troops the same way they
slaughter goats.

Their morale seems high, especially for men who sleep in the dirt every night.
Their throats are constantly dry, but they like to sing.

''A camel is delivering a baby today and the milk of the camel is coming,'' goes
one campfire song. ''Who is the owner of this land?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Anab, a 40-year-old camel herder, said Ethiopian soldiers took
her to a police station, put her in a cell and twisted her nipples with pliers.
Members of the rebel group greeted one another during a 10-day march. The group
first broached the idea of splitting from Ethiopia in 1994.
Ogaden National Liberation Front members in the Ogaden desert. Many people in
the region resist Ethiopia's rule. (Photo by Video images by Courtenay Morris
for The New York Times)(pg. A8)
 WITH REBEL FORCES -- Members of the Ogaden National Liberation Front, who are
fighting the Ethiopian Army in a separatist war in the desert. (Photo by Video
image by Courtenay Morris for The New York Times)(pg. A1)   Map of Ethiopia
highlighting Ogaden Desert: In the Ogaden desert, villagers have accused the
army of brutalizing them. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(77%); RELIGION (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%);
POLICE FORCES (71%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%)

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (92%)

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (92%); SOMALIA (92%); CHINA
(79%); ERITREA (79%); SUDAN (79%); EASTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The China Puzzle

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 365 words


The ''Chinese miracle'' has been the biggest economic story for several years
now, a tale of a nation rising from the ashes of a Stalinist command economy to
become the world's premier trading partner. But China reminds us with
distressing regularity that the progress has been selective.

The latest reminders are reports of slave labor in Chinese factories and the
discovery that some of the popular Thomas the Tank Engine toys manufactured in
China have lead in their paint. Before that, it was the contaminated dog food,
the stubborn support of Sudan for its oil, the regular reports of human rights
abuses, the huge economic disparities between city and country, the controls on
the media.

Why rehearse these faults now? Because governments and companies tend to become
so seduced or intimidated by China that they won't hold it to high standards of
human rights and business ethics.

Western companies have been so anxious to transfer manufacturing to China's
cheap factories that they have been happy to close their eyes to what else goes
on over there -- just as Google or Yahoo were happy to assist in repressing
information to get a toe into the Chinese market, or as Washington and other
Western capitals compete in trying to please visiting Chinese leaders. The
ultimate source of China's failings is a Communist Party that has jettisoned
worn-out Marxist economic theories but clings to its authoritarian rule on all
other fronts, creating a dangerously unbalanced behemoth.

This is not an argument against trading with or investing in China.
Globalization can be a potent force for democratization. But human rights
violations cannot be relegated to untouchable internal affairs. Just as the
world has not hesitated, rightly, to lambaste the United States over issues like
Guantanamo Bay, it should not be shy about systematic and widespread violations
of human rights in China.

China's unreformed political system fosters corruption and an undue focus on
short-term economic gains, which will lead to more internal inequities and
injustices and more tainted exports. A politically reformed China would be an
even more formidable economic power, but a less destructive one.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TOYS & GAMES MFG
(76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); ETHICS (74%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (73%);
GLOBALIZATION (70%); CORRUPTION (70%); LEAD PAINT (70%); BUSINESS ETHICS (69%);
BUSINESS ETHICS & CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP (69%)

COMPANY: GOOGLE INC (55%)

TICKER: GOOG (NASDAQ) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(55%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Year After Massacre of Aid Workers, Sri Lanka Still Asks Who, When and Why?

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1525 words

DATELINE: MUTUR, Sri Lanka


The victims had been ordered to lie face down, arms outstretched, all in a row
in the front yard of a  white bungalow. Two lay next to a parked van,
interrupted perhaps in a bid to escape.

Most of the dead wore T-shirts bearing the name of the aid group that employed
them: the Paris-based Action Contre La Faim,    or Action Against Hunger.

The bungalow was their local office, where they had huddled for at least three
days last August, waiting to be rescued as soldiers and rebels battled for
control of this town.

By the time help arrived, their bodies were decomposing. Photographs show crows
standing witness on a plastic patio chair.

The massacre of the 17 was among the worst attacks  aimed  at aid workers in any
conflict anywhere in recent years, approaching the toll in  the bombing of the
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003.

But nearly a year after the massacre, the most basic questions about the
killings remain unresolved.

Sri Lanka's government, enmeshed again in a bitter civil war and anxious to keep
international human rights monitors out of the country, is facing rising
condemnation from groups here and abroad who say the investigation has been
wanting because of the possibility that its security forces were involved.

They point to serious gaps, including inconsistencies in ballistics evidence
that could implicate Sri Lankan soldiers.

The International Commission of Jurists, a Geneva-based human rights group
composed of lawyers, released a report in April identifying ''a disturbing lack
of impartiality, transparency and effectiveness of the investigation.''

Predictably, the rivals in the fighting, the Sinhalese-dominated   state and the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, have traded blame for the massacre, one in a
pattern of extrajudicial killings that have become a regular feature of the war.
Each  side says the aid workers were killed when the other party held Mutur;
exactly when they were killed, and who was in charge then,  is  the major
mystery.

[In the latest assault on aid workers, the bodies of two Sri Lankan Red Cross
Society staff members were found in early June in a suburb of the capital,
Colombo. They were picked up for questioning the day before by men who
identified themselves as police officers.]

The massacre here occurred at a turning point in the war, as government troops
and Tamil Tiger rebels clashed for control of the east. By Aug. 1, the battle
had reached Mutur, a small town that was a tricky place.

Located across the bay from Trincomalee, it had long been under government
control, but was encircled by rebel-held villages.

Its population was mixed, with Tamils and Muslims living with each other
alongside hundreds of largely Sinhalese soldiers.

Trickier still for the aid group was the fact that all its workers were Sri
Lankan nationals from Trincomalee, an hour away by ferry, and strangers to the
town. And all were Tamil, except one man, a Muslim.

Foreigners can often shield national staff from harassment and suspicion from
the warring parties. But that week, with Mutur already girding for trouble,
local staff members were sent out alone. Officials from Action Against Hunger
said they could not clarify why.

As the Sinhalese military fought to flush out rebel bases nearby, the Tamil
Tigers stormed the town, by their account, around 12:30 p.m. Tuesday.

That evening, from besieged Mutur, one of the aid workers, Sivapragasam Romila,
25, called a neighbor in Trincomalee; her own family did not have a phone. Her
18-year-old sister, Noilen,  ran next door to answer the call. It was only then
that she learned that her sister was even in Mutur.

Romila  had gone off to work that morning at the aid group's office in
Trincomalee and later, unknown to her family, had taken the ferry to Mutur,
which she visited frequently in her work as a hygiene promoter for the group.

Noilen  said she could hear the shelling on the phone, louder than anything she
had heard before. ''Don't tell mother, but I'm afraid,'' she said Romila had
told her.

Noilen waited anxiously for two days for more news. Then Romila called again.
She told Noilen that the aid group was trying to get them out. She said they
were running out of food.

Their instructions to the Mutur group were unequivocal: remain in the house and
wear the agency T-shirts, call in to the Trincomalee radio room every hour. Help
would be on the way.

Officials from Action Against Hunger said efforts to retrieve the workers were
stymied by soldiers, who blocked the one long road that loops through marsh and
jungle from Trincomalee to Mutur. The fighting had prevented the ferry from
running.

In interviews, the officials  insisted that the decision to instruct their
employees to stay put was the right one. They pointed out that a church, where
civilians had sought shelter that week, had been shelled, killing more than a
dozen people.

''It's easy to say afterwards they should have left,'' Francois Danel, the
group's executive in Paris, said by telephone. ''Our decision was for them to
stay. It's in our guidelines.''

By the morning of Friday, Aug. 4, with food and water running out, many of the
town's residents had fled.

At 6:15 a.m. Friday, the aid office in Trincomalee received a final radio call.
What was said, including whether the group wanted to leave Mutur with the other
civilians, remains unclear. The group said the conversation was not recorded on
the radio log, though it would not share its records.

An autopsy did not determine  the exact time of death. The Sri Lankan court
hearing the case concluded that all 17 were killed early the same morning.

When the security forces reclaimed Mutur is disputed. The rebels contend they
cleared out shortly after midnight on Thursday after urging the aid workers to
be careful, a contention that is impossible to verify. The military has made
contradictory statements about when it took control.

Firzan Hashim, the deputy executive director of the Consortium of Humanitarian
Agencies, an umbrella group based in Colombo, reached Mutur on Sunday afternoon.
By then, no one was on the narrow road.

The bungalow used by the aid group had been ransacked. A rotten stench filled
the air. The aid workers had been shot at such close range, he said, that the
bullets had burned muscle as they entered.

The first serious autopsy, last October, showed that nearly all had been shot in
the head, two in the neck.

The evidence presented in March to the criminal court indicated that the bullets
used were from automatic rifles,  7.62  millimeter, ammunition used by each side
in the war.

But that evidence was incomplete. Malcolm J. Dodd, an Australian forensic
pathologist invited by the government to observe the autopsy, recorded seeing
something else. From Sivapragasam Romila's skull a ''minimally deformed'' 5.56
millimeter  projectile was retrieved, he wrote in a 64-page report. A 7.62
millimeter bullet was enmeshed in her hair.

The 5.56 millimeter  bullet is used in American-made M-16 rifles,  carried by
some members of Sri Lankan security forces, though such a weapon could just as
easily have been stolen by the rebels or someone else. It is a mystery why that
evidence was only belatedly revealed to the court.

The government, apparently to deflect calls for an international human rights
mission, has appointed a panel to conduct an independent investigation of the
massacre and several other prominent  human rights crimes.

The inquiry is separate from the criminal case, and it has not satisfied many
here or abroad. The Center for Policy Alternatives, a Colombo-based advocacy
group, said the official commission was no substitute for an international
mission.

[In a statement on June 11, the International Independent Group of Eminent
Persons,  a government-appointed panel called in to observe the work of the
presidential commission, said the measures taken by the commission ''do not
satisfy international norms and standards.'']

The uncertainties surrounding the investigations have only compounded the
mourning of the victims' families.

The last time Ganesh  Sivaneshwari  heard from her daughter, Kavitha, 27, was
Thursday night, Aug. 3. Kavitha, also a hygiene promoter,  had taken the Tuesday
morning ferry to the aid office in Mutur.

Her father, Selaiah Ganesh, 54, a driver for Action Against Hunger, was already
there.

It gave Mrs. Ganesh strength that week, knowing that her husband and daughter
were together. She trusted her husband's judgment. He was able and well
connected, she said, and he would know how to keep everyone safe or get them
out.

What is left of father and daughter  are pictures on the family altar.  On one
afternoon, Mrs. Ganesh sat on the unswept floor and wept.

Her husband's death has  deepened her fear. Only reluctantly does she allow her
son Gajan to work, so the family can eat. She has sent another son  out of the
country.

Without Selaiah Ganesh, they no longer know how to keep safe in the madness of
this war.

''If my father were here, I wouldn't be afraid,''  Gajan, 24, said. ''I am
afraid now.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The killings at Mutur occurred at a turning point in a civil
war. The New York Times  Sivapragasam Romila, one of  17 aid workers massacred
in Mutur, in a photo held by her sister, Noilen. Noilen recalled hearing loud
shelling in a phone call that day as Romila said, ''Don't tell mother, but I'm
afraid.'' J. (Photograph by Adam Huggins for The New York Times)  Map of Sri
Lanka

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FOOD CHARITIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS (75%);
CIVIL WAR (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); WITNESSES (74%); WORKPLACE
VIOLENCE (74%); FORENSICS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(72%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: ACTION AGAINST HUNGER (83%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION OF JURISTS (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Year After Massacre of Aid Workers, Sri Lanka Still Asks Who, When and Why?

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1525 words

DATELINE: MUTUR, Sri Lanka


The victims had been ordered to lie face down, arms outstretched, all in a row
in the front yard of a  white bungalow. Two lay next to a parked van,
interrupted perhaps in a bid to escape.

Most of the dead wore T-shirts bearing the name of the aid group that employed
them: the Paris-based Action Contre La Faim,    or Action Against Hunger.

The bungalow was their local office, where they had huddled for at least three
days last August, waiting to be rescued as soldiers and rebels battled for
control of this town.

By the time help arrived, their bodies were decomposing. Photographs show crows
standing witness on a plastic patio chair.

The massacre of the 17 was among the worst attacks  aimed  at aid workers in any
conflict anywhere in recent years, approaching the toll in  the bombing of the
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003.

But nearly a year after the massacre, the most basic questions about the
killings remain unresolved.

Sri Lanka's government, enmeshed again in a bitter civil war and anxious to keep
international human rights monitors out of the country, is facing rising
condemnation from groups here and abroad who say the investigation has been
wanting because of the possibility that its security forces were involved.

They point to serious gaps, including inconsistencies in ballistics evidence
that could implicate Sri Lankan soldiers.

The International Commission of Jurists, a Geneva-based human rights group
composed of lawyers, released a report in April identifying ''a disturbing lack
of impartiality, transparency and effectiveness of the investigation.''

Predictably, the rivals in the fighting, the Sinhalese-dominated   state and the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, have traded blame for the massacre, one in a
pattern of extrajudicial killings that have become a regular feature of the war.
Each  side says the aid workers were killed when the other party held Mutur;
exactly when they were killed, and who was in charge then,  is  the major
mystery.

[In the latest assault on aid workers, the bodies of two Sri Lankan Red Cross
Society staff members were found in early June in a suburb of the capital,
Colombo. They were picked up for questioning the day before by men who
identified themselves as police officers.]

The massacre here occurred at a turning point in the war, as government troops
and Tamil Tiger rebels clashed for control of the east. By Aug. 1, the battle
had reached Mutur, a small town that was a tricky place.

Located across the bay from Trincomalee, it had long been under government
control, but was encircled by rebel-held villages.

Its population was mixed, with Tamils and Muslims living with each other
alongside hundreds of largely Sinhalese soldiers.

Trickier still for the aid group was the fact that all its workers were Sri
Lankan nationals from Trincomalee, an hour away by ferry, and strangers to the
town. And all were Tamil, except one man, a Muslim.

Foreigners can often shield national staff from harassment and suspicion from
the warring parties. But that week, with Mutur already girding for trouble,
local staff members were sent out alone. Officials from Action Against Hunger
said they could not clarify why.

As the Sinhalese military fought to flush out rebel bases nearby, the Tamil
Tigers stormed the town, by their account, around 12:30 p.m. Tuesday.

That evening, from besieged Mutur, one of the aid workers, Sivapragasam Romila,
25, called a neighbor in Trincomalee; her own family did not have a phone. Her
18-year-old sister, Noilen,  ran next door to answer the call. It was only then
that she learned that her sister was even in Mutur.

Romila  had gone off to work that morning at the aid group's office in
Trincomalee and later, unknown to her family, had taken the ferry to Mutur,
which she visited frequently in her work as a hygiene promoter for the group.

Noilen  said she could hear the shelling on the phone, louder than anything she
had heard before. ''Don't tell mother, but I'm afraid,'' she said Romila had
told her.

Noilen waited anxiously for two days for more news. Then Romila called again.
She told Noilen that the aid group was trying to get them out. She said they
were running out of food.

Their instructions to the Mutur group were unequivocal: remain in the house and
wear the agency T-shirts, call in to the Trincomalee radio room every hour. Help
would be on the way.

Officials from Action Against Hunger said efforts to retrieve the workers were
stymied by soldiers, who blocked the one long road that loops through marsh and
jungle from Trincomalee to Mutur. The fighting had prevented the ferry from
running.

In interviews, the officials  insisted that the decision to instruct their
employees to stay put was the right one. They pointed out that a church, where
civilians had sought shelter that week, had been shelled, killing more than a
dozen people.

''It's easy to say afterwards they should have left,'' Francois Danel, the
group's executive in Paris, said by telephone. ''Our decision was for them to
stay. It's in our guidelines.''

By the morning of Friday, Aug. 4, with food and water running out, many of the
town's residents had fled.

At 6:15 a.m. Friday, the aid office in Trincomalee received a final radio call.
What was said, including whether the group wanted to leave Mutur with the other
civilians, remains unclear. The group said the conversation was not recorded on
the radio log, though it would not share its records.

An autopsy did not determine  the exact time of death. The Sri Lankan court
hearing the case concluded that all 17 were killed early the same morning.

When the security forces reclaimed Mutur is disputed. The rebels contend they
cleared out shortly after midnight on Thursday after urging the aid workers to
be careful, a contention that is impossible to verify. The military has made
contradictory statements about when it took control.

Firzan Hashim, the deputy executive director of the Consortium of Humanitarian
Agencies, an umbrella group based in Colombo, reached Mutur on Sunday afternoon.
By then, no one was on the narrow road.

The bungalow used by the aid group had been ransacked. A rotten stench filled
the air. The aid workers had been shot at such close range, he said, that the
bullets had burned muscle as they entered.

The first serious autopsy, last October, showed that nearly all had been shot in
the head, two in the neck.

The evidence presented in March to the criminal court indicated that the bullets
used were from automatic rifles,  7.62  millimeter, ammunition used by each side
in the war.

But that evidence was incomplete. Malcolm J. Dodd, an Australian forensic
pathologist invited by the government to observe the autopsy, recorded seeing
something else. From Sivapragasam Romila's skull a ''minimally deformed'' 5.56
millimeter  projectile was retrieved, he wrote in a 64-page report. A 7.62
millimeter bullet was enmeshed in her hair.

The 5.56 millimeter  bullet is used in American-made M-16 rifles,  carried by
some members of Sri Lankan security forces, though such a weapon could just as
easily have been stolen by the rebels or someone else. It is a mystery why that
evidence was only belatedly revealed to the court.

The government, apparently to deflect calls for an international human rights
mission, has appointed a panel to conduct an independent investigation of the
massacre and several other prominent  human rights crimes.

The inquiry is separate from the criminal case, and it has not satisfied many
here or abroad. The Center for Policy Alternatives, a Colombo-based advocacy
group, said the official commission was no substitute for an international
mission.

[In a statement on June 11, the International Independent Group of Eminent
Persons,  a government-appointed panel called in to observe the work of the
presidential commission, said the measures taken by the commission ''do not
satisfy international norms and standards.'']

The uncertainties surrounding the investigations have only compounded the
mourning of the victims' families.

The last time Ganesh  Sivaneshwari  heard from her daughter, Kavitha, 27, was
Thursday night, Aug. 3. Kavitha, also a hygiene promoter,  had taken the Tuesday
morning ferry to the aid office in Mutur.

Her father, Selaiah Ganesh, 54, a driver for Action Against Hunger, was already
there.

It gave Mrs. Ganesh strength that week, knowing that her husband and daughter
were together. She trusted her husband's judgment. He was able and well
connected, she said, and he would know how to keep everyone safe or get them
out.

What is left of father and daughter  are pictures on the family altar.  On one
afternoon, Mrs. Ganesh sat on the unswept floor and wept.

Her husband's death has  deepened her fear. Only reluctantly does she allow her
son Gajan to work, so the family can eat. She has sent another son  out of the
country.

Without Selaiah Ganesh, they no longer know how to keep safe in the madness of
this war.

''If my father were here, I wouldn't be afraid,''  Gajan, 24, said. ''I am
afraid now.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The killings at Mutur occurred at a turning point in a civil
war. The New York Times  Sivapragasam Romila, one of  17 aid workers massacred
in Mutur, in a photo held by her sister, Noilen. Noilen recalled hearing loud
shelling in a phone call that day as Romila said, ''Don't tell mother, but I'm
afraid.'' J. (Photograph by Adam Huggins for The New York Times)  Map of Sri
Lanka

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FOOD CHARITIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS (75%);
CIVIL WAR (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); WITNESSES (74%); WORKPLACE
VIOLENCE (74%); FORENSICS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(72%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: ACTION AGAINST HUNGER (83%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION OF JURISTS (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Sri Lanka: Report Accuses Government Of Collusion In Child
Soldiers

BYLINE: By SHIMALI SENANAYAKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 113 words


Human Rights Watch accused the government of colluding with Karuna, a renegade
faction of the Tamil Tiger rebels, in rounding up children to fight against
their former comrades. While the Tigers have long been accused of conscripting
child soldiers, the rights group said the government was implicated in some of
the same abuse by using the renegade group as a ''proxy force.'' The government
denied both charges. Its report, based on interviews with parents and children,
said that Karuna operated with impunity in government-controlled areas and that
its abductions of hundreds of boys and young men were carried out in areas with
a heavy military presence.   SHIMALI SENANAYAKE

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%) Children and Youth

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%)
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam; Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Shimali Senanayake

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Sri Lanka

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeing What We Want to See in Qaddafi

BYLINE: By Hisham Matar.

Hisham Matar is the author of ''In the Country of Men,'' a novel.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: PARIS


SINCE 2003, Libyan diplomats have been hard at work convincing the West that
Libya is no longer interested in amassing weapons of mass destruction, blowing
up Western airplanes or covertly financing armed movements abroad. Presenting
this new face has been largely effective: sanctions, in place since 1982, have
been lifted; Libya has been removed from the United States roster of terrorist
nations; and the list of international trade agreements continues to grow.

As part of this public relations drive, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and his
officials have been keen to reassure Libyan critics that it is now safe to
return to Libya. Unsurprisingly, the vast majority of the hundreds of thousands
of exiled Libyans have not returned. However, one did: Idrees Boufayed, a doctor
living and working in Switzerland. On Sept. 30, 2006 he returned to Libya for
the first time in 16 years. And on Nov. 5, he disappeared.

Throughout its 37-year rule, the Qaddafi government has found as many reasons to
arrest its citizens as Libyans have found to abandon their country. Thousands of
critics of the Qaddafi regime, inside and outside Libya, have either disappeared
or been assassinated. My father, the political dissident Jaballa Matar,
disappeared from his home in Cairo in March 1990. We still do not know whether
he is alive or dead.

Astonishingly, on Dec. 29 -- 55 days after his arrest -- Dr. Boufayed was
released. The Libyan authorities offered no explanation for his detention. And
Dr. Boufayed, who had been a regular contributor to dissident Web sites, has
remained uncharacteristically silent ever since. This change in behavior is not
unusual: almost all political dissidents fortunate enough to be released have
given up their criticism of the regime. The machinery of Colonel Qaddafi's
government is as effective as ever.

Now that the United States has incorporated the Libyan regime into its so-called
war on terrorism, it is difficult to see what political pressure it can exert on
the Libyan government to reform. Western governments have had the power to
effect change in Libya only as long as the dictator's government has hungered
for the West's acceptance. The short-sighted paranoia with which the war on
terrorism has been managed has weakened any moral advantage the United States
might once have had.

The cards surrendered were hugely undervalued: the United States could have
compelled the Libyan dictatorship to do much more than just hand over its
outdated weapons of mass destruction and compensate the families of the victims
of the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, with $2.7 billion
-- a sum that would be earned back in trade deals during the first week after
sanctions were lifted.

Although America has highlighted the issue of human rights in its negotiations
with Libya, none of the countries that now profit from a close association with
the Libyan leadership has demanded the release, or even the trial, of the
silenced political prisoners who crowd Libya's prisons. No country made it a
condition in negotiations that Libya investigate the countless cases of the
''disappeared.'' None of them compelled the Qaddafi government even to address
the massacre at Abu Salim prison, where, one night in June 1996, more than 1,000
political prisoners were shot dead.

In its 2003 negotiations with Libya, the United States lost a golden opportunity
to link the improvement of Libya's dismal human rights situation to its
acceptance into the international community. Indeed, it can be argued that the
United States has instead helped worsen human rights in Libya. It has not only
defended torture, which has softened the critical gaze on Libya's own practice
of torture, but also encouraged the practice by sending Libyans suspected of
terrorism to Tripoli for ''interrogation.''

Furthermore, Colonel Qaddafi has used the new panic -- that the Islamist
bogeyman will imminently shroud the world under his dark beard -- as an excuse
to silence the regime's critics. That tactic has fomented rather than curbed
religious extremism in Libya as elsewhere.

The impression that a bloodless battle has been won in Libya rests on an
inflated notion of the threat the country, even with its rusty weapons of mass
destruction, ever posed to the West. It misreads an act of diplomatic negligence
toward the rights of the Libyan people as a victory for world peace.

Colonel Qaddafi deserves sole credit for Libya's foreign policy U-turn. He has
never found it necessary to devote himself to a single political ideology; his
only consistent policy has been to guard his personal political survival. The
United States and Britain understand this, but have only exploited it for their
own myopic objectives, forgetting that Libya's political development can lie
only with its people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); BOMBINGS (78%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (77%); EMBARGOES
& SANCTIONS (77%); ASSASSINATION (77%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL
TALKS (76%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (71%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (71%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (71%); ARRESTS (67%) Freedom and Human Rights; Political Prisoners;
United States International Relations; Terrorism

PERSON: Hisham Matar; Jaballa Matar; Muammar El- (Col) Qaddafi

COUNTRY: LIBYA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Libya; Libya

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Must-Do List

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1710 words


The Bush administration's assault on some of the founding principles of American
democracy marches onward despite the Democratic victory in the 2006 elections.
The new Democratic majorities in Congress can block the sort of noxious measures
that the Republican majority rubber-stamped. But preventing new assaults on
civil liberties is not nearly enough.

Five years of presidential overreaching and Congressional collaboration continue
to exact a high toll in human lives, America's global reputation and the
architecture of democracy. Brutality toward prisoners, and the denial of their
human rights, have been institutionalized; unlawful spying on Americans
continues; and the courts are being closed to legal challenges of these
practices.

It will require forceful steps by this Congress to undo the damage. A few
lawmakers are offering bills intended to do just that, but they are only a
start. Taking on this task is a moral imperative that will show the world the
United States can be tough on terrorism without sacrificing its humanity and the
rule of law.

Today we're offering a list -- which, sadly, is hardly exhaustive -- of things
that need to be done to reverse the unwise and lawless policies of President
Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney. Many will require a rewrite of the Military
Commissions Act of 2006, an atrocious measure pushed through Congress with the
help of three Republican senators, Arlen Specter, Lindsey Graham and John
McCain; Senator McCain lent his moral authority to improving one part of the
bill and thus obscured its many other problems.

Our list starts with three fundamental tasks:

Restore Habeas Corpus

One of the new act's most indecent provisions denies anyone Mr. Bush labels an
''illegal enemy combatant'' the ancient right to challenge his imprisonment in
court. The arguments for doing this were specious. Habeas corpus is nothing
remotely like a get-out-of-jail-free card for terrorists, as supporters would
have you believe. It is a way to sort out those justly detained from those
unjustly detained. It will not ''clog the courts,'' as Senator Graham claims.
Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont, the Democratic chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, has a worthy bill that would restore habeas corpus. It is essential
to bringing integrity to the detention system and reviving the United States'
credibility.

Stop Illegal Spying  Mr. Bush's program of intercepting Americans' international
calls and e-mail messages without a warrant has not ceased. The agreement
announced recently -- under which a secret court supposedly gave its blessing to
the program -- did nothing to restore judicial process or ensure that Americans'
rights are preserved. Congress needs to pass a measure, like one proposed by
Senator Dianne Feinstein, to force Mr. Bush to obey the law that requires
warrants for electronic surveillance.

Ban Torture, Really  The provisions in the Military Commissions Act that Senator
McCain trumpeted as a ban on torture are hardly that. It is still largely up to
the president to decide what constitutes torture and abuse for the purpose of
prosecuting anyone who breaks the rules. This amounts to rewriting the Geneva
Conventions and puts every American soldier at far greater risk if captured. It
allows the president to decide in secret what kinds of treatment he will permit
at the Central Intelligence Agency's prisons. The law absolves American
intelligence agents and their bosses of any acts of torture and abuse they have
already committed.

Many of the tasks facing Congress involve the way the United States takes
prisoners, and how it treats them. There are two sets of prisons in the war on
terror. The military runs one set in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay. The
other is even more shadowy, run by the C.I.A. at secret places.

Close the C.I.A. Prisons

When the Military Commissions Act passed, Mr. Bush triumphantly announced that
he now had the power to keep the secret prisons open. He cast this as a great
victory for national security. It was a defeat for America's image around the
world. The prisons should be closed.

Account for 'Ghost Prisoners'  The United States has to come clean on all of the
''ghost prisoners'' it has in the secret camps. Holding prisoners without any
accounting violates human rights norms. Human Rights Watch says it has
identified nearly 40 men and women who have disappeared into secret American-run
prisons.

Ban Extraordinary Rendition

This is the odious practice of abducting foreign citizens and secretly flying
them to countries where everyone knows they will be tortured. It is already
illegal to send a prisoner to a country if there is reason to believe he will be
tortured. The administration's claim that it got ''diplomatic assurances'' that
prisoners would not be abused is laughable.

A bill by Representative Edward Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, would require
the executive branch to list countries known to abuse and torture prisoners. No
prisoner could be sent to any of them unless the secretary of state certified
that the country's government no longer abused its prisoners or offered a way to
verify that a prisoner will not be mistreated. It says ''diplomatic assurances''
are not sufficient.

Congress needs to completely overhaul the military prisons for terrorist
suspects, starting with the way prisoners are classified. Shortly after 9/11,
Mr. Bush declared all members of Al Qaeda and the Taliban to be ''illegal enemy
combatants'' not entitled to the protections of the Geneva Conventions or
American justice. Over time, the designation was applied to anyone the
administration chose, including some United States citizens and the entire
detainee population of Gitmo.

To address this mess, the government must:

Tighten the Definition of Combatant

''Illegal enemy combatant'' is assigned a dangerously broad definition in the
Military Commissions Act. It allows Mr. Bush -- or for that matter anyone he
chooses to designate to do the job -- to apply this label to virtually any
foreigner anywhere, including those living legally in the United States.

Screen Prisoners Fairly and Effectively

When the administration began taking prisoners in Afghanistan, it did not much
bother to screen them. Hundreds of innocent men were sent to Gitmo, where far
too many remain to this day. The vast majority will never even be brought before
tribunals and still face indefinite detention without charges.

Under legal pressure, Mr. Bush created ''combatant status review tribunals,''
but they are a mockery of any civilized legal proceeding. They take place
thousands of miles from the point of capture, and often years later. Evidence
obtained by coercion and torture is permitted. The inmates do not get to
challenge this evidence. They usually do not see it.

The Bush administration uses the hoary ''fog of war'' dodge to justify the
failure to screen prisoners, saying it is not practical to do that on the
battlefield. That's nonsense. It did not happen in Afghanistan, and often in
Iraq, because Mr. Bush decided just to ship the prisoners off to Gitmo.

Prisoners designated as illegal combatants are subject to trial rules out of the
Red Queen's playbook. The administration refuses to allow lawyers access to 14
terrorism suspects transferred in September from C.I.A. prisons to Guantanamo.
It says that if they had a lawyer, they might say that they were tortured or
abused at the C.I.A. prisons, and anything that happened at those prisons is
secret.

At first, Mr. Bush provided no system of trial at the Guantanamo camp. Then he
invented his own military tribunals, which were rightly overturned by the
Supreme Court. Congress then passed the Military Commissions Act, which did not
fix the problem. Some tasks now for Congress:

Ban Tainted Evidence  The Military Commissions Act and the regulations drawn up
by the Pentagon to put it into action, are far too permissive on evidence
obtained through physical abuse or coercion. This evidence is unreliable. The
method of obtaining it is an affront.

Ban Secret Evidence

Under the Pentagon's new rules for military tribunals, judges are allowed to
keep evidence secret from a prisoner's lawyer if the government persuades the
judge it is classified. The information that may be withheld can include
interrogation methods, which would make it hard, if not impossible, to prove
torture or abuse.

Better Define 'Classified' Evidence

The military commission rules define this sort of secret evidence as ''any
information or material that has been determined by the United States government
pursuant to statute, executive order or regulation to require protection against
unauthorized disclosure for reasons of national security.'' This is too broad,
even if a president can be trusted to exercise the power fairly and carefully.
Mr. Bush has shown he cannot be trusted to do that.

Respect the Right to Counsel

Soon after 9/11, the Bush administration allowed the government to listen to
conversations and intercept mail between some prisoners and their lawyers. This
had the effect of suspending their right to effective legal representation.
Since then, the administration has been unceasingly hostile to any lawyers who
defend detainees. The right to legal counsel does not exist to coddle serial
terrorists or snarl legal proceedings. It exists to protect innocent people from
illegal imprisonment.

Beyond all these huge tasks, Congress should halt the federal government's race
to classify documents to avoid public scrutiny -- 15.6 million in 2005, nearly
double the 2001 number. It should also reverse the grievous harm this
administration has done to the Freedom of Information Act by encouraging
agencies to reject requests for documents whenever possible. Congress should
curtail F.B.I. spying on nonviolent antiwar groups and revisit parts of the
Patriot Act that allow this practice.

The United States should apologize to a Canadian citizen and a German citizen,
both innocent, who were kidnapped and tortured by American agents.

Oh yes, and it is time to close the Guantanamo camp. It is a despicable symbol
of the abuses committed by this administration (with Congress's complicity) in
the name of fighting terrorism.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HABEAS
CORPUS (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); LEGISLATION (77%); JAIL SENTENCING (75%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (75%);
CORRECTIONS (75%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (70%); WIRETAPPING (63%); ELECTRONIC MAIL
(63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) Terrorism; Editorials; Freedom and Human
Rights; Prisoners of War; Privacy; Torture; Surveillance of Citizens by
Government; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods ; Habeas
Corpus; Terrorism; Geneva Conventions; Security and Warning Systems; Search and
Seizure; Telephones and Telecommunications; Electronic Mail; Computers and the
Internet

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (78%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%); PATRICK LEAHY
(58%); ARLEN SPECTER (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (58%) George
W (Pres) Bush; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Talking About Israel

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 781 words


Democrats are railing at just about everything President Bush does, with one
prominent exception: Mr. Bush's crushing embrace of Israel.

There is no serious political debate among either Democrats or Republicans about
our policy toward Israelis and Palestinians. And that silence harms America,
Middle East peace prospects and Israel itself.

Within Israel, you hear vitriolic debates in politics and the news media about
the use of force and the occupation of Palestinian territories. Yet no major
American candidate is willing today to be half as critical of hard-line Israeli
government policies as, say, Haaretz, the Israeli newspaper.

Three years ago, Israel's minister of justice spoke publicly of photos of an
elderly Palestinian woman beside the ruins of her home, after it had been
destroyed by the Israeli army. He said that they reminded him of his own
grandmother, who had been dispossessed by the Nazis. Can you imagine an American
cabinet secretary ever saying such a thing?

One reason for the void is that American politicians have learned to muzzle
themselves. In the run-up to the 2004 Democratic primaries, Howard Dean said he
favored an ''even-handed role'' for the U.S. -- and was blasted for being
hostile to Israel. Likewise, Barack Obama has been scolded for daring to say:
''Nobody is suffering more than the Palestinian people.'' In contrast, Hillary
Rodham Clinton has safely refused to show an inch of daylight between herself
and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert.

A second reason may be that American politicians just don't get it. King
Abdullah of Jordan spoke to Congress this month and observed: ''The wellspring
of regional division, the source of resentment and frustration far beyond, is
the denial of justice and peace in Palestine.'' Though widely criticized, King
Abdullah was exactly right: from Morocco to Yemen to Sudan, the Palestinian
cause arouses ordinary people in coffee shops more than almost anything else.

You can argue that Arabs pursue a double standard, focusing on repression by
Israelis while ignoring greater human rights violations by fellow Arabs. But the
suffering in Palestinian territories, while not remotely at the scale of
brutality in Sudan or Iraq, is still tragically real.

B'Tselem, a respected Israeli human rights organization, reports that last year
Palestinians killed 17 Israeli civilians (including one minor) and six Israeli
soldiers. In the same period, B'Tselem said, Israeli forces killed 660
Palestinians, triple the number killed in 2005. Of the Palestinians killed in
2006, half were not taking part in hostilities at the time they were killed, and
141 were minors.

For more than half a century, the U.S. was an honest broker in the Middle East.
Presidents Harry Truman, Lyndon Johnson and Ronald Reagan were warmer to Israel
and Dwight Eisenhower, Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush a bit cooler, but all
sought a balance. George W. Bush has abandoned that tradition of balance.

Hard-line Israeli policies have profoundly harmed that country's long-term
security by adding vulnerable settlements, radicalizing young Palestinians,
empowering Hamas and Hezbollah, isolating Israel in the world and nurturing
another generation of terrorists in Lebanon. The Israeli right's aggressive
approach has only hurt Israeli security, just as President Bush's invasion of
Iraq ended up harming U.S. interests.

The best hope for Israel in the long run isn't a better fence or more weaponry;
they can provide a measure of security in the short run but will be of little
help if terrorists turn, as they eventually will if the present trajectory
continues, to chemical, biological or radiological weapons. Ultimately, security
for Israel will emerge only from a peace agreement with Palestinians. We even
know what that peace deal will look like: the Geneva accord, reached in 2003 by
private Israeli and Palestinian negotiators.

M. J. Rosenberg of the Israel Policy Forum headlined a recent column,
''Pandering Not Required.'' He wisely called on American presidential candidates
instead to prove their support for Israel by pledging: ''If I am elected
president, I will do everything in my power to bring about negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians with the goal of achieving peace and security for
Israel and a secure state for the Palestinians.''

Last summer, after Hezbollah killed three Israeli soldiers and kidnapped two
others, Prime Minister Olmert invaded Lebanon and thus transformed Hezbollah
into a heroic force in much of the Arab world. President Bush would have been a
much better friend to Israel if he had tried to rein in Mr. Olmert. So let's be
better friends -- and stop biting our tongues.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (91%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (79%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); HAMAS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); ARMIES (75%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (70%); SENIOR
CITIZENS (69%); ARMED FORCES (68%); TERRORISM (64%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Palestinians; United States International Relations;
Politics and Government; Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%); HEZBOLLAH (59%) Hamas; Hezbollah

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (84%); GEORGE H W BUSH (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
(79%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); JIMMY CARTER (59%); BARACK OBAMA (59%); EHUD OLMERT
(58%) Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES
(94%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); SUDAN (92%); YEMEN (79%); JORDAN (79%); MOROCCO (79%);
IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Israel; Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Still Awaiting Rules On Interrogating Suspects

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1394 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


A sharp debate within the Bush administration over the future of the Central
Intelligence Agency's detention and interrogation program has left the agency
without the authority to use harsh interrogation techniques that the White House
said last fall were necessary in questioning terrorism suspects, according to
administration and Congressional officials.

The agency for months has been awaiting approval for rules that would give
intelligence operatives greater latitude than military interrogators in
questioning terrorism suspects but would not include some of the most
controversial interrogation procedures the spy agency has used in the past.

But the internal debate has left the C.I.A. program in limbo as top officials
struggle over where to set boundaries in the treatment of people suspected of
being involved in terrorist activities. Until the debate is resolved, C.I.A.
interrogators are authorized to use only interrogation procedures approved by
the Pentagon.

The C.I.A.'s proposed interrogation rules are part of the first major overhaul
of the agency's detention and interrogation program since the agency began
jailing terrorism suspects in 2002. The agency has already decided to abandon
some past interrogation techniques -- among them ''waterboarding,'' which
induces a feeling of drowning -- that human rights groups and some lawmakers
have argued are torture.

Although it is unclear whether the C.I.A. has any prisoners in custody, the
White House has not repeated its earlier statements that the secret prisons are
empty. The C.I.A.'s proposed interrogation methods remain highly classified, but
they may include exposure to extreme temperatures and sleep deprivation.

Much of the debate over the interrogation rules has not been made public. A
draft of an executive order providing broad guidelines for interrogators was
rejected this year by State Department officials, who argued that the language
was too expansive and could leave the Bush administration open to challenges,
including some from American allies, that the White House was legalizing
practices that violated a provision of the Geneva Conventions.

The Supreme Court ruled last year that all prisoners in American captivity must
be treated in accordance with Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which
prohibits the humiliating and degrading treatment of prisoners.

The struggle is evidence of shifting dynamics within the administration and a
rethinking of some of the most polarizing policies enacted after the Sept. 11,
2001, attacks to fight terrorism worldwide.

Late last year, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates forced a debate within the
administration about whether to close the military prison at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and now some senior officials are questioning how far the C.I.A.
interrogation program should go beyond the Army Field Manual for interrogations,
which the Pentagon uses to train military interrogators.

It has been six months since President Bush signed a bill authorizing the secret
C.I.A. interrogations -- a measure the White House promoted as a critical tool
to obtain information from high-level terrorism suspects.

Several officials said the C.I.A. had not yet needed to press the White House
for the legal authority because there was no one in C.I.A. custody who had
required the ''enhanced'' interrogation techniques.

Still, C.I.A. officials have maintained that it is important to get the
detention program on a solid legal footing and to give clarity to operatives in
the field about what is permissible and what is not.

''At the end of the day, the director -- any director -- of C.I.A. must be
confident that what he has asked an agency officer to do under this program is
lawful,'' the agency's director, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, wrote in a note to
agency employees last September. ''That's the story here.''

Some officials said that while the C.I.A. would probably be able to get legal
approvals if the agency captured someone it wished to interrogate, doing so
could take precious time. The intelligence value of detainees sometimes
diminishes quickly.

''You want established, clear rules in place,'' said one American official with
knowledge of the debate over interrogations. ''You don't want agency officials
having to call back to headquarters for 'Mother may I?' ''

The Supreme Court decision forced the White House to press Congress for new
authority both to try terrorism suspects using military commissions and to
detain and interrogate high-level suspects in secret C.I.A. jails abroad.

When President Bush signed the Military Commissions Act last October, the White
House released a statement calling the C.I.A. detention program ''one of the
most successful intelligence efforts in American history.'' The new authority,
Mr. Bush said, will ''ensure that we can continue using this vital tool to
protect the American people for years to come.''

But since passage of the bill, top officials have been wrestling with the
executive order and a separate legal opinion from the Justice Department's
Office of Legal Counsel that would authorize the C.I.A. interrogation techniques
and explain why the techniques comply with the standards of the Geneva
Conventions.

Gordon D. Johndroe, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said the
executive order was expected in ''the next few weeks.''

''The administration has been engaged in a deliberative and thoughtful
interagency process,'' Mr. Johndroe said. ''This process required additional
time as new officials, including the defense secretary, director of national
intelligence and White House counsel were brought into the deliberations.''

The Military Commissions Act states that the president ''shall'' issue an
executive order setting out broad guidelines for the interrogation of detainees.
Administration officials said the Justice Department had already determined that
the language did not compel the White House to issue such an order, but that the
administration still planned to complete the document.

Some human rights groups remain skeptical that, even with the Justice
Department's blessing, the new interrogation rules would meet international
standards governing the treatment of detainees.

Specifically, they point to a series of Office of Legal Counsel memos written in
2002 in which Justice Department lawyers took a broad view of what is
permissible under international conventions barring torture, and said they
feared that the office could again authorize interrogation techniques that
violate international law.

''I would hope that the O.L.C. has learned its lesson and that they're not
trying to split hairs and draw fine distinctions to undermine the spirit of U.S.
law,'' said John Sifton, a researcher with Human Rights Watch.

Some lawmakers have expressed anger that the White House, after pushing Congress
to pass the Military Commissions Act last year, has yet to issue the executive
order.

''Given the speed with which this bill was pushed through Congress last year,
the president should have lived up to his obligations under the law by now,''
said Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, in an e-mail message.

''Providing legal clarity for our interrogators was one of the key factors in my
decision to support the Military Commissions legislation,'' Mr. Rockefeller
said.

Both Mr. Rockefeller and Representative Silvestre Reyes, the Texas Democrat who
is chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, have questioned the need for
the C.I.A.'s secret prison network and have pledged to make oversight of the
agency's detention and interrogation program a priority during this session of
Congress.

The interrogation of high-level terrorism suspects in C.I.A. prisons is one of
the most criticized aspects of the Bush administration's response to the Sept.
11 attacks.

The prison network was cloaked in secrecy until President Bush confirmed its
existence during a speech last September, when he announced that the 14
remaining inmates in C.I.A. prisons would be transferred to the military prison
at Guantanamo Bay.

But President Bush defended the C.I.A.'s interrogation techniques as ''safe and
lawful and necessary,'' and said the spy agency would continue to detain and
question high-level terrorism suspects in the future.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (94%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); TERRORISM
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); PRISONS (89%); LAW OF WAR
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CORRECTIONS (86%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); APPROVALS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ARMIES
(77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); JAIL SENTENCING
(72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (68%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (61%); SUPREME COURTS (50%) Terrorism; Torture;
Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Central
Intelligence Agency

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); ROBERT M GATES (58%) Mark Mazzetti; George W (Pres)
Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt to Vote on Expanding Powers of the Presidency

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Mona el-Naggar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, March 24


Egyptian officials are hoping to add powers to the Constitution that would allow
the president to more easily dissolve Parliament and give him free rein to
suspend civil liberties and imprison anyone deemed a terrorist threat.

The Egyptian public will be asked to vote Monday on a package of 34 amendments
to the Constitution that the government says represent political reform, in part
by making it easier for opposition candidates to run for president.

But political opposition and international human rights groups say the package
appears more an effort by the governing party to secure its monopoly on power
and give constitutional legitimacy to police powers that have long been
criticized as excessive and undemocratic.

The sharpest debate has been over three areas of proposed change. One would
ultimately allow broad powers to monitor and detain people accused of terrorist
activities while not specifically defining terrorism. Another would limit the
role of judges in monitoring elections, which are often mired in accusations of
fraud. And a third would prohibit the creation of any religious political
parties.

''There is one political regime, and one ruling party with a monopoly over power
and wealth, and it wants to give the false impression that there is an ongoing
process of political reform,'' said Hassan Nafaa, a political scientist at Cairo
University. ''In reality, it is an assertion of the control of the ruling
party.''

The government, however, says the amendments would allow true reform because
they would also redistribute powers among the president, the government and
Parliament. Parliament, for example, could with a two-thirds vote cause the
collapse of the government. But the president would have the power to dissolve
Parliament without first asking for a public referendum, as current law
requires.

The amendments were debated for months in Parliament, then emerged largely
unchanged from what had been proposed by the government and the governing party
of President Hosni Mubarak. The State Information Service, the public relations
arm of the government, plans to publish a summary of the amendments in every
newspaper over three days, starting Saturday -- just two days before the polls
open. The actual text of the amendment is not widely available. The election had
been planned for the first week of April, but it was moved to Monday in a late
night vote a week ago in Parliament.

''We are not telling people what to do; we are asking them to participate,''
said Ayman al-Kaffas, chairman of the State Information Service. ''We are trying
to guarantee maximum integrity of the process, not the outcome of the process.''

Opposition groups, including the popular Muslim Brotherhood, have urged a
boycott of the election.

With little doubt about the outcome -- no referendum has failed in modern Egypt
-- Amnesty International said in a statement that the proposals represented
''the greatest erosion of human rights in 26 years.'' In equally harsh language,
it charged that the antiterrorism provisions would ''simply entrench the
long-standing system of abuse'' in place since the adoption of emergency laws
after President Anwar el-Sadat was assassinated in 1981.

The government strongly objected to Amnesty International's assessment, and Mr.
Kaffas said antiterrorism laws, while necessary, were often unpopular, including
the Patriot Act in the United States.

But anxiety permeated the ranks of the governing party as well. Abdel Moneim
Said, a member of the governing National Democratic Party and director of
Egypt's premier research center, the government-financed Ahram Center for
Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo, acknowledged concerns over aspects of
the changes that could permit ''an abuse of power.'' But he said the changes
could also push the country toward reform. ''I think it is the accumulation of
little additions here and there that can generate change eventually,'' he said.

The move is occurring at a time when the government is showing less tolerance
for criticism and political opposition. It has jailed opposition critics,
including a member of Parliament and a former presidential candidate; it delayed
local council elections by two years; it sentenced a blogger who had criticized
the president to four years in prison; it has had troops fire on would-be voters
to keep them away from the polls; and it has cracked down on the Muslim
Brotherhood, arresting members and freezing assets.

The Brotherhood is a banned but tolerated organization that has won wide public
support by offering a network of social services throughout the country. While
the crackdown and the amendments would inhibit the Brotherhood's political
activities, the group said it would do little to shut down the grassroots
operations it has used to build support.

''We can we do?'' said Muhammad Habib, deputy leader of the Brotherhood. ''There
is not much we can do except increase our activity and our reach to the
people.''

Egypt receives about $1.7 billion a year in American military and development
aid, and at one time was held up by the White House as the vanguard for
Democratic changes in the region. But the Bush administration's pressure on Mr.
Mubarak to enact such changes has evaporated as it has increasingly sought help
in dealing with Iran, Iraq and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

The United States has been tentative in its comments on the referendum, with the
State Department initially saying it was an internal matter for Egypt and the
secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, later telling reporters it was
''disappointing.''

At a news conference in Aswan on Saturday morning with the United Nations
secretary general, Egypt's foreign minister, Ahmed Aboul Gheit sharply rejected
Ms. Rice's remarks, saying, ''This is our own development, our own country.''

In a televised speech later, Mr. Mubarak insisted that Egypt would never bend to
foreign ''pressure, dictation or prerequisites.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of an opposition group, the Tagamou Party, protested in
Cairo yesterday against a vote on Monday on expanding the president's powers.
(Photo by Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REFERENDUMS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (79%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ELECTION
MONITORING (77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%);
POLITICAL SCIENCE (73%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (73%);
RELIGION (67%); PUBLISHING (61%) Referendums  ; Constitutional Amendments;
Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Politics and Government; Legislatures and
Parliaments; Elections

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (59%) Michael Slackman

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (93%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (97%)

REGION: Egypt

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

7 Were Abused, Group Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 73 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 29


Seven Russians who had been inmates at the American prison at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, were beaten and abused after the United States returned them to Russia in
2004, Human Rights Watch said Thursday.

''The U.S. government knew these men would likely be tortured and sent them back
to Russia anyway,'' Carroll Bogert, associate director at Human Rights Watch,
said in a statement.

Russian officials were not immediately available for comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
PRISONS (90%); NAVIES (86%) Torture; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Human Rights
Watch

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

REGION: Russia; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Maria Julia Hernandez, 68, Rights Advocate in El Salvador

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 455 words


Maria Julia Hernandez, a prominent human rights advocate who braved death squads
to speak for the victims of the long civil war in El Salvador, died Friday in
San Salvador, the capital. She was 68.

The cause was a heart attack, said her aides at Tutela Legal, the human rights
office of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador, where Ms. Hernandez
was the founding director.

She spent nearly 30 years gathering evidence of massacres and individual
killings, interviewing survivors, seeing that they stayed alive and compiling a
book of the dead. It grew into an encyclopedia of political violence. In a land
where the rule of the law was weak, she saw herself as a force for solidarity.

She worked in a barely furnished room decorated by a cross and two photographs
of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, the church leader who was assassinated in
1980 by right-wing forces in El Salvador. He was killed while celebrating Mass,
after calling upon the army to stop the shadowy death squads who were attacking
real and imagined opponents of the status quo.

The killing of the archbishop was among the opening shots of a civil war that
lasted until 1992, though its aftershocks continue in El Salvador. It was also a
central event in Ms. Hernandez's life, which ended 27 years to the day after the
archbishop's burial.

She had worked with Archbishop Romero, who was installed in 1977, at the start
of a 15-year wave of violence that pitted a relative handful of left-wing
guerrillas against the ruling class, the armed forces and the government of El
Salvador. Most of the 75,000 victims of that violence were peasants who were
killed while passively resisting the powers of the state. Also among the dead
were American nuns, Jesuit priests and urban political advocates.

Even after the war ended in 1992, the conflicting forces remained at odds, with
criminal gangs playing the roles that death squads held during the cold war.

''Human rights today is a very delicate subject here,'' Ms. Hernandez said in a
2005 interview published in The Nation. ''The majority of people are threatened
every day -- by the gangs, of course, but also by bandits and even the national
police, who are very corrupt and take bribes. They also still use torture.''

''The same causes exist that were here before the civil war -- social and
economic inequality, the threat and reality of violence,'' she said. ''The
politicians are shouting now instead of shooting, but the conditions are the
same as before.''

She was born in 1939 in San Francisco Morazan, Honduras, to Salvadoran parents.
Her family returned to El Salvador shortly after her birth. She never married,
dedicating her life to the church and its work among the people of her country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Maria Julia Hernandez

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (88%);
CORRUPTION (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); COLD WAR (78%); TORTURE (78%); THIS DAY IN
HISTORY (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); POLITICS (75%); BRIBERY (67%); MARRIAGE (60%);
POLICE FORCES (50%) Deaths (Obituaries); Biographical Information

Tim Weiner

CITY: SAN SALVADOR, EL SALVADOR (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (94%); HONDURAS (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Somali Battles Bring Claims Of War Crimes

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya, April 5


European diplomats said Thursday that they were investigating whether Ethiopian
and Somali government forces committed war crimes last week during heavy
fighting in Somalia's capital that killed more than 300 civilians.

The fighting, some of the bloodiest in Somalia in the past 15 years, pitted
Ethiopian and Somali forces against bands of insurgents. It reduced blocks of
buildings in Mogadishu, the capital, to smoldering rubble. Many residents have
complained to human rights groups, saying the government used excessive force
and indiscriminately shelled their neighborhoods.

Eric van der Linden, the chief of the European Commission's delegation to Kenya,
said he had appointed a team to look into several war crime allegations stemming
from the civilian casualties. ''These are hefty accusations,'' Mr. van der
Linden said. ''We are examining them very prudently.''

In an e-mail message to Mr. van der Linden marked urgent, a security adviser to
the commission wrote that there were ''strong grounds'' to believe that
Ethiopian and Somali troops had intentionally attacked civilian areas and that
Ugandan peacekeepers, who arrived in the country last month, were complicit for
standing by. The message was provided by someone who thought that the issue
should become public; its authenticity was confirmed by commission officials.

Ethiopian, Somali and Ugandan officials denied that their soldiers had done
anything wrong.

A war crimes case is about the last thing Somalia's transitional government
needs. Ever since it took control of Mogadishu in late December, the
transitional government has struggled to pacify the city and win popular
support.

Many Western diplomats have expressed hope that this transitional government,
Somalia's 14th, will end the seemingly interminable chaos that has enveloped the
country since the central government collapsed in 1991.

But so far, the government has failed to deliver the same level of stability
that an Islamist administration brought during its brief reign last year. It was
overthrown by Ethiopian-led forces, with covert American help.

Mogadishu has become so dangerous -- again -- that many residents say they are
now doubting whether the government will be able to hold a major reconciliation
conference scheduled for mid-April. The Ethiopian military struck a truce with
insurgents on Sunday, though, and the past three days have been quiet, giving
beleaguered residents a chance to bury their dead.

The European Commission has no authority to prosecute war crimes and would have
to refer any findings to the International Criminal Court. But commission
officials said they were investigating the accusations because the commission
has provided money and technical assistance to the transitional government and
the peacekeeping mission there.

A Western official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of diplomatic
considerations predicted that even if there was compelling evidence of war
crimes, the case would probably never get to court.

Another Western official, speaking anonymously for similar reasons, said, ''At
the end of the day, no one is going to want to further undermine the
transitional government.''

Diplomats and analysts from Somali and international organizations predicted
that the American government would resist the European effort because Ethiopia
is a close American ally, valued as bulwark against Islamic militants in the
Horn of Africa.

In the past week, human rights groups have been urging someone to look into the
issue of civilian casualties. The Somali Diaspora Network, an American-based
advocacy group, accused the transitional government and Ethiopian forces of
''collective punishment'' and genocide.

The Somali Disapora Network said Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, the transitional
president, warned in a recent radio interview that ''any place from which a
bullet is fired, we will bombard it, regardless of whoever is there.''

Several of the analysts said they believed that Ethiopian forces overreacted in
the fighting last week. One analyst who works closely on Somali issues said
Ethiopian soldiers might have panicked after they were surrounded by insurgents
in Mogadishu's main stadium and commanders responded by carpet-bombing the
entire neighborhood.

Ethiopian officials denied that.

''Our forces have been praised for not attacking civilians and nothing in recent
days has changed,'' said Zemedkun Tekle, a spokesman for the Ethiopian
government.

Abdirizak Adam Hassan, chief of staff for Somalia's transitional president, did
not deny that many civilians had been killed. ''Unfortunately, this is what
happens when you fight in a city,'' he said.

But, he said, the government was simply trying to defend itself.

''For a good two months, these insurgents have been attacking our government
compounds, planting land mines in the road, assassinating people,'' he said.
''Our job is to protect the people, not kill them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relatives buried a family member in Mogadishu yesterday, days
after fighting killed more than 300 civilians and prompted charges of war crimes
against Ethiopian troops and forces of the interim government. (Photo by Bakar
Ahmed/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COMMISSION (83%) European Commission

PERSON: Jeffrey Gettleman

CITY: MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (94%); NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (99%); ETHIOPIA (94%); EUROPE (94%); KENYA (93%); UGANDA (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Somalia; Ethiopia; Uganda; Mogadishu (Somalia); Somalia

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 9, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Genocide Court Ruled for Serbia Without Seeing Full War Archive

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1772 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


In the spring of 2003, during the trial of Slobodan Milosevic, hundreds of
documents arrived at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague marked ''Defense.
State Secret. Strictly Confidential.''

The cache contained minutes of wartime meetings of Yugoslavia's political and
military leaders, and promised the best inside view of Serbia's role in the
Bosnian war of 1992-1995.

But there was a catch. Serbia, the heir to Yugoslavia, obtained the tribunal's
permission to keep parts of the archives out of the public eye. Citing national
security, its lawyers blacked out many sensitive -- those who have seen them say
incriminating -- pages. Judges and lawyers at the war crimes tribunal could see
the censored material, but it was barred from the tribunal's public records.

Now, lawyers and others who were involved in Serbia's bid for secrecy say that,
at the time, Belgrade made its true objective clear: to keep the full military
archives from the International Court of Justice, where Bosnia was suing Serbia
for genocide. And they say Belgrade's goal was achieved in February, when the
international court, which is also in The Hague, declared Serbia not guilty of
genocide, and absolved it from paying potentially enormous damages.

Lawyers interviewed in The Hague and Belgrade said that the outcome might well
have been different had the International Court of Justice pressed for access to
the full archives, and legal scholars and human rights groups said it was deeply
troubling that the judges did not subpoena the documents directly from Serbia.
At one point, the court rebuffed a Bosnian request that it demand the full
documents, saying that ample evidence was available in tribunal records.

''It's a question that nags loudly,'' Diane Orentlicher, a law professor at
American University in Washington, said recently in The Hague. ''Why didn't the
court request the full documents? The fact that they were blacked out clearly
implies these passages would have made a difference.''

The ruling -- which was binding and final -- was in many ways meticulous, and
acknowledged that the 15 judges had not seen the censored archives. But it did
not say why the court did not order Serbia to provide the full documents.

Two of the judges themselves criticized that failure in strongly worded
dissents. One, the court's vice president, Awn Shawkat al-Khasawneh of Jordan,
wrote that ''regrettably the court failed to act,'' adding, ''It is a reasonable
expectation that those documents would have shed light on the central
questions.''

As part of its ruling, the court said that the 1995 massacre of nearly 8,000
Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica, a designated United Nations safe haven in
eastern Bosnia, was an act of genocide committed by Bosnian Serb forces, but
that it lacked proof in this case that the forces were acting under Serbia's
''direction'' or ''effective control.''

The ruling raised some eyebrows because details of Serbian military involvement
were already known from records of earlier tribunal cases. For instance,
evidence showed that in late 1993, more than 1,800 officers and noncommissioned
men from the Yugoslav Army were serving in the Bosnian Serb army, and were
deployed, paid, promoted or retired by Belgrade.

These and many other men, including top generals, were given dual identities,
and to help handle that development, Belgrade created the so-called 30th
personnel center of the general staff, a secret office for dealing with officers
listed in both armies. The court took note of that, but said that Belgrade's
''substantial support'' did not automatically make the Bosnian Serb army a
Serbian agent.

However, lawyers who have seen the archives and further secret personnel files
say they address Serbia's control and direction even more directly, revealing in
new and vivid detail how Belgrade financed and supplied the war in Bosnia, and
how the Bosnian Serb army, though officially separate after 1992, remained
virtually an extension of the Yugoslav Army. They said the archives showed in
verbatim records and summaries of meetings that Serbian forces, including secret
police, played a role in the takeover of Srebrenica and in the preparation of
the massacre there.

The lawyers spoke on condition of anonymity, saying they could be held in
contempt of court.

The story of the blacked-out documents, pieced together from more than 20
interviews with lawyers and court officials and from public records, offers rare
insight into proceedings in The Hague, where hearings can turn into closed
sessions and deals often happen behind closed doors.

It took the tribunal prosecutors of Mr. Milosevic two years of talks, court
orders and diplomatic pressure for Belgrade to hand over the documents -- the
much coveted minutes of the Supreme Defense Council. The council was created in
1992 when Serb-dominated Yugoslavia was fighting for more land for Serbs in
Croatia and Bosnia.

When the documents were handed over, the lawyers said, a team from Belgrade made
it clear in letters to the tribunal and in meetings with prosecutors and judges
that it wanted the documents expurgated to keep them from harming Serbia's case
at the International Court of Justice. The Serbs made no secret of that even as
they argued their case for ''national security,'' said one of the lawyers,
adding, ''The senior people here knew about this.''

Confidentiality rules to protect ''national security interests'' have often been
invoked at the tribunal, including by the United States, which has privately
provided intelligence like intercepts and satellite images to assist
prosecutors.

When Belgrade's lawyers met with tribunal judges to request secrecy for their
archives, they produced a letter of support from Carla Del Ponte, the tribunal's
chief prosecutor.

In a recent interview, Mrs. Del Ponte confirmed that she had sent a letter in
May 2003 to the former Serbian foreign minister, Goran Svilanovic, saying she
would accept the sealing of ''reasonable'' portions of the records. ''It was a
long fight to get the documents, and in the end because of time constraints we
agreed,'' she said. ''They were extremely valuable for the conviction of
Slobodan Milosevic.'' Mr. Milosevic died before his trial was over.

After the tribunal judges approved Belgrade's request to keep sections of the
military archives secret, Vladimir Djeric, a member of the Serbian team, told
lawyers there that ''we could not believe our luck.'' Mr. Djeric, now a private
lawyer in Belgrade, said by telephone that he could not discuss his former
duties.

Tantalizing glimpses of the secrets of the Supreme Defense Council -- whose
agenda included the military budget, promotions and retirement of generals --
can be gleaned elsewhere. Uncensored parts of the archives obtained by The New
York Times include minutes of sessions between 1993 and 1995, when the war in
Bosnia was in full swing.

Those meetings in Belgrade were attended by the presidents of then Yugoslavia,
its constituent states of Serbia and Montenegro, and the top military command,
including Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb military leader twice indicted by
the tribunal on charges that include genocide. He remains a fugitive.

A recent book, ''Unspoken Defense,'' by Momir Bulatovic, a former president of
Montenegro who attended many sessions of the Defense Council, said that in 1994,
when more than 4,000 men on Serbia's payroll were fighting in Bosnia, the
council discussed abolishing the 30th personnel center because its discovery
might cause political problems.

Lawyersand human rights groups have searched with special interest for council
records from the summer of 1995, when Srebrenica was overrun by soldiers and
police officers, many of them, tribunal records show, in the pay of Serbia.
After the massacre there, the council met three times, with General Mladic
attending at least one session. Verbatim transcripts of those days are missing
even from the secret archives, lawyers said.

Bosnia's team at the International Court of Justice, also known as the World
Court, was convinced that the archives and the military personnel files were
central to their case. Before hearings opened in 2006, Bosnia asked the court to
request that Serbia provide an uncensored version of the documents. The court
refused, saying that ''extensive evidence'' was available at the war crimes
tribunal. When Bosnia pressed during hearings, the court ignored the request.

In an interview, Rosalyn Higgins, the president of the World Court, declined to
say why the uncensored archives were not subpoenaed. She said it was the court's
practice not to discuss its findings. ''The ruling speaks for itself,'' she
said.

But the dissents from Judge Khasawneh and another judge criticized the court on
that count. The second dissent, by Ahmed Mahiou of Algeria, said that judges had
several reasons -- ''none of them sufficiently convincing'' -- including a fear
of creating the impression that the court was taking sides, that it might
intrude on the sovereignty of a state, or that it might be embarrassed if Serbia
refused.

Phon van den Biesen, a lawyer on the Bosnian team, said the full documents would
probably have demonstrated that the Bosnian Serb forces were agents of Serbia,
controlled by Belgrade.

''This would have made Serbia liable for the Srebrenica genocide,'' Mr. van den
Biesen said. ''We believe all this can be found in the documents. The cuts are
made whenever the agenda turns to financing and to personnel matters. That's why
Serbia went to such lengths to hide them from us.''

William Schabas, a professor of international law at the University of Ireland
in Galway, said the court might have wanted to avoid a diplomatic showdown with
Serbia and that, as a civil rather than a criminal court, it was more used to
relying on materials put before it than aggressively pursuing evidence.

Natasha Kandic, director of the Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade, said she
was shocked at the court's inaction, in part because it blocked the Serbian
public from understanding the reality of the war.

After the verdict, she said, she met with a leading member of the Serbian team.
''He was very pleased,'' she said, ''but I confronted him. I said, 'You did not
tell the truth.' '' The man, a scholar she said she could not name, replied:
''It's normal, every country will do everything possible to protect the state.
Bosnia wanted a lot of money for damages.''

Ms. Kandic added: ''I said that one day the truth will come out. And my friend
said: 'But that's the future. Now it's important to protect the state.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Protesters at the International Court of Justice in February,
after the court ruled on genocide in Bosnia. Lawyers said the outcome might have
been different if the court had sought documents censored by Serbia. (Photo by
Joel van Houdt/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (92%); LAWYERS (91%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
SUBPOENAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (75%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Archives and
Records

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (94%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ethiopia Holding 41 Suspects Who Fought With Somali Islamists, Officials Confirm

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN and MARK MAZZETTI; Jeffrey Gettleman reported from
Nairobi, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya, April 10


Ethiopian officials acknowledged Tuesday for the first time that they had
detained 41 terrorism suspects from 17 countries who had been fighting for
Somalia's Islamist movement.

''Suspected international terrorists have been and are still being captured by
the joint forces of the transitional federal government of Somalia and
Ethiopia,'' said a statement from the Ethiopian Foreign Ministry.

For weeks now, human rights groups have been urging Ethiopia, which has a
nettlesome human rights record, to shed some light on the detainees. Many were
captured in Kenya, sent to Somalia and then secretly taken to prisons in
Ethiopia.

The acknowledgment by Ethiopia of its role in detaining terrorism suspects
prompted officials in Washington to speak more candidly about American
interrogations of the captives. Those officials, who spoke on condition of
anonymity because they were not allowed to speak publicly, said Tuesday that
American intelligence agents had questioned several of the detainees in
Ethiopian jails over the past several months.

But they denied that the United States had played any part in transferring or
detaining the prisoners, and denied that the prisoners were part of a covert
rendition program in which suspects are captured by American forces and flown to
another country to be interrogated. In the past, many rendition suspects have
been taken to countries where torture is routine.

It was unclear whether the Ethiopians acted unilaterally in detaining the
suspects, or with encouragement from American officials. The Washington
officials said that the Ethiopian military had been anxious to get Islamic
fighters off the battlefield in Somalia because they had successfully attacked
Ethiopian troops, and that the government in Addis Ababa had rarely hesitated in
the past to begin operations in the Horn of Africa without American approval.

Several Ethiopian opposition groups had been using Somalia as a base for attacks
on Ethiopia, and another American official said it was suspects from those
outfits that most interested Ethiopian intelligence agents. Also, Eritrea,
Ethiopia's neighbor and bitter enemy, is widely suspected by Ethiopian
intelligence agents of supporting Islamists in Somalia.

Although Ethiopia has a long and storied Christian history, its population today
is about half Muslim. Some Ethiopians worry that the conditions are ripe for a
radical Islamist movement in their own country.

The United States and Ethiopia have grown closer over the past year as their
interests in combating Islamic extremism in the region have aligned.

Last December, Ethiopian forces, with clandestine American help, overthrew an
Islamist movement that briefly ruled Somalia. Thousands of Ethiopian soldiers
remain in that country and many Somalis say that if they leave, Somalia's weak
transitional government will collapse.

At the time of the invasion, the United States provided the Ethiopians with
detailed intelligence about the fighting positions of Islamic fighters. The
Pentagon has also used a secret airstrip in Ethiopia for Special Operations
raids into Somalia.

The significance of the detainees in Ethiopian custody was unclear. American
officials have said that none of the top operatives in Al Qaeda who have been
active in the Horn of Africa have been killed or captured since the Ethiopian
invasion began in December.

Human rights groups have accused the Ethiopian government of running a secret
detention program and breaking international law. They have also accused
Ethiopia of committing war crimes during recent fighting in Mogadishu, Somalia's
capital. They cited the bombing of several neighborhoods by Ethiopian forces
that caused hundreds of civilian deaths. Ethiopian officials have said their
troops did not intentionally single out civilians.

As for accusations of illegality, the statement from the Ethiopian Foreign
Ministry said, ''All legal procedures are being followed, and the suspected
terrorists have been allowed to appear before the relevant court of law.''

Five suspects have already been freed, the statement said, and 29 others have
been cleared by a military court. It said that the five were from Denmark,
Sweden, Tanzania, Sudan and the United Arab Emirates. The statement added that
foreign investigators had questioned some of the suspects but it did not specify
the nationalities of the investigators.

American Special Operations forces have been working closely with Ethiopian
forces for several months to hunt terrorism suspects believed to have played a
role in attacks during the past decade, including the bombings of the American
Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.

American intelligence agencies believe that Qaeda operatives responsible for
those and other large-scale attacks have been hiding in Somalia, which has been
mired in anarchy since the central government imploded in 1991.

Early this year, F.B.I. agents in Kenya questioned several militia fighters who
escaped over Somalia's southern border into Kenya, including two Americans, Amir
Mohamed Meshal and Daniel Joseph Maldonado. Mr. Meshal was deported to Somalia
and wound up in an Ethiopian jail. Mr. Maldonado was later flown to Houston,
where he faces terrorism-related charges.

One American intelligence official, speaking on condition of anonymity because
he was not authorized to speak publicly about the matter, said that the
interviews in Ethiopia had produced ''valuable information.'' It would have been
''irresponsible'' for the United States to give up the opportunity to
interrogate suspects who could have information about Al Qaeda in the Horn of
Africa, the official added.

Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman, declined to give details about the agency's
activities in the region, but said that the ''C.I.A. acts boldly yet legally,
alone and with partners, just as our government and people expect us to.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); RELIGION (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); ARMED FORCES (69%) Terrorism;
United States International Relations

PERSON: Jeffrey Gettleman; Mark Mazzetti

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (79%); NAIROBI, KENYA (72%)

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (99%); SOMALIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); KENYA (93%);
ERITREA (79%); AFRICA (79%); EASTERN AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Somalia; Ethiopia; Somalia

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Held Qaeda Leader In Secret Prison for Months

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and DAVID S. CLOUD

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


The Central Intelligence Agency held a captured Qaeda leader in a secret prison
since last fall and transferred him last week to the American military prison at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, officials said Friday.

Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, an Iraqi Kurd who is said to have joined Al Qaeda in the
late 1990s and ascended to become a top aide to Osama bin Laden, is the first
terrorism suspect known to have been held in secret C.I.A. jails since President
Bush announced the transfer of 14 captives to Guantanamo Bay last September.

The Pentagon announced the transfer, giving few details about his arrest or
confinement.

Mr. Iraqi's case suggests that the C.I.A. may have adopted a new model for
handling prisoners held secretly -- a practice that Mr. Bush said could resume
and that Congress permitted when it passed the Military Commissions Act of 2006.

Unlike past C.I.A. detainees, including the Sept. 11 plotter Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed, who was held by the agency for several years after being seized in
Pakistan in 2003, Mr. Iraqi was turned over to the Pentagon after a few months
of interrogation. He appears to have been taken into C.I.A. custody just weeks
after Mr. Bush declared C.I.A. jails empty.

Last fall, Mr. Bush declared the agency's interrogations ''one of the most
successful intelligence efforts in American history.'' But its secret detention
of terrorism suspects has been widely criticized by human rights organizations
and foreign governments as a violation of international law that relied on
interrogation methods verging on torture.

Intelligence officials said that under questioning Mr. Iraqi had provided
valuable intelligence about Qaeda hierarchy and operations. It appears he gave
up this information after being subjected to standard interrogation methods
approved for the Defense Department -- not harsher methods that the C.I.A. is
awaiting approval to use.

A debate in the administration has delayed approval of the proposed C.I.A.
methods.

Military and intelligence officials said the prisoner was captured last fall on
his way to Iraq, where he may have been sent by top Qaeda leaders in Pakistan to
take a senior position in Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia. That group has claimed
responsibility for some of the deadliest attacks in Iraq, including the bombing
last year of the Golden Mosque in Samarra.

In a message to agency employees on Friday, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, the C.I.A.
director, called the capture ''a significant victory.'' He said C.I.A.
operatives had played ''a key role in efforts to locate'' Mr. Iraqi. Though
American officials would not say where or when he had been captured, they said
it was not in Pakistan or Iran, countries where he was known to have operated in
recent years.

Human rights advocates expressed anger that the United States continued a
program of secret detention, and some wondered why the C.I.A. claimed it needed
harsh interrogation methods to extract information from detainees when it
appeared that Mr. Iraqi had given up information using Pentagon interrogation
practices.

''The C.I.A. can't seem to get its story straight, said John Sifton of Human
Rights Watch. ''If they can get good intelligence without using abusive
techniques, why do they so desperately need to use the abusive techniques?'' But
he said that there was no way to know whether Mr. Iraqi had been mistreated,
because ''no independent monitors have been able to see him since his arrest.''

In his message on Friday, General Hayden said that the agency always operated
''in keeping with American laws and values.''

American officials have long been worried about efforts by Qaeda leadership in
Pakistan to exert control over its Iraqi offshoot, known as Al Qaeda in
Mesopotamia, and the dispatch of Mr. Iraqi to help run the Iraqi affiliate has
raised concern among American military officials that the links between the
groups are growing.

''We do definitely see links to the greater Al Qaeda network,'' Gen. David H.
Petraeus, the top American commander in Iraq, told reporters at the Pentagon on
Thursday.

But the relationship between Qaeda fighters in Iraq and the top leadership has
appeared to wax and wane over the years, often over tactical disagreements.

In 2005, Ayman al-Zawahri, Al Qaeda's second in command, wrote a letter to Abu
Musab al-Zarqawi, then the top Al Qaeda operative in Iraq, urging him to refrain
from killing Shiites. But since then, terrorist experts have said that they see
Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia as largely independent of the organization hub in
Pakistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); PRISONS (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); APPROVALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HISTORY (73%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); BOMBINGS
(73%); NAVIES (73%); ARRESTS (71%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (64%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (97%); AL-QAEDA (84%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%) Central Intelligence Agency; Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (72%); MICHAEL HAYDEN (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) Mark
Mazzetti; David S Cloud; Abd Al-Hadi Al- Iraqi; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (96%); CUBA (94%); PAKISTAN (93%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Seeks to Persuade Congress to Continue Aid

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela, April 29


Faced with allegations of government ties to paramilitary death squads and
criticism from prominent Democrats, President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia is
heading to Washington this week to try to unlock frozen American aid and salvage
a trade agreement with the United States.

It is not clear whether Mr. Uribe will succeed, despite having the best
relations with President Bush of any South American leader. Mr. Uribe boasts
high approval ratings in Colombia, but a scandal over links between outlawed
paramilitary groups and his close political allies has eroded his credibility in
Washington.

''We need vigilance by our own government and assurances that our aid is not
going to anyone linked to illegal groups,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the
Vermont Democrat who is the leader of the Senate panel that oversees aid to
Colombia. After the Middle East and Afghanistan, Colombia is the largest
recipient of American assistance, with more than $4 billion disbursed this
decade.

Mr. Leahy put a hold on $55.2 million in military aid to Colombia this month
while awaiting clarification on intelligence claims of collaboration between
Colombia's army and paramilitaries, which have been classified as terrorist
groups by the State Department.

Both the paramilitaries and guerrilla insurgents have committed atrocities
against Colombians and shipped large amounts of cocaine to the United States
during an internal war that has lasted decades.

Mr. Uribe's reaction to the scandal may have worsened his standing in the United
States Congress since control passed to the Democrats. He has lashed out at
domestic political opponents, saying he had placed opposition lawmakers who had
met with Democratic leaders in Washington under surveillance.

Much of Mr. Uribe's ire has been directed at Senator Gustavo Petro, a lawmaker
and former member of the M-19 rebel movement who has pushed for investigations
of paramilitary groups. In testimony before Colombia's Congress this month, Mr.
Petro asserted that paramilitaries held meetings on ranches owned by Mr. Uribe
and his brother in the late 1980s before embarking on nighttime killing raids.

Senior Colombian officials and Mr. Uribe himself have vehemently denied the
accusations. Still, investigators are looking into paramilitary ties of more
than a dozen allies of Mr. Uribe, including his former domestic intelligence
chief, who is accused of supplying the militias with details on academics and
union officials who were chosen for assassination.

Mr. Uribe, who is scheduled to be in Washington from Tuesday through Thursday to
meet with President Bush, Democratic lawmakers and human rights groups, declined
requests for an interview.

Vice President Francisco Santos expressed concern that deteriorating relations
with Democratic leaders could endanger advances Colombia has made in reducing
urban violence, demobilizing thousands of paramilitary fighters and economic
growth. ''There is friendly fire from the Democrats of which Colombia is
becoming the casualty,'' Mr. Santos said in a telephone interview.

''We stabilized a country that was going to shambles,'' Mr. Santos said, noting
that Washington's large assistance project for Colombia was conceived under
President Clinton. Mr. Santos said paramilitary ties were coming to light
because of the resilience of institutions carrying out independent
investigations.

Mr. Uribe is popular in Colombia after limiting the reach of the war into large
cities while riding an economic growth wave. ''He received a country with 21
percent unemployment and today has it at 13 percent,'' said Rafael Nieto, a
political analyst in Bogota.

Mr. Uribe's critics say he is doing relatively little to move the investigations
forward and ensure the safety of his opponents. Mr. Petro, the opposition
lawmaker, said he had uncovered a plot to kill him led by Juan Villate, a
security official for the Drummond Company, an American coal producer with
operations in Colombia.

Drummond said in a statement that the accusations against Mr. Villate, who had
previously worked as a security official at the United States Embassy in Bogota,
were ''politically motivated.''

''I have had an avalanche of hostile actions against me,'' Mr. Petro said in a
telephone interview, adding that family members had also received death threats.

Human rights groups have criticized the killings of trade union officials and
violations by Colombia's armed forces, creating another obstacle to securing
Congressional approval of new military aid and the trade agreement, which has
already been signed by Mr. Bush and Mr. Uribe. Fifty-eight trade unionists were
killed in 2006, up from 40 the previous year, though labor groups say government
estimates of the homicides are too low.

''Colombia has no real answer to these killings,'' said Maria McFarland, a
researcher for Human Rights Watch.

Colombian business leaders argue that a trade agreement is needed to open new
markets for Colombian goods. But critics say it could increase American
agribusiness exports like soybeans, effectively restricting access to the
important Colombian market for relatively poor neighboring countries like
Bolivia.

The Bush administration, meanwhile, has requested $3.9 billion in additional aid
for Colombia, which is still the world's largest supplier of cocaine. John P.
Walters, the director of the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy,
acknowledged in a recent letter to Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa
Republican, that street prices of cocaine in the United States had dropped more
than 10 percent from 2005 to 2006 and that the drug's purity levels had also
increased.

Mr. Uribe's unwavering support of Mr. Bush, meanwhile, seems to have won him
little respect among leading Democrats. Former Vice President Al Gore, for
instance, recently canceled an appearance at a Miami conference attended by Mr.
Uribe because of concerns over the claims of his paramilitary ties.

Political analysts in Washington and Bogota do not expect the United States to
cut off aid to Colombia. Rather, they see Washington retooling aid to strengthen
judicial institutions that carry out investigations while still supporting
Colombia's military. But to reach that point, they say, Mr. Uribe needs to
aggressively advance investigations of the reach of paramilitary groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Alvaro Uribe in Miami recently. Prominent Democrats
are concerned about accusations of Colombian government ties to paramilitaries.
(Photo by Peter Andrew Bosch/Miami Herald, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); SCANDALS (78%); ASSASSINATION (78%);
EMERGING MARKETS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ARMIES (74%);
TESTIMONY (74%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (72%);
ETHICS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); DEFENSE SPENDING (67%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (57%); COCAINE (51%) Foreign Aid  ; United States International
Relations; Terrorism; Ethics

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%); PATRICK LEAHY (73%) Simon
Romero; Alvaro (Pres) Uribe; George W (Pres) Bush; Patrick J (Sen) Leahy

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (79%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (59%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%); VENEZUELA
(59%)

REGION: Colombia; Colombia

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Interrogation Abuses

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 214 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Advisers Fault Harsh Methods in Interrogation'' (front page, May 30):

The abusive interrogation methods reverse-engineered from the military's
Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape torture-resistance program cause
enormous psychological harm ranging from psychosis and suicidal ideation to
post-traumatic stress disorder. They are not only unreliable and immoral; they
constitute torture and violate the United States' commitment to respect the most
basic human rights.

Yet according to the Pentagon's inspector general, psychologists, under the
guise of behavioral science, have used their credentials to develop and carry
out these highly abusive techniques at Guantanamo, in Iraq and Afghanistan, and
elsewhere. The abuses are a direct result of trying to rely on science and
scientists to break down detainees.

The only appropriate response, for the profession and for the government, is to
end the direct participation of psychologists, who have an ethical obligation to
minimize harm, in interrogations.  Leonard S. Rubenstein Stephen N. Xenakis,
M.D.  Washington, May 30, 2007  The writers are, respectively, executive
director, Physicians for Human Rights; and a retired Army brigadier general who
is a former commander of the Southeast Medical Command.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
PSYCHOLOGY (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
ARMIES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); BEHAVIOR & COGNITION (76%);
MENTAL ILLNESS (76%); POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (76%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); SUICIDE (71%); ETHICS (70%); EXECUTIVES (68%)

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (68%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 27, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Is Not Well at Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1024 words


To the Editor:

Col. Morris D. Davis (''The Guantanamo I Know,'' Op-Ed, June 26) describes a
pristine prison where detainees are given three meals a day. What he ignores is
that Guantanamo's new prison facilities subject detainees to virtually total and
continuous isolation in tiny windowless cells.

Particularly galling is Colonel Davis's assertion that David Hicks, the only
person to be convicted by military commissions, stipulated that he had been
''treated properly.'' In fact, this carefully worded statement, which Mr. Hicks
had to make as a condition of his plea agreement, said only that he had not been
''illegally treated.'' This concession means little for a government that has
interpreted waterboarding as compliant with United States law.

In a previous court filing, Mr. Hicks alleged being beaten repeatedly, sodomized
and forced into painful stress positions while in United States custody. If one
of Colonel Davis's soldiers were picked up by Iran or North Korea and held for
years in solitary confinement in a small, windowless room, do you think he would
be praising the detention as ''clean, safe, and humane''?

Jennifer Daskal

Senior Counterterrorism Counsel

Human Rights Watch

Washington, June 26, 2007

To the Editor:

Col. Morris D. Davis paints Guantanamo as a model, humane prison in which the
rule of law reigns. If only it were so.

My clients are enduring their sixth year of detention at Gitmo. None have even
been charged with a crime. Because they are unlikely to ever face trial, they
will never have the opportunity to see the secret evidence against them. They
will never have a chance to refute the coerced, hearsay statements that have so
far justified their detention.

The government claims that it can hold them in this legal limbo for the duration
of our war on terror. The extreme isolation and conditions my clients face are
unbearable.

Many have been punished for disciplinary infractions by having their beards
shaved. Most have been stripped of their trousers so that they cannot pray while
modestly dressed. Some have been interrogated at gunpoint and threatened with
rendition.

One of my clients recently tried to slit his wrists, explaining to me afterward
that death would be more merciful than life here.

There is nothing ''contrived'' about these facts.  Marc Falkoff

Chicago, June 26, 2007

The writer, an assistant professor of law at Northern Illinois University,
represents 16 Yemeni detainees at Guantanamo.

To the Editor:

There has recently been a push to close the military prison at Guantanamo. To
close this safe prison, which now houses 375 Al Qaeda terrorists and enemy
combatants, would be a grave error and would endanger the security of the United
States homeland.

These terrorists and criminals interned at Guantanamo are the most dangerous
criminals this country has ever had to deal with.

Guantanamo provides a safe and sure way that these terrorists and Qaeda fighters
can be securely imprisoned.

To bring these dangerous terrorists to the United States and intern them at
federal penitentiaries would be a bad idea and would not make the homeland any
safer. There would always be a chance of a breakout or escape.

I urge the president, the Pentagon and Congress not to close Guantanamo and to
keep it operational to confine these enemy combatants and terrorists. To close
Gitmo would be a grave mistake.  Al  Eisner

Wheaton, Md., June 26, 2007

To the Editor:

The Guantanamo that Col. Morris D. Davis knows is obviously not the same prison
where our clients have been held without charge or trial for more than five
years.

Majid Khan and Mohammed Al Qahtani have been tortured so badly that any evidence
against them would be inadmissible under any legal standard.

Hundreds of men waste away in isolation in small metal cells that any regularly
constituted court would reject as a violation of United States and international
law. None have received a fair hearing. The results are predictable: four
detainees are dead, nearly a hundred suffer from mental illness, and countless
others continue to suffer abuse daily.

Guantanamo Bay is a failure. Its existence demeans and threatens our nation. It
must be closed now.

J. Wells Dixon

Gitanjali S. Gutierrez

New York, June 26, 2007

The writers are staff attorneys at  the Center for Constitutional Rights.

To the Editor:

Col. Morris D. Davis paints a rosy picture of Guantanamo Bay and the military
commissions. I traveled there three weeks ago; the Guantanamo I came to know is
starkly different from the place he describes.

The commissions fall well short of international standards, including by
permitting the use of evidence obtained under coercion. The likelihood is high
that someone on trial before the military commissions will have been coerced
during his detention.

The Defense Department's own investigations document that detainees have been
kept awake all night, subjected to loud music and extreme hot and cold
temperatures, and beaten.

Regardless of actual conditions, the arbitrary deprivation of liberty is
inherently inhumane. When people can be held without being charged, and denied
real opportunities to challenge their detention, America's image and authority
in the world are undermined.

Guantanamo and the military commissions are unworthy of a nation that prizes
justice and aspires to lead the world.  Priti Patel

Associate Attorney

Law and Security Program

Human Rights First

New York, June 26, 2007

To the Editor:

The Guantanamo I know is the spoils of the 1898 Spanish-American War, another
war of choice the United States undertook during the imperialist frenzy of the
late 19th century.

Beyond today's questions of what is appropriate detainee policy, Gitmo says to
the world that once landed, the United States military might never leave, and
the ''host'' country runs the risk of excessive exploitation and manipulation in
the service of American hegemony.

I suspect that this fuels an anti-Americanism with a longer reach than our
hand-wringing over what is torture and what is not.

Alan Goldstein

Plainfield, N.J., June 26, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); EVIDENCE
(89%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (76%);
ARMED FORCES (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); RULE OF LAW (74%); HEARSAY (73%);
LAW SCHOOLS (73%); WRITERS (73%); SEX OFFENSES (71%); WAR ON TERROR (71%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (69%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (66%); AL-QAEDA (66%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (51%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FILM

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; THE WEEK AHEAD: June 17 -
23; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 363 words


One of the reasons we need THE HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL,
the traveling series of mostly documentary films that arrives in New York City
on Friday, is the chance to see a film like ''Hot House,'' Shimon Dotan's study
of Palestinan prisoners in Israel's highest-security jails. A detailed
examination of prison life, ''Hot House,'' which has its New York premiere on
June 25, includes interviews with many prisoners involved in suicide bombings.
Most express no remorse for their deadly actions and reject the term
''terrorists'' in favor of ''freedom fighters.''   This politically even-handed
film, which won a special jury prize at this year's Sundance Film Festival,
suggests that the system which houses some 10,000 ''security prisoners,'' some
of them for life, only fortifies the zeal of the terrorists who regard prison as
an educational institution for the sharing of ideas and the development of
strategy.

It concludes that prison is an efficient incubator for future radical
Palestinian leaders.  The festival, at the Walter Reade Theater, opens with
''Mon Colonel,'' a film directed by Costa-Gravas and Jean-Claude Grumberg that
offers another look back at the French-Algerian war. It closes next week with
''The Devil Came on Horseback,'' the portrait by Annie Sundberg and Ricki Stern
of Brian Steidle, a former Marine Corps captain whose photographs of the Darfur
killing fields awakened the world to mass slaughter that continues.   Another
outstanding selection is Alejandro Landes's ''Cocalero,'' which follows the rise
of President Evo Morales of Bolivia, a grass-roots politician backed by
impoverished coca farmers threatened by the American war on drugs. ''The
Unforeseen,'' by Laura Dunn, investigates the battle between real-estate
developers in Austin, Tex., and environmental activists.   The uncomfortable
truth revealed by these films is that there are no easy solutions to the world's
ills; that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction that may be
delayed but is eventually felt. Friday through June 28, Walter Reade Theater,
165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, (212) 496-3809, filmlinc.com; $11, $7 for
members.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''Cocalero,'' about Bolivia's impoverished coca farmers and
their campaign to elect the nation's first indigenous president, is at the Human
Rights Watch film festival.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (90%); FILM (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS
(90%); FESTIVALS (90%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); REAL ESTATE (77%); FILM DIRECTORS (73%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (71%);
INVESTIGATIONS (70%); BOMBINGS (70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT (67%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (50%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); AUSTIN, TX, USA (66%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOLIVIA (92%); ISRAEL (92%); UNITED STATES (91%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ALGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Account of Afghan Deaths at Odds With Head of Rights Group

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK and ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 29


Four civilians were killed early Friday by American and Afghan forces in eastern
Afghanistan, according to the leader of a small human rights group who gave an
account of the deaths entirely at odds with that of the United States-led
coalition.

''The soldiers claimed they were looking for three Taliban suspects, and they
blew out the door of the house that belongs to Haji Muhammada Jan, who was about
80 years old, killing him and two of his sons and a grandson,'' said Lal Gul,
chairman of the Afghanistan Human Rights Organization and a resident of the area
in Nangarhar Province where the  killings took place. ''There were no Taliban
here.''

The American-led coalition offered a markedly different version, saying its
forces  had been  fired upon after ''credible intelligence''  led them to three
separate compounds suspected of harboring Taliban fighters. It said that three
militants were killed in the ensuing combat. A search of the compounds yielded
rocket-propelled grenade launchers and  grenades, Maj. Christopher Belcher said.
Sixteen militants were taken prisoner, the coalition said.

Such competing versions of reality have become an almost daily part of the war
in Afghanistan, where the nation's president and many of its people vehemently
complain that American and NATO military forces are causing needless civilian
casualties.

On Friday, the NATO secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, addressed the
matter in remarks made in Macedonia, promising, ''We will do our utmost to
reduce the loss of civilian life.'' He continued, ''Let me make one point
unmistakably: NATO has never and will never intentionally kill innocent
civilians.''

But the issue is not one of intent. Last week, President Hamid Karzai rebuked
the United States military and NATO for ''careless operations.'' He spoke after
a week in which more than 100 civilian deaths were reported from airstrikes and
artillery fire against the Taliban. Among his specific criticisms were what he
called ''the disproportionate use of force to a situation and the lack of
coordination with the Afghan government.''

If Mr. Gul, the human rights advocate, is correct, the events in Nangarhar on
Friday may have been a  result of another in a series of   tragic mistakes.
''The people who were taken away are not members of the Taliban,'' he said in a
telephone interview. ''They are mostly farmers. The version being given by the
coalition is baseless and a lie.''

Two weeks ago, seven Afghan policemen were killed by Americans  in the same
region when the two forces mistook each other  for insurgents.

Also on Friday, Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general,  visited
Afghanistan for the first time in his present job,  meeting  with Mr. Karzai and
the commander of NATO forces here, The Associated Press reported.

A spokesman for the United Nations, Adrian Edwards, said the visit was aimed at
''ensuring solid coordination between the U.N. and Afghan government in their
joint efforts here,'' The A.P. reported.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A boy wept yesterday after  two uncles died and his father was
held in an American raid on several family compounds in eastern Afghanistan.
(Photograph by Rahmat Gul/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%);
GRANDCHILDREN (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (82%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%); JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER (50%); BAN KI-MOON (50%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq Sets Toll Of Civilians At 12,000 For 2006

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Jan. 2


Iraq reported Tuesday that about 12,000 civilians were killed last year -- the
third full year since the American-led invasion -- with a sharp rise in the last
three months, when 5,000 died.

Only about half as many Iraqi soldiers died in 2006 as American troops. But the
number of Iraqi security forces killed jumped to 1,539, nearly double the
American death count of 823 for the year, when the deaths of police officers are
added to the number of slain Iraqi soldiers.

The Iraqi Health, Defense and Interior Ministries reported that 13,896 Iraqi
civilians, police officers and soldiers died last year, 162 more than the tally
kept by The Associated Press.

The A.P. count, assembled from its daily news reports, was always believed to be
substantially lower than the actual number of deaths because the news agency
does not have daily access to official accounting by the Iraqi ministries.

Counts of Iraqi deaths kept by other groups, including the United Nations, list
far higher death tolls, which are disputed by the Iraqi government.

While the United States government and military provide no death totals for
Iraqis, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq does keep a count based
on reports it gathers from the Baghdad morgue, the Ministry of Health and the
Medico-Legal Institute.

The figures for November and December are not yet available from the United
Nations, but as of the end of October the organization had reported 26,782
deaths in the first 10 months of 2006.

The United Nations has said that Iraq's heavily armed Shiite militias are
gaining strength and influence and that torture is rampant, despite the
government's vow to reduce human rights abuses.

''Hundreds of bodies continued to appear in different areas of Baghdad --
handcuffed, blindfolded and bearing signs of torture and execution-style
killing,'' the most recent United Nations report said.

The two primary militias in Iraq are the military wings of the country's
strongest Shiite political groups, on which Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki
is heavily dependent. Mr. Maliki has repeatedly rejected American demands that
he disband the heavily armed groups, especially the Mahdi Army of the radical
anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr.

''I think the type of violence is different in the past few months,'' Gianni
Magazzeni, the United Nations mission chief in Baghdad, said when its report was
issued in late November. ''There was a great increase in sectarian violence, in
activities by terrorists and insurgents, but also by militias and criminal
gangs.''

He noted that religious clashes had been common since Sunni Arab insurgents
bombed a major Shiite shrine last February in Samarra, north of Baghdad.

The United Nations' human rights office in Iraq continues to receive reports
that Iraqi police units and security forces have either been infiltrated by
militias or act in collusion with them, the report said.

It said that while sectarian violence is the main cause of civilian deaths,
Iraqis also continue to be the victims of terrorism, roadside bombs and drive-by
shootings. Others have been caught in the cross-fire between rival gangs.

Last year, a team of American and Iraqi public health researchers for the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health estimated that 600,000 civilians had
died in violence from the 2003 American invasion until last summer, the highest
estimate at the time for the toll of the war.

But it was an estimate and not a precise count, and researchers acknowledged a
margin of error that ranged from 426,369 to 793,663 deaths. The study used
samples of casualties from Iraqi households to extrapolate an overall figure of
601,027 Iraqis dead from violence between March 2003 and July 2006.

Researchers came up with the figures after surveying 1,849 Iraqi families in 47
different neighborhoods across Iraq. The selection of geographical areas in 18
regions across Iraq was based on population size, not on the level of violence,
they said.

The American and Iraqi governments, as well as other groups, including the Iraq
Body Count, an organization that conducts its own surveys, disputed the validity
of the study's findings.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
TERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES
(77%); POLICE FORCES (76%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%);
RELIGION (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (67%);
PRIME MINISTERS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (67%) United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (89%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (59%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Quietly Preparing Evidence Against Top Qaeda Detainees

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


The Bush administration has set up a secret war room in a Virginia suburb where
it is assembling evidence to prosecute high-ranking detainees from Al Qaeda
including the man accused of being the mastermind of the September 2001 attacks,
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, government officials said this week.

The effort to sift the classified files of the Pentagon, F.B.I., C.I.A. and
other intelligence agencies amounts to the first concrete steps that the
government has taken to press ahead with war crimes trials of high-level terror
suspects under a plan announced by President Bush in a speech last September.

At the time, Mr. Bush said that Mr. Mohammed and 13 other high-level terror
suspects had been transferred from secret prisons around the world to the
military detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where they would be held
pending trial.

The preparation of cases against the high-value operatives appears to rebut many
who doubted that Qaeda suspects like Mr. Mohammed would ever be brought to
trial. Critics in Congress and human rights groups had asserted that such trials
would not be feasible because they would expose harsh interrogation techniques
used by the Central Intelligence Agency.

The officials who discussed the preparations have been briefed on the effort in
detail and represented several agencies. They declined to speak on the record
about deliberations in advance of criminal prosecutions involving national
security.

The prosecution team for the Qaeda defendants will be a mix of military and
civilian prosecutors. Some officials said no decision had been made about who
would lead each prosecution, but others said the trial of Mr. Mohammed would
probably be undertaken principally by Justice Department lawyers, who would run
the prosecution in a military courtroom in Guantanamo.

Mr. Mohammed, whose alleged role in the Sept. 11 attacks would make him the
centerpiece of the government's effort to bring terrorists to justice in a court
of law, could be held responsible for about 3,000 deaths in the attacks,
officials have said.

The prosecution of high-value detainees is separate from the long planned trials
of lower-level Qaeda figures, some of whom have been at Guantanamo since 2002
and who are expected to be tried before the more important terrorist suspects.

However, both high- and low-level suspects will be tried under the same rules,
which are contained in legislation approved in October.

Officials said that they were hoping to bring the first charges against leaders
of Al Qaeda this summer or fall and that trials could get under way in early
2008. The current plans are to use the new trial procedures first against some
of the lesser Guantanamo defendants as kind of a test run beginning this summer.

Those trials would involve some of the detainees who had already been charged
under the previous system of military commissions that was struck down by the
Supreme Court.

The initial trials of detainees held at Guantanamo will not carry the
possibility of a death penalty. But officials said that they expected to seek to
have some of the senior Qaeda officials executed if convicted.

A team of lawyers from the Justice and Defense Departments, along with civilian
and military investigators, has begun poring over intelligence files and
interrogation reports, about Mr. Mohammed's role in the Sept. 11 attacks and
other potentially prosecutable crimes, like the killing of a reporter for The
Wall Street Journal, Daniel Pearl, and other terror plots, including an aborted
plan in 2003 to use smuggled explosives to blow up gas stations, railroad tracks
and a bridge in New York.

According to the final report of the independent commission that investigated
the 2001 attacks, Mr. Mohammed acknowledged under interrogation that he was a
major planner of the 9/11 plot. The report said that Mr. Mohammed first proposed
the airliner attacks to Osama bin Laden and supervised the core group
responsible for the hijackings.

Other prosecutions, like the cases related to the attack in 2000 on the Navy
destroyer Cole in Yemen which killed 17 sailors, are likely to be led by
military lawyers.

The Qaeda detainees at Guantanamo who the authorities have said were involved in
planning the Cole attack include Abd al-Rahim al Nashiri, the accused
mastermind, and Walid bin Attash, known as Khallad, who worked with Mr. Nashiri.

In preparation for the trials, the Justice Department has been quietly
recruiting lawyers from the ranks of experienced terrorism prosecutors, mainly
in New York and Virginia.

The new war crimes trials will operate according to rules modeled after the
military justice system which were approved in legislation known at the Military
Commission Act, which was signed into law last fall. The law has been criticized
by some Democrats in Congress and human rights groups who say the procedures are
flawed because they tilt in the government's favor.

Prosecutors could use hearsay evidence or second-hand testimony, but could not
use information obtained under torture. Even so, that would mean virtually any
information obtained by the C.I.A would appear to be admissible because, under
Justice Department legal opinions, none of the harsh techniques amounted to
torture.

At their trials, the accused would have the right not to testify and would have
the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses against them.
The trials would be open unless a military judge determined that they should be
closed to protect classified information. Defendants would have the right to
review the evidence to be used against them.

The C.I.A. indicated in court filings last November how it hopes to deal with
efforts by defendants to bring up the issue of their interrogations. In a case
involving one of the 14 high-level Qaeda detainees, the intelligence agency
asked a federal judge to rule that the prisoner could not describe details of
his confinement because of national security concerns. No ruling has yet been
issued.

The case involves Majid Khan, a Pakistani who authorities have said was selected
by Mr. Mohammed in 2002 to take part in a possible attack in the United States.

When civil liberties lawyers filed a petition on Mr. Khan's behalf in federal
court in Washington, the C.I.A. submitted an affidavit saying that if specific
interrogation techniques were disclosed, ''It would permit terrorist
organizations to adapt their training to counter the tactics that C.I.A. can
employ in interrogations.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PRISONS (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (75%); LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(73%); NAVIES (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%);
SUPREME COURTS (70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%) Terrorism; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World
Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (76%); FEDERAL BUREAU
OF INVESTIGATION (57%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%) Khaled Shaikh Mohammad; George W (Pres) Bush; David
Johnston; Neil A Lewis

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Washington (DC)  ; New York City

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Ethiopia: Dictator In Exile Gets Life Term

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 135 words


The former dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam was sentenced to life imprisonment,
ending his 12-year trial in absentia for genocide and other crimes committed
during his rule. He could have faced the death penalty. He lives comfortably in
exile in Zimbabwe and is unlikely ever to spend a day behind bars. Mr. Mengistu
ruled from 1974 to 1991 after his military junta ended Emperor Haile Selassie's
reign in a bloody coup and followed up with a notorious purge, the Red Terror,
described by Human Rights Watch as ''one of the most systematic uses of mass
murder by a state ever witnessed in Africa.'' The trial in Ethiopia's capital,
Addis Ababa, was a rare case of an African strongman being held to account by
his own country, but critics say the trial, which began in 1994, went on for too
long to serve justice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); MILITARY RULE
(73%); COUPS (73%) Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes and Criminals; Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: Mengistu Haile Miriam

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (93%); AFRICA (92%); ZIMBABWE (91%)

REGION: Ethiopia; Zimbabwe

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Car Washes And Genocide

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 750 words


Genocide may be the worst of crimes, but historically it has also brought out
the best in some people.

The Raoul Wallenbergs of 2007 speckle America and the globe. And I don't just
mean the aid workers -- 13 of whom have been murdered for their efforts in
Darfur since last May -- but also those ordinary Americans who have united in a
grass-roots campaign to try to stop genocide half a world away in Sudan.

President Bush and other world leaders have dropped the ball on Darfur. But that
vacuum of moral leadership has been filled by university students, churches and
temples, celebrities like George Clooney and Mia Farrow, and armies of
schoolchildren.

Their arsenal -- green armbands, phone calls to the White House, bake sales to
raise money -- all seem pallid. How can a ''Save Darfur'' lawn sign in Peoria
intimidate government-backed raiders in Sudan or Chad who throw babies into
bonfires?

Yet, finally, we see evidence that those armbands and lawn signs can make a
difference. Last week, the Save Darfur Coalition -- the grass-roots organization
that puts out those lawn signs -- sponsored a trip by Bill Richardson, the New
Mexico governor, to Khartoum to negotiate with President Omar al-Bashir.

Sure, it's a little weird when a private advocacy group undertakes freelance
diplomacy. But if George W. Bush, Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac and Hu Jintao
twiddle their thumbs, then more power to the freelancers.

Mr. Richardson worked out a joint statement in which Sudan agreed to a 60-day
cease-fire to allow peace talks to resume, provided the Darfur rebels go along
as well. Mr. Bashir also agreed that Sudan would prosecute rapes and stop
painting its military aircraft to look as if they belong to the U.N.

The first thing to say is that Mr. Bashir has repeatedly broken his pledges in
the past. Count me deeply skeptical about whether it will be any different this
time. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, a Sudanese human rights campaigner, told me he thinks
that President Bashir simply made cosmetic concessions in hopes of winning the
chairmanship of the African Union later this month.

That said, there may be a path forward here. While U.N. peacekeepers and a
no-fly zone are needed, ultimately the only way to end the slaughter is to
achieve a peace agreement in Darfur. And that seems more feasible today than it
was a week ago.

Most striking, it's clear that the cease-fire was a consequence of all those
armbands and lawn signs. Mr. Richardson told me that Mr. Bashir was motivated by
concern at the way the killings have been spotlighted by Darfur activists. Mr.
Richardson quoted him as saying, ''These guys have caused me a lot of damage.''

Ken Bacon, who heads Refugees International and accompanied Mr. Richardson, said
of President Bashir: ''One thing that was very clear was that the Save Darfur
movement has gotten under his skin. The vilification of the Khartoum regime in
columns and editorials and ads is making a difference.''

So cherish this historical moment. The long record of genocide is one
overwhelmingly of acquiescence, but this time ordinary citizens are trying to
write a different ending.

There are the students at Santa Clara University in California who replicated a
mini refugee camp and slept in it. They limited themselves to 1,000 calories a
day -- because that's what Darfuris are limited to -- and donated the savings to
aid groups.

Or there's Jason Miller, a California M.D./Ph.D student who in his spare time
has become the foremost expert on how investments by foreign companies
underwrite the Sudanese genocide. Or Beth Reilly, a stay-at-home mom in Indiana
who works on Darfur a little bit every day. Or the legions of schoolkids who
organize car washes, and ask for donations in lieu of birthday presents, in
hopes of saving other children halfway around the globe.

Sudan's leaders are used to bullying everyone. Jan Pronk, who was the United
Nations envoy in Sudan until Khartoum ejected him, reports in his Weblog that a
U.N. official recently went to the authorities in Darfur to complain about human
rights violations. A Sudanese official retorted: ''You better shut up. We can
always expel you, as we have proven.''

But finally President Bashir is confronting people whom he can't bully. Let's
have no illusions about how much more pressure will be necessary to stop the
slaughter, but let's also celebrate this moment. Mr. Bashir has blinked, showing
that it just may be possible to fight genocide with moral courage and lawn
signs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); FUNDRAISING (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
PEACE PROCESS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (79%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (79%); MURDER
(78%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (77%); ARMIES (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); US
PRESIDENTS (75%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (74%); REFUGEES (72%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (71%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (70%); GOVERNORS (70%); CHILDREN (69%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (69%); PEACEKEEPING (69%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (69%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (63%) Public Opinion

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); GEORGE CLOONEY (88%); BILL RICHARDSON (79%); OMAR
AL-BASHIR (59%); JACQUES CHIRAC (55%); TONY BLAIR (52%); HU JINTAO (50%)
Nicholas D Kristof; Mia Farrow; George Clooney; George W (Pres) Bush; Bill (Gov)
Richardson; Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (78%)

STATE: NEW MEXICO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canada's Good Example

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 440 words


Canada set an important example of decency when it offered a formal apology and
compensation worth millions of dollars to a Syrian-born Canadian citizen who was
a victim of President Bush's use of open-ended detention, summary deportation
and even torture in the name of fighting terrorism.

Last week's announcement by Prime Minister Stephen Harper came more than four
years after the nightmare began for the Canadian, Maher Arar, a 36-year-old
software engineer. On his way back from a family vacation, he was detained by
U.S. officials at Kennedy Airport on the basis of unsubstantiated information
from the Canadian police. After being held in solitary confinement in a Brooklyn
detention center and interrogated without proper access to legal counsel, he was
sent to Syria, where he was imprisoned for nearly a year and tortured.

It was all part of a legally and morally unsupportable practice known as
extraordinary rendition, the deportation of terrorism suspects to countries
where the regimes are known to use torture and to disdain basic human rights
protections.

Four months ago, a Canadian government panel concluded that Mr. Arar had never
had a terrorism connection, and that Americans had misled Canada about their
plans for him. The Bush administration stonewalled the inquiry. It has responded
to a new Canadian request to remove Mr. Arar from a United States security watch
list by rudely telling Canada, its democratic northern neighbor and strategic
ally, to mind its own business.

Not only has the Bush administration refused to apologize to Mr. Arar, but
Justice Department lawyers are also brandishing a dubious claim of state secrets
and fighting a lawsuit brought by Mr. Arar in this country. Bush administration
officials insist that they have ''new intelligence'' that justifies keeping Mr.
Arar on the watch list. That intelligence has not been disclosed, but Canadian
officials who have reviewed the information are unpersuaded.

Questioned about the Arar case at a recent Senate Judiciary Committee hearing,
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales provided no specifics that would explain Mr.
Arar's continued presence on the watch list, or why he had been deported to
Syria in the first place. The committee's chairman, Senator Patrick Leahy,
Democrat of Vermont, is right to demand that the administration face up to its
bad behavior in this case and renounce its renditions policy.

This is not just about making amends with Canada, or doing the right thing by
someone who appears to be an innocent man. It is a matter of trying to restore
this country's reputation as a defender and protector of human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); DEPORTATION (89%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); LAWYERS (74%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); LITIGATION (69%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (65%) Terrorism; Editorials; Torture; Freedom and
Human Rights; United States International Relations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); STEPHEN HARPER (59%); ALBERTO GONZALES (57%);
PATRICK LEAHY (57%) Maher Arar; Patrick J (Sen) Leahy; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: CANADA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); SYRIA (94%)

REGION: Canada; Syria

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudi Shiites Fear Gains Could Be Lost

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH and RASHEED ABOU AL-SAMH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: QATIF, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 30


As young men beat their chests in street processions marking the Shiite Muslim
holiday of Ashura in this Shiite stronghold in eastern Saudi Arabia, Ibrahim
al-Mugaiteeb looked on nervously, bracing for the region's political conflicts
to close in on this downtrodden community.

With sectarian tensions rising between Sunnis and Shiites throughout the Middle
East, and pressure growing on the Saudi government by the country's Sunni
leadership, Saudi Shiites, who have made great strides in recent years, are
worried that those gains will be rolled back.

''Things are dim and dark, and the worst is still to come,'' said Mr. Mugaiteeb,
a human rights campaigner who runs an unlicensed Saudi human rights monitor here
in the Eastern Province. ''As always the minorities will be most affected when
this is done. But it will affect everyone else too.''

There are still no Shiites in positions of authority, and Shiites are rarely
promoted to managerial positions in government and private companies, Shiite
leaders here say. There are also virtually no Shiite headmasters in public
schools.

More important, the government has stopped short of actually recognizing the
minority, they say. Their hard-won rights have yet to be enshrined into law,
meaning they could be rescinded at short notice.

Last week, the Sunni governor of Al Hasa, a mixed Sunni-Shiite town in the
Eastern Province, banned all blood drives organized by Shiites. Sunni clerics
have stepped up their preaching against Shiites recently, declaring them again
to be infidels. And earlier this week King Abdullah, speaking of rumors that
Shiites are seeking to convert Sunnis, said that such attempts would fail, and
that Sunnis would always make up a majority of the world's Muslims.

In recent times, life had been growing better for Saudi Arabia's two million
Shiites, who have long suffered religious and economic discrimination. Yet
things are growing tenuous again.

After Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979 energized Shiites throughout the region,
the allegiance of Saudi Shiites to the state became suspect as the country's
Sunni religious leaders began viewing them as a potential fifth column that
could bring down the government. When violent riots erupted during Ashura in the
early 1980s, the government killed dozens of protesters and arrested thousands,
sending many into exile and setting off a decade of repression.

In 1993, King Fahd tried to settle the differences and in 2003 met with a group
of Shiite elders who presented him with a petition calling for equal rights.
Suddenly, Shiite fortunes turned.

''There were problems before, but with the passing of time and with the
insistence of the people for their rights, things have changed,'' said Sheik
Hassan al-Saffar, a longtime opposition leader who has become a primary advocate
for engaging with the government. ''Saudi politics is much more focused now on
delivering rights than ever before.''

Sheik Saffar proudly read off a list of some of the important gains the Shiites
have made since then: political prisoners have been released and exiles have
returned; rituals have been allowed relatively unfettered; Shiites have been
allowed to establish meeting halls and build mosques, and they have begun
publishing their own religious books and importing some.

Ashura, the holiest period for Shiites, has become something of a litmus test
for the change. Just a few years ago the 10-day commemoration of the
seventh-century martyrdom of the Imam Hussein, the most defining event for
Shiite Muslims, was largely hidden from public view, held in illegal community
centers. This week Saudi Shiites burst into the open in the streets of the
oil-rich Eastern Province, holding carnivals and re-enactments of the killing.

In Saudi Arabia, the commemorations have grown larger and more colorful. This
year, about 500,000 people attended nightly lectures espousing Imam Hussein's
virtues and applying the lessons of his life to modern times. Worshipers marched
under large posters of Shiite figures as well as posters of the Lebanese Shiite
Muslim leader Hassan Nasrallah, and they shared food and gifts, all emphasizing
the human battle between good and evil.

Shiites have begun calling for the Saudi government to enshrine their rights,
while encouraging residents here to focus their sights on local Saudi issues,
not regional or international ones. They say all that they have achieved has
been fought for.

''Things have changed here not because the government wanted the change, but
because the world itself has changed,'' said Sheik Nimr al-Nimr, who advocates a
more confrontational stance with the government. ''We see better conditions not
because of government support but because of our demands for change. The
government will not give us anything unless we demand it.''

Some Shiite leaders read much in the lack of coverage of Ashura in the Saudi
news media. ''This is one of the most important cultural events for us,'' said
Sheik Fawzi al-Seif, a local Shiite cleric, who notes that the Saudi news media
normally cover religious events in faraway places but rarely ever here. ''But no
one outside of here knows about it.''

Sheik Seif said the government had passed up an opportunity to encourage unity
and send a signal to the conservative Sunni leaders. But more significantly, he
said, the government lends tacit acceptance to those who attack the Shiites by
not responding to their actions.

''The big danger we face now is the growing sectarian division in the region and
its slow move into the Persian Gulf, which can have explosive conditions,'' he
said. ''The fire could reach us very quickly here.''

Shiite clerics here insist they are unwilling to have the Shiites used as a
political card, either by the United States or Iran. They warn that any
confrontation with Iran would put significant strains on the Shiite population,
and fear that ultimately it could be split between those supporting Iran and
those supporting the government.

''Things were just like this in the 1970s,'' said Jaffar al-Shayeb, a longtime
Shiite campaigner who in 2005 was elected to Qatif's municipal council. He
argues that the Shiites have become more politically astute and focused on their
internal interests. But still, he worries that could change someday, too.

''Everything seems normal, then an event can come along and turn everything
upside down,'' he said.

Many fear that the dormant militant groups that once existed here could make a
comeback as a result. Mr. Mugaiteeb noted, for instance, that cells of Hezbollah
in the Hijaz, the Saudi version of the group, could still be put into action.

''If the U.S. attacks Iran, a lot of people will be violent against the
Americans, including Sunnis,'' he said. ''What I want to tell the Americans is
that this will not be a picnic.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Shiites in Qatif, Saudi Arabia, watched a battle re-enactment
last week as part of Ashura commemorations. (Photo by Hasan Jamali/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (95%); RELIGION (90%); MUHARRAM (90%); ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS
& OBSERVANCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HOLIDAYS
& OBSERVANCES (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (77%);
POLITICS (77%); TRENDS (72%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (67%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(65%); PETITIONS (60%); RIOTS (50%); BLOOD DONATIONS (50%) Islam; Ashura (Shiite
Holiday); Discrimination; News and News Media; Social Conditions and Trends;
Holidays and Special Occasions

PERSON: Hassan M Fattah; Rasheed Abou al- Samh

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia; Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

BASRA RAID FINDS DOZENS DETAINED BY IRAQ SPY UNIT

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE; Reporting was contributed by Khalid al-Ansary, Hosham
Hussein, Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1649 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Monday, March 5


Iraqi special forces and British troops stormed the offices of an Iraqi
government intelligence agency in the southern city of Basra on Sunday, and
British officials said they discovered about 30 prisoners, some showing signs of
torture.

The raid appeared to catch Iraq's central government by surprise and raised new
questions about the rule of law in the Shiite-dominated south, where less than
two weeks ago Britain announced plans for a significant reduction in its forces
because of improved stability.

News of the Basra raid, with its resonant themes of torture and sectarian-driven
conflict, coincided with the next stage of the intensified security plan here in
Baghdad, where more than 1,100 American and Iraqi soldiers moved into Sadr City,
a stronghold of Iraq's largest Shiite militia. The soldiers met no resistance in
what the Americans called the plan's biggest test yet.

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, a conservative Shiite, condemned the raid
in Basra. He publicly said nothing about the evidence of torture.

''The prime minister has ordered an immediate investigation into the incident of
breaking into the security compound in Basra and stressed the need to punish
those who have carried out this illegal and irresponsible act,'' said the full
text of a statement issued late Sunday by his office.

It remained unclear why he sought to pursue the raiding force aggressively
rather than the accusations of prisoner abuse. Efforts to reach officials in his
office were unsuccessful.

The discovery of prisoners in the Basra offices, which the British described as
the headquarters of Iraq's government intelligence agency, echoed other recent
cases in which American or British forces stumbled onto a government-run
detention center that held people showing signs of torture.

As recently as December, a combined force of British and Iraqi troops assaulted
a police station in Basra and rescued 127 prisoners from fetid conditions. Some
of the prisoners had been tortured.

The most significant recent case involved a secret Baghdad prison run by the
Shiite-controlled Interior Ministry, known as Site 4 and discovered by American
and Iraqi troops last year, where more than 1,400 prisoners were discovered and
where some had been subjected to systematic abuse.

Mr. Maliki has been under considerable pressure, particularly from American
officials and Sunni Arab leaders, to rid the country's Shiite-run security and
intelligence forces of militia influence and human rights abuses. American
officials have warned Iraqi leaders that they might curtail aid to the Interior
Ministry, which runs the country's police forces, if officials who commit
''gross violations of human rights'' and are not held accountable.

The Interior Ministry, dominated by Shiites, has long been accused by Sunni
Arabs of complicity in torture and killings.

It was unclear whether the Basra detainees were still in custody, and there was
no further information on the of the detainees or their captors. A spokesman for
the British military command in Basra, Maj. David Gell, said in a telephone
interview early Monday that he could not provide any further information about
them. Reuters news agency said the detainees included a woman and two children.

The raid in Basra comes as the British command is planning a drawdown of as many
as 1,600 of its 7,200 troops, a decision driven by the British government's
assessment that Iraqi forces are strong enough to manage the security of the
region on their own. In announcing the reduction on Feb. 22, Prime Minister Tony
Blair said that while the Basra area remained dangerous, British troops faced
far less violence than Americans farther north and that ''the next chapter in
Basra's history can be written by Iraqis.''

It was unclear whether the discovery in Basra would have any impact on British
planning.

Major Gell said the intelligence agency office was raided after an investigation
earlier Sunday led to the capture of five suspected bomb makers and evidence
that pointed to possible violations at the agency's offices. In those offices,
he said, ''Evidence of significant criminal activity such as torture was
found.''

In Baghdad, Iraqi and American soldiers began to patrol the streets of Sadr City
and conducted house-to-house searches for illegal weapons and militia fighters
linked to sectarian crimes, according to residents and the American military
command. No shots were fired.

''Local residents were receptive and cooperative with coalition and Iraqi
forces,'' said Lt. Col. Scott R. Bleichwehl, a military spokesman in Baghdad.
The operation is the most ambitious since the implementation of the latest
security plan for Baghdad nearly three weeks ago. The push into Sadr City, a
bastion of Shiite militancy and anti-Americanism, will serve as a test of Mr.
Maliki's willingness to seriously confront the country's Shiite militias,
particularly the Mahdi Army, which is based in Sadr City and is led by Moktada
al-Sadr, a powerful cleric.

Sadr City residents said they witnessed American soldiers converting a police
station into a small garrison on the neighborhood's western flank. American and
Iraqi military officials would not confirm this report, but officials have been
planning to open a joint Iraqi-American security station there, one of several
in the plan to pacify Baghdad, unveiled by President Bush in January.

The sweep on Sunday amounted to the largest military operation in Sadr City
involving American troops since 2004, when the Americans suppressed a violent
uprising of the Mahdi Army with ground forces and aerial bombardments.

American officials have been pressing Mr. Maliki to send troops into Sadr City
and wrest control from the Mahdi Army, which has been accused of driving the
cycle of sectarian bloodshed but is considered by many Shiite followers of Mr.
Sadr to be a bulwark defense against Sunni insurgents.

The prime minister has also been under pressure from the Americans and his Iraqi
critics to distance himself politically from Mr. Sadr, whose backing was
decisive in Mr. Maliki's campaign for prime minister last year.

On Sunday, Mr. Maliki announced that he planned to reshuffle his cabinet within
the next two weeks, possibly eroding Mr. Sadr's influence in the administration.
While the prime minister did not identify whom he would replace, two prominent
Shiite politicians said in interviews on Sunday that the Health Ministry, the
most powerful of the six ministries run by a Sadr loyalist, would be removed
from Mr. Sadr's faction's control.

The military incursion into Sadr City, widely anticipated for days, lacked any
element of surprise. It followed protracted negotiations -- among
representatives of Mr. Sadr, neighborhood leaders, Iraqi government officials
and American and British military commanders -- regarding the American role in
Sadr City, home to at least 1.5 million people.

Mr. Sadr has long demanded an American withdrawal from Iraq. But he has promised
not to impede the government's latest crackdown in Baghdad, which involves a
so-called surge of about 20,000 American troops in the capital. The cleric has
privately ordered his militia fighters not to resist the military sweeps
regardless of provocation.

Many militia leaders, in turn, have left Sadr City and sought sanctuary in
Shiite-dominated southern Iraq and Iran, possibly figuring that they can wait
out the offensive and return to the capital later. Their subordinates, foot
soldiers who have for years operated openly in Sadr City, manning checkpoints
and maintaining neighborhood watches, have also remained out of sight in recent
days.

For the past two weeks, American and Iraqi forces have been conducting sweeps of
neighborhoods bordering Sadr City. These operations, in eastern Baghdad, have
been the centerpiece of the new security plan, which is viewed by many here as a
last-ditch effort to save the country from all-out civil war. American and Iraqi
commanders say they have conducted thousands of patrols and detained hundreds of
suspects.

Abdul Hassan Jubara al-Kahbi, the manager of the Sadr City governing council,
warned that a prolonged American presence in the neighborhood might eventually
incite militia members to retaliate.

Other residents, however, had more mundane concerns, like the traffic jams the
sweep caused.

''You can see a vehicle at the entrance of each street,'' said a 45-year-old
baker, who gave only his nickname, Abu Aqil. ''It took me two hours to reach the
grocery store and return home.''

Elsewhere, the American command said Sunday that one marine and one sailor were
killed on Friday while conducting a combat mission in Anbar Province, and
another marine was killed on Saturday, also while on a combat mission in Anbar.

In an operation unrelated to the Sadr City incursion, American soldiers in
Baghdad raided a mosque on Sunday and captured three suspected insurgents hiding
inside, according to the American military.

In the western Baghdad neighborhood of Jamiya, the authorities discovered the
bodies of eight Shiite pilgrims who were apparently on their way to a holy city
south of the capital to celebrate an Islamic holiday this weekend. The bodies
were handcuffed and had bullet holes in their heads, according to an official at
Yarmouk Hospital.

In Hilla, a bomb killed four other Shiite pilgrims -- three women and a child --
on their way to Karbala, one of the southern holy cities. The bomb was
apparently intended for an American convoy but missed, according to an official
at the Interior Ministry. Two others were wounded.

In Baghdad, three people were killed and seven were wounded in a series of
attacks. In one, an editor for the Iraqi newspaper Al Mashriq was shot and
killed by gunmen while he waited to catch a bus to go to work, an official at
the Interior Ministry and a colleague said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In an image from a video posted on a radical Islamic Web site,
a group linked to Al Qaeda claims it recorded the killings of 18 Interior
Ministry employees. A photograph of the prisoners, still alive, was posted
Friday. (Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
 A masked officer collected his belongings from an intelligence office in Basra.
Iraq's prime minister criticized the joint forces who conducted yesterday's
raid, but not the possible abuse of the prisoners found there. (Photo by Essam
al-Sudani/Agence France Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A6)Map of Iraq highlighting
Sadr City: More than 1,100 American and Iraqi troops moved into Sadr City. (pg.
A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%);
POLICE FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%) Torture  ; Freedom and Human Rights; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (90%) Kirk Semple; Nuri Kamal Al- (Prime Min) Maliki

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Basra (Iraq); Great Britain; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Heads to Colombia as Scandal Taints Key Alliance

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, March 10


The Bush administration has no closer ally in South America than Colombia, the
recipient of more than $4 billion in American aid this decade to combat drug
trafficking and guerrilla insurgencies. But a widening scandal tying
paramilitary death squads and drug traffickers to close supporters of President
Alvaro Uribe is clouding President Bush's brief visit here on Sunday.

Since the scandal worsened in recent weeks, Democrats in the United States
Congress have increased their scrutiny of two important measures before them: a
broad trade agreement with Colombia that has already been signed by Mr. Bush and
Mr. Uribe, and a request from the administration for a new $3.9 billion aid
package for the country.

Claims of human rights abuses by political allies of Mr. Uribe, including the
use of information from the executive branch's intelligence service to
assassinate union organizers and university professors, have already resulted in
the arrest of Jorge Noguera, a former chief of Colombia's secret police who was
awarded that job after working on the president's campaign.

''Uribe has certainly been considered a bright light here in the United States,
but at some point you have to ask: what are these people doing?'' Senator
Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who heads the Senate panel that oversees
aid to Colombia, said in a telephone interview from Washington. ''It's time to
take a pause and look at what we've done,'' he said, referring to the
effectiveness of aid to Colombia.

Senior government officials here say concern over the scandal should not
distract legislators in the United States from strides by Mr. Uribe since his
presidency began in 2002. Mr. Uribe, an Oxford-educated lawyer, remains highly
popular, with a 72 percent approval rating. Many Colombians, particularly in
cities like Bogota and Medellin, have welcomed a break with the chaotic years
early in the decade when violence by guerrillas and paramilitaries was more
widespread.

''This country was going to be Sudan, and we've turned a corner in a dramatic
way,'' Vice President Francisco Santos said in an interview, referring to fears
at one point that Colombia, destabilized by an internal war, could become a
failed state.

He pointed to accomplishments like economic growth expected to surpass 6 percent
this year, a reduction in violent crime rates in large cities, and a process
demobilizing about 30,000 paramilitary combatants.

Mr. Santos expressed gratitude for American help with efforts to end Colombia's
internal war, which has dragged on for more than four decades, displacing three
million people.

Still, Mr. Santos turned on its head a statement by Winston Churchill about
Americans always doing the right thing after exhausting all the alternatives by
saying the United States had made ''all the right decisions'' in relation to
Colombia. ''If the Congress doesn't approve the free trade agreement, the
message is that being a friend of the United States doesn't pay,'' Mr. Santos
said.

Supporters of Mr. Uribe say ties between paramilitary death squads and political
supporters of the president are coming to light because of the resilience of
Colombia's political institutions, particularly the Supreme Court, which has
been investigating the connections.

The court's diligence despite death threats to its members has resulted in
startling actions like an arrest warrant issued this month for Alvaro Araujo
Noguera, a regional political boss implicated in the kidnapping of a member of a
rival political family. Mr. Araujo, the father of Mr. Uribe's former foreign
minister, Maria Consuelo Araujo, remains at large.

''It is not our concern,'' said Alfredo Gomez Quintero, the magistrate at the
Supreme Court leading the investigation, when asked in an interview how the
revelations might affect American aid to Colombia. ''We know the eyes of the
world are upon us. Our only job is to arrive at the truth.''

Beyond the paramilitary scandal ensnaring members of Mr. Uribe's government and
at least eight members of his coalition in Congress, human rights organizations
are calling attention to the killings of trade union officials in the past six
years. And there are claims of abuses involving American companies like the
Drummond Company, a coal producer based in Birmingham, Ala.

A judge in Alabama this week allowed a civil lawsuit against Drummond to go
forward in which the company is accused of allowing paramilitary gunmen to kill
three union leaders at its operations in northern Colombia.

Drummond has repeatedly denied having a role in the killings, which have
nonetheless generated skepticism over tightening trade relations with Colombia
without safeguarding the rights of the working poor.

''Our aid should be more focused on giving Colombian prosecutors the resources
to do their job,'' said Representative Jim McGovern, a Massachusetts Democrat
who visited Colombia this month.

Here in Bogota, officials point to Mr. Bush's visit, the first by an American
president to the capital since Ronald Reagan in 1982, as evidence that the
security situation has improved. Certainly the scrubbed prosperity of parts of
Bogota, its hotels bulging with foreign business executives and even the
occasional tourist, contrasts with the swaths of territory still controlled by
leftist-inspired guerrilla organizations.

But Mr. Bush's visit has also drawn attention to the fact that Colombia, despite
being the largest recipient of American aid outside the Middle East and
Afghanistan, remains the world's largest producer of cocaine.

The recent emergence of shadowy new paramilitary organizations with an intense
focus on the cocaine trade illustrates the hydra-headed nature of Colombia's
traffickers, political analysts here say.

Mr. Santos, the vice president, said the supply of Colombian cocaine to the
United States would be even greater without American antinarcotics aid. Mr. Bush
is expected to stand by Mr. Uribe at a time when explicit allies in the region
remain scarce.

The fragile stability in Colombia's largest cities and the slow-burning war in
its countryside came into focus in the days before Mr. Bush's arrival, after
Gen. Jorge Daniel Castro, the country's police commander, said officials had
monitored communications by guerrillas about plans for sabotage and attacks to
coincide with the visit.

More than 7,000 police officers have been assigned to protect Mr. Bush.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Soldiers yesterday in Bogota, Colombia's capital. President Bush
was expected to arrive today for a brief visit during his Latin American trip.
(Photo by Rodrigo Arangua/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SCANDALS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); CRIME RATES (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (77%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (76%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (75%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (74%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (73%); VIOLENT CRIME (73%); TRADE
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%);
LAWYERS (68%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (68%); CITY LIFE
(67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (55%); LABOR UNIONS (53%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (53%); VIOLENT CRIME STATISTICS (50%) Drug Abuse and Traffic; Freedom
and Human Rights; United States International Relations; Foreign Aid

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); ALVARO URIBE (79%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) Simon
Romero; George W (Pres) Bush; Alvaro (Pres) Uribe

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%); MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); COLOMBIA (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%)

REGION: Colombia; Colombia

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bill on War Crimes Amnesty Gains in Kabul

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, March 10


The lower house of the Afghan Parliament passed a revised bill on Saturday that
called for amnesty for groups involved in war crimes, lawmakers said. It also
recognized the right of victims to seek justice.

It was not immediately clear when the bill would go to the upper house and be
signed into law by President Hamid Karzai.

Parliament, which includes several warlords, last month passed the original
version of the bill, which granted immunity to all Afghans involved in the
country's long conflict, despite calls by human rights groups for war crimes
trials.

Earlier Saturday, President Karzai praised Parliament's ''important initiative''
to promote national reconciliation and stability, but he proposed adding the
article that also ''safeguards the victim's rights and punishment of an
individual who committed crimes against an individual.''

Last month, tens of thousands of supporters of former mujahedeen leaders rallied
in Kabul to press President Karzai to sign the bill into law.

Shukria Barakzai, an outspoken member of Parliament, said she was unsure of how
the new bill would work. ''On the one hand, I, as an individual, have the right
to seek justice, but I can't do so if it's committed by a group,'' she told
Reuters. ''I myself am confused.''

On Saturday, a top Taliban commander threatened to kill a kidnapped Italian
journalist unless two arrested Taliban spokesmen were freed and a date was set
for the withdrawal of Italian troops from Afghanistan, according to Agence
France-Presse.

Mullah Dadullah, the commander, said the militia had set a seven-day deadline
for the demands to be met. The journalist, Daniele Mastrogiacomo, 52, is a
correspondent for La Repubblica and has been missing in Afghanistan since last
Sunday.

Also on Saturday, a roadside bomb killed four Afghan militia soldiers allied
with the United States-led forces in southeastern Afghanistan, officials said.
No one claimed responsibility for the blast in a remote area in southeastern
Khost Province, near the Pakistan border. Taliban militants have been blamed for
such attacks in the past.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (90%);
AMNESTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); POLITICS (73%); PARDONS (73%); TERRORISM (72%);
IMMUNITY (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); RELIGION (50%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and
Legislation; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism; Amnesties and Pardons; Politics and Government

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (79%) Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Media Face Threat Of Controls

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, May 6


Afghanistan's government, competing with the Taliban for public support and
trying to fend off accusations that it is corrupt and ineffective, is moving to
curb one of its own most impressive achievements: the country's flourishing
independent news media.

Under President Hamid Karzai, a 1960s media law was updated and has been
considered the most liberal in the region. Six independent television channels
have begun broadcasting, and dozens of radio stations and newspapers are now
operating. All news media outlets were under government control under the
Taliban government, which was ousted in late 2001.

Yet for the past year, as the government has sought to counter growing public
dissatisfaction, it has tried to impose more controls over the news media,
journalists and human rights officials said. Parliament is now considering
amendments that the critics warn could undo many of the gains made since the
fall of the Taliban.

Said Aqa Fazil Sancharaki, the director of the Afghanistan National Journalists'
Union, who has been lobbying against many of the amendments with limited
success, said: ''We are concerned about more restrictions. We are not
optimistic.''

One of his main concerns is a plan to abolish the media commission, a largely
independent group made up of journalists and representatives of the community,
which monitors the application of the law and judges complaints, and to replace
it with a commission under much stronger government control.

A spokesman for Mr. Karzai said the president remained a firm supporter of
freedom of the press and would wait to see what amendments were passed in
Parliament. ''The president can sign the law or he can send it back to
Parliament with his amendments,'' said the spokesman, Khaleeq Ahmad.

Yet Mr. Karzai has said there is a need to curb journalists. Mr. Ahmad said the
president meant that journalists should be more responsible, and not print
rumors or falsehoods.

The revisions before Parliament were initiated by Mr. Karzai's government,
though the legislation has changed as it has moved through Parliament.
Journalists and members of Parliament said that some of the proposed
restrictions certainly emanated from the cabinet, if not from the president.

''The government does not want to see and hear about its corruption and
weaknesses on the media,'' said Shukria Barakzai, a member of Parliament and a
former journalist.

The proposal before Parliament would prohibit coverage seen as violating the
provisions of Islam or insulting other religions, as well as coverage that
insults individuals or corporations, without allowing truth as a defense. It
would also prohibit coverage seen as endangering national stability, security or
sovereignty.

Mr. Sancharaki said he had lobbied unsuccessfully to have the clause changed to
the ''principles'' of Islam rather than ''provisions,'' which he said was so
broad that it would allow all manner of interference.

The minister of information and culture, Abdul Karim Khuram, has also scrapped
the plans of his predecessor to make the government-run Afghan National Radio
and Television into a public service governed by an independent board, along the
lines of the BBC.

Mr. Karzai pledged in 2002 to turn the national television and radio station,
and the government news agency, Bakhtar, into public service broadcasting
companies and to establish independent bodies to govern them and to license
broadcasting. But those promises have not been kept, said Shirazuddin Siddiqui,
director of the BBC World Service Trust in Afghanistan, which conducts training
for Afghan journalists.

''The problem is, our government and our Parliament are very young,'' he said.
''Every government wants to have some control of the media.''

Mr. Khuram said that in view of Afghanistan's fragile security situation, Afghan
National Radio and Television should remain government controlled. ''The current
situation regarding security, and social, political and cultural needs is such
that the government should have its own radio, television and newspapers,'' he
said.

He said he also supported restrictions prohibiting news media coverage found to
be against traditional values, the Islamic faith and ethics. He said he had
received many complaints from people about nakedness shown on some channels. He
also wanted to outlaw any coverage that could encourage sexual abuse of
children, he said.

The intelligence service put out a document last year calling for restrictions
on journalists, including outlawing interviews with the Taliban, whose fighters
continue to carry out attacks in large areas of the country. That document did
not have the government's support, Mr. Ahmad said.

''My concern is if the media is against the system and have more freedom, then
elements like the Taliban will use the situation and gain more supporters,''
said Moeen Marastial, a former member of the religious and cultural
parliamentary commission, which has worked on the news media law as it moved
through Parliament.

The slaying by the Taliban of the Afghan translator and reporter, Ajmal
Naqshbandi, last month has badly shaken the press corps, and while pressure from
local power brokers has always been a fact of life, the possibility of new
strictures from the central government have alarmed supporters of an independent
news media.

In the most blatant attack on news gatherers, the attorney general, Abdul Jabar
Sabit, angered by coverage of his comments in Parliament, recently ordered the
arrest of three journalists from the popular television channel Tolo TV. The
police raided the television's headquarters, roughed up members of the staff and
detained the three journalists for a short while.

Mr. Khuram, the information minister, refused to condemn Mr. Sabit's action,
saying that the attorney general had the right to make arrests. Instead, Mr.
Khuram asked Tolo TV to apologize to Mr. Sabit for its coverage. Tolo TV
refused, and filed a complaint with the Supreme Court.

In another matter that has caused widespread interest in Afghanistan, the upper
house of Parliament passed an amnesty bill on Sunday, granting factions and
political groups involved in past hostilities freedom from state prosecution.

Supporters of the bill said it was necessary for peace and reconciliation in the
country. But the United Nations, human rights organizations and liberal members
of Parliament have criticized it for granting immunity to suspected war
criminals.

Mr. Karzai rejected an earlier version and introduced an amendment that
recognizes the individual's right to seek justice for individual war crimes. It
is not clear whether he will sign the new version.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Afghans protested the programming of the Tolo television station
on April 19, in Kabul. They carried photos of the attorney general, Abdul Jabar
Sabit, who ordered the arrest of three journalists from the station. (Photo by
Shah Marai/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRUPTION (90%); WRITERS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%); LOBBYING (89%); LIBERALISM
(78%); LEGISLATION (77%); BROADCASTING REGULATION (77%); CULTURE DEPARTMENTS
(76%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (76%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(69%); RELIGION (63%) Freedom of the Press; News and News Media; Freedom and
Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (89%) Abdul Waheed Wafa; Carlotta Gall; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In War-Crimes Trial, A Signal to Africans

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 203 words


To the Editor:

Re ''International Justice on Trial'' (editorial, June 10):

The challenges judges need to rise to in trying war-crimes cases fairly and
efficiently were evident at the opening of the trial of Charles Taylor, the
former president of Liberia, which I observed for Human Rights Watch. But the
significance of a trial of a former head of state associated with horrendous
crimes shouldn't be obscured because the proceedings didn't open without a
hitch.

No one said international justice was easy, but it is often essential to ensure
that atrocities cannot be committed with impunity. The Sierra Leone war-crimes
court faces additional challenges because of the trial's relocation outside
Sierra Leone for security concerns. By using video, audio and observation by
local journalists and civil society, the court is working to ensure that the
communities most affected by the crimes are kept informed.

Charles Taylor's war-crimes trial signals that no one is above the law and puts
would-be perpetrators on notice. And thanks to the court's outreach work, that
message is getting to the people of West Africa.  Elise Keppler Counsel,
International Justice Program, Human Rights Watch New York, June 11, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (92%); LIBERIA (92%); AFRICA (87%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberian Ex-Leader Boycotts War Crimes Trial as It Opens

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 774 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, June 4


On the first day of his trial, former President Charles G. Taylor of Liberia,
one of Africa's most tyrannical warlords, refused to appear in court on Monday
and sent word that he was firing his lawyer, apparently wanting to deflect
attention from proceedings that aim to cover a decade of warfare and
extraordinary cruelties.

Even from a high-security cell, the former dictator succeeded in briefly
dominating the opening session by having his lawyer read a letter saying Mr.
Taylor would not ''be a fig leaf of legitimacy for this court.''

But as his lawyer walked out, the judges ordered the trial, before the United
Nations-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone, to go on.

A panel of four international judges is trying Mr. Taylor, 59, on charges of
backing rebels who plunged Sierra Leone, which borders Liberia, into civil war.
Prosecutors said ''they terrorized, killed and mutilated civilians'' on rampages
in which weapons were often paid for with locally mined diamonds.

Tens of thousands of people were killed in the fighting, and as many as 500,000
were affected by the rebels' campaign, which became notorious for rape and the
cutting off of arms, legs, ears or noses of civilians to silence dissent.

The war strategies of Mr. Taylor are said to have also caused the deaths of
several hundred thousand people in his home country, where he became president
in 1997 after leading a guerrilla army, but any crimes in Liberia are not within
the mandate of this court. His forces often consisted of child soldiers, who the
prosecution said had been indoctrinated and incited through the use of drugs.

Mr. Taylor, the first African head of state to be brought to trial before an
international court, faces 11 counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes,
committed during the Sierra Leone civil war, which lasted from 1991 to 2002.

The long-awaited start of the trial was briefly taken up by procedural wrangling
in which the defense lawyer, Karim Khan, and the presiding judge, Julia
Subutinde of Uganda, sparred over Mr. Taylor's absence. Mr. Khan walked out,
saying Mr. Taylor had ''terminated'' his relations with him, even though the
judge repeatedly ordered him to stay.

As the formal session began in a courtroom of the International Criminal Court,
the prosecution read a nearly three-hour opening statement before the red-robed
judges and two public galleries, packed with diplomats, lawyers, human rights
advocates and reporters.

Outlining his case, Stephen Rapp, the chief prosecutor, said he planned to show
how Mr. Taylor controlled his men, even killing members of his inner circle when
he feared they might expose him, and how he obtained arms and ammunition by
illegally selling timber and trading in diamonds, which became known as ''blood
diamonds.'' Mr. Rapp said the prosecution would show ''how the diamond trade
worked.''

He said he would dwell on the fate of children who were taught to amputate limbs
and gouge out eyes and were even ordered to kill their parents and to see the
army as their new family.

''The crimes are nothing short of enormous,'' Mr. Rapp said. While the suffering
could never be erased, he said, he hoped that the trial would give the people of
Sierra Leone ''some small measure of closure.''

Some observers in the gallery said that by boycotting the court session, Mr.
Taylor was evidently trying to draw attention to himself rather than to the
prosecution's graphic accounts. During a break, Abdul Rahim Kamara, a human
rights advocate from Sierra Leone, said Mr. Taylor's absence and other actions
were ''just stalling tactics.''

''But in the end he can't gain anything, Mr. Kamara said. ''He is locked up.''

Mr. Taylor did attend three earlier hearings. During those, he and his lawyer
demanded delays to gain more preparation time, better offices and more financing
for the defense. Mr. Taylor has declared himself partly indigent, which means
that the court pays all of his legal fees, which thus far add up to $680,000, a
court official said.

''Here's a man who has sucked the life blood out of a whole region, emotionally,
physically and financially, and he is playing a smoke and mirrors game over
money,'' said David Crane, former prosecutor of the Special Sierra Leone Court,
who signed the Taylor indictment in 2003 and was in the gallery on Monday.

Mr. Crane said court investigations had estimated Mr. Taylor's personal fortune
at $450 million. Mr. Taylor, he added, may not have ready access to his wealth.
The Swiss government has frozen several million dollars of it.

The trial is to resume June 25, when the prosecution will call its first
witnesses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: People in a shop in Monrovia, Liberia, yesterday watched
televised coverage of the trial of Charles G. Taylor. (Photo by Rebecca
Blackwell/Associated Press)
 Karim Khan, Mr. Taylor's lawyer, at the start of the trial in The Hague. He
soon walked out, telling the judge that Mr. Taylor had fired him. (Pool photo by
Robert Vos)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(89%); DIAMOND MARKETS (87%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ARMIES (75%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); CONFLICT MINERALS (74%); GEMSTONE MARKETS (72%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(69%); CHILD SOLDIERS (68%); DIAMOND MINING (67%); ARMED FORCES (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: STEVE CASE (50%)

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (66%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); SIERRA LEONE (93%); AFRICA (90%); UGANDA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (66%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 9, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Blocks Sri Lanka's Effort to Expel Tamils From Capital

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Anthony David contributed reporting from Colombo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, June 8


The Sri Lankan government's efforts to expel ethnic minority Tamils living in
Colombo, the capital, met with a barrage of criticism from home and abroad on
Friday and was quashed by the country's highest court.

The government had said it had deported nearly 400 Tamils living in low-cost
hotels and boardinghouses in Colombo on suspicion that they were helping ethnic
separatist rebels plot bombings in the city, though no criminal charges were
filed. Human rights groups said the expulsions were tantamount to ethnic
cleansing.

The police, backed by the army, rounded up the men and women on Thursday and
placed them in buses bound for a northern district called Vavuniya, near the
front line between government and rebel territories. The Defense Ministry said
in a statement that only those who could not provide a valid reason for being in
the capital were evicted. Opposition politicians denounced the move as a
violation of the right to move freely within the country.

On Friday, a Colombo-based nonpartisan research and advocacy group called the
Center for Policy Alternatives successfully lobbied the court to halt the
evictions. The police told Reuters that after the court order, those who were
expelled the day before would be given the choice to return to Colombo or be
sent to their homes in rebel-held areas.

In the past year, the 2002 cease-fire that halted Sri Lanka's
quarter-century-long ethnic conflict has fallen apart. The military, aided by
pro-government paramilitary groups, is conducting an intensive campaign against
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.

Since July, the government has largely succeeded in flushing the Tamil Tigers
out of the east, where the rebels had long held strategic patches of coast,
jungle and countryside. The army has tried to push them deeper into the jungle,
in and around the rebel headquarters in the north, Kilinochchi, and the air
force has regularly bombed what it calls their strategic assets in the area.
Meanwhile, the military has also tried to push the rebels away from the western
coast around Mannar, where oil exploration is about to start. There are also
clashes in and around the Jaffna peninsula, farther north, as well as near the
northern front line in northern Vavuniya.

In April, the Tamil Tigers unveiled their latest weapon in the fight: small
airplanes, which they used to bomb an air force base next to the civilian
airport just north of Colombo, forcing the closing of the airport at night and
prompting a number of international airlines to cancel flights to Sri Lanka. The
rebels have refused to return to negotiations until the military offensives
cease.

The United States government, in a statement on Friday, pressed the government
to halt the evictions. The United States, a longtime ally of Sri Lanka and one
of the first foreign countries to include the Tamil Tigers on its list of banned
terrorist organizations, has lately stepped up criticism of the government.

''The United States understands and supports Sri Lanka's obligation to defend
itself against terrorism,'' the statement read. ''But this action can only widen
the ethnic divide at a time when important efforts are under way to reach a
national consensus to end Sri Lanka's nearly quarter-century-old conflict.'' The
United States continues to provide military training assistance to Colombo.

The court order came Friday as troops defused a roadside bomb in the capital and
bombed a rebel airstrip in the north, Reuters reported. Separately, Reuters
said, the police found nine unidentified bodies near the capital. Hundreds of
people, largely ethnic Tamils, are reported to have been abducted across the
country over the last several months. On occasion, their bodies turn up.

Last week, the bodies of two workers of the Sri Lanka Red Cross Society were
found in a suburb of Colombo, a day after they were picked up at a Colombo train
station by two men who had identified themselves as police officers. The
president, Mahinda Rajapakse, said the killings were an effort to discredit his
government. His government has opposed calls to dispatch international human
rights monitors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EVICTION (90%); ARMIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); AIR FORCES (88%); AIRPORTS (84%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); ETHNICITY (78%); POLITICS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); DEPORTATION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); TERRORISM (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); MILITARY BASES (75%); ARMED FORCES (75%); LOBBYING (73%); ROOMING &
BOARDING HOUSES (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (70%); AIRLINES (60%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR POLICY ALTERNATIVES (55%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Domestic Worker Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 180 words


To the Editor:

In ''A Maid's Escape Plan in Malaysia'' (photo, June 18), you featured a
domestic worker in Malaysia escaping an abusive employer through a 15th-story
window.

She is far from an isolated case. Every month 1,200 domestic workers run away
from their employers in Malaysia, many complaining of unpaid wages, inadequate
food, confinement in the workplace and in some cases physical or sexual abuse.

Just last week, the State Department ranked Malaysia in its lowest category for
efforts against human trafficking, in significant part because of labor and
immigration policies that place domestic workers at risk of abuse and forced
labor.

Malaysia and other countries with similar problems, such as Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Lebanon and Singapore, should extend protection of their labor laws to
domestic workers, ensure that they can keep their passports, and reform
immigration laws that leave them at the mercy of unscrupulous employers.

Nisha Varia

New York, June 18, 2007

The writer is a senior researcher in the women's rights division at Human Rights
Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FORCED LABOR (88%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (86%); IMMIGRATION (86%); PUBLIC POLICY (86%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (72%); BACK PAY (72%); WOMEN (70%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (69%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (68%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (64%)

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

COUNTRY: MALAYSIA (96%); SINGAPORE (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); KUWAIT (79%);
LEBANON (74%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 2, 2007 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Not the Case

BYLINE: By NOAH FELDMAN; Noah Feldman, a contributing writer, is a law professor
at New York University and adjunct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 905 words


Even among those who opposed the Iraq war from the start, there was always hope
that bringing Saddam Hussein to justice would be a saving grace of the entire
misbegotten enterprise. Now it seems that even this comfort will be denied. Far
from healing old wounds, as some suggested it would, his conviction by the Iraqi
special tribunal has exerted little effect on the deepening civil conflict
between Shiites and Sunnis. The often circuslike atmosphere of the trial, as
well as the murder of three defense lawyers, led groups like Human Rights Watch
to condemn the tribunal as flawed and illegitimate. And the charge for which
Saddam Hussein received the death penalty did not include his most heinous acts.
His execution must still remind the world of the horror of the atrocities he
committed while in power. But unfortunately, the disarray of the legal process
calls greater attention to the failings of the United States, the Iraqis and the
international community in dealing with all that has come after.

Since its inception, the tribunal has been haunted by a fundamental problem that
bedevils the new Iraqi government more generally: the nature and origin of its
authority. That the Iraqi dictator deserved to be punished was never in
question. But from what source did the tribunal, which was established under
U.S. occupation and then affirmed by the sovereign Iraqi government, derive the
right to do so? This was not an academic question. Saddam Hussein was found
guilty and sentenced to hang for sending 148 men and boys to their deaths in the
aftermath of an attempted assassination against him in the Shiite town of Dujail
in 1982. Under Iraqi law at the time, the president was immune from prosecution.
In order to satisfy the rule of law - and to avoid the appearance of victor's
justice - the tribunal needed to be able to explain its basis for applying the
law that was used to find him guilty.

In part, the tribunal sought to draw legitimacy from international law. The
court found Saddam Hussein guilty not of ordinary murder but of ''crimes against
humanity,'' a grand-sounding, internationally recognized charge with intuitive
moral force. When the phrase ''crimes against humanity'' was used at the
Nuremberg trials in 1945, the convening nations did not bother to explain what
gave them the right to define and punish such crimes. It was presumed
self-evident that certain actions were so terrible that they must be treated as
illegal, even if they might have been permissible under Nazi German law when
they took place. The so-called Rome Statute, which created the International
Criminal Court in The Hague in 2002, specifically defined crimes against
humanity in terms drawn from the Nuremberg charter, and the definition used by
the Iraqi special tribunal was copied from there.

Yet it is hard to believe that the Iraqi tribunal could convincingly claim its
authority from the international community. Like the United States, Iraq has not
ratified the Rome Statute. Indeed, the Iraqi tribunal explicitly avoided
submitting itself to international standards so that it would be able to apply
the death penalty, which most of the international community rejects. This
resulted in near complete withdrawal of international cooperation in the
investigation of Saddam Hussein's crimes and the trial itself, and the tribunal
lost some of the perception of fairness that would have come from broader
international participation.

So where, if anywhere, did the Iraqi tribunal get the right to punish Saddam
Hussein for crimes against humanity? Sovereign nations like Iraq can, of course,
punish whatever crimes they choose, and can change or abrogate their own earlier
laws to do it. But there is something unsatisfying about offering this as an
account, for it diminishes the tribunal's credible claim that the Iraqi
dictator's actions reverberated worldwide, implicating not just Iraq but all of
humanity. There must be some deeper source of law, apart from treaties or the
dictates of the United Nations Security Council, that bans the systematic
killing of innocents.

The most persuasive answer is that a law prohibiting crimes against humanity
derives its authority from the inherent moral responsibility that lies with
whoever has the capacity to punish truly heinous deeds. To be sure, in some
cases the international community will bear that responsibility. In the case of
Iraq, though, the international community was not in a position to act, not only
because of the question of the death penalty but also because many of its
members denied the legality of the invasion. Responsibility rested with the
powers that actually held Saddam Hussein within their grasp. Their right - and
their duty - was to bring him to justice.

By these lights, the decision to charge Saddam Hussein with crimes against
humanity was morally and legally justified. Nevertheless, the process fell short
of what is needed to invoke the transcendent norms of universal justice. This
was a profound failure. As with the other shortcomings of Iraq's government,
many players were at fault here: the Americans for failing to provide security
for the Iraqis, including the defense team; the Iraqis for failing to get the
trial - or the country - to run smoothly; the international community for
sanctimoniously disengaging.

But the fact that blame is to be shared does not mitigate the tragedy of this
missed opportunity.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Photo by David E. Scherman/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); MURDER (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); RULE OF LAW (78%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (77%); SENTENCING (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); VERDICTS (77%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); LAWYERS (74%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (71%); IMMUNITY (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(70%); ASSASSINATION (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); GERMANY (69%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Not the Case

BYLINE: By Noah Feldman.

Noah Feldman, a contributing writer, is a law professor at New York University
and adjunct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-07-07; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1011 words


Even among those who opposed the Iraq war from the start, there was always hope
that bringing Saddam Hussein to justice would be a saving grace of the entire
misbegotten enterprise. Now it seems that even this comfort will be denied. Far
from healing old wounds, as some suggested it would, his conviction by the Iraqi
special tribunal has exerted little effect on the deepening civil conflict
between Shiites and Sunnis. The often circuslike atmosphere of the trial, as
well as the murder of three defense lawyers, led groups like Human Rights Watch
to condemn the tribunal as flawed and illegitimate. And the charge for which
Saddam Hussein received the death penalty did not include his most heinous acts.
His execution must still remind the world of the horror of the atrocities he
committed while in power. But unfortunately, the disarray of the legal process
calls greater attention to the failings of the United States, the Iraqis and the
international community in dealing with all that has come after.

Since its inception, the tribunal has been haunted by a fundamental problem that
bedevils the new Iraqi government more generally: the nature and origin of its
authority. That the Iraqi dictator deserved to be punished was never in
question. But from what source did the tribunal, which was established under
U.S. occupation and then affirmed by the sovereign Iraqi government, derive the
right to do so? This was not an academic question. Saddam Hussein was found
guilty and sentenced to hang for sending 148 men and boys to their deaths in the
aftermath of an attempted assassination against him in the Shiite town of Dujail
in 1982. Under Iraqi law at the time, the president was immune from prosecution.
In order to satisfy the rule of law -- and to avoid the appearance of victor's
justice -- the tribunal needed to be able to explain its basis for applying the
law that was used to find him guilty.

In part, the tribunal sought to draw legitimacy from international law. The
court found Saddam Hussein guilty not of ordinary murder but of ''crimes against
humanity,'' a grand-sounding, internationally recognized charge with intuitive
moral force. When the phrase ''crimes against humanity'' was used at the
Nuremberg trials in 1945, the convening nations did not bother to explain what
gave them the right to define and punish such crimes. It was presumed
self-evident that certain actions were so terrible that they must be treated as
illegal, even if they might have been permissible under Nazi German law when
they took place. The so-called Rome Statute, which created the International
Criminal Court in The Hague in 2002, specifically defined crimes against
humanity in terms drawn from the Nuremberg charter, and the definition used by
the Iraqi special tribunal was copied from there.

Yet it is hard to believe that the Iraqi tribunal could convincingly claim its
authority from the international community. Like the United States, Iraq has not
ratified the Rome Statute. Indeed, the Iraqi tribunal explicitly avoided
submitting itself to international standards so that it would be able to apply
the death penalty, which most of the international community rejects. This
resulted in near complete withdrawal of international cooperation in the
investigation of Saddam Hussein's crimes and the trial itself, and the tribunal
lost some of the perception of fairness that would have come from broader
international participation.

So where, if anywhere, did the Iraqi tribunal get the right to punish Saddam
Hussein for crimes against humanity? Sovereign nations like Iraq can, of course,
punish whatever crimes they choose, and can change or abrogate their own earlier
laws to do it. But there is something unsatisfying about offering this as an
account, for it diminishes the tribunal's credible claim that the Iraqi
dictator's actions reverberated worldwide, implicating not just Iraq but all of
humanity. There must be some deeper source of law, apart from treaties or the
dictates of the United Nations Security Council, that bans the systematic
killing of innocents.

The most persuasive answer is that a law prohibiting crimes against humanity
derives its authority from the inherent moral responsibility that lies with
whoever has the capacity to punish truly heinous deeds. To be sure, in some
cases the international community will bear that responsibility. In the case of
Iraq, though, the international community was not in a position to act, not only
because of the question of the death penalty but also because many of its
members denied the legality of the invasion. Responsibility rested with the
powers that actually held Saddam Hussein within their grasp. Their right -- and
their duty -- was to bring him to justice.

By these lights, the decision to charge Saddam Hussein with crimes against
humanity was morally and legally justified. Nevertheless, the process fell short
of what is needed to invoke the transcendent norms of universal justice. This
was a profound failure. As with the other shortcomings of Iraq's government,
many players were at fault here: the Americans for failing to provide security
for the Iraqis, including the defense team; the Iraqis for failing to get the
trial -- or the country -- to run smoothly; the international community for
sanctimoniously disengaging. But the fact that blame is to be shared does not
mitigate the tragedy of this missed opportunity.


  From Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court:

For the purpose of this Statute, crime against humanity'' means any of the
following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack
directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

(a) Murder;

(b) Extermination;

(c) Enslavement;

(d) Deportation ... ;

(e) Imprisonment ... ;

(f) Torture;

(g) Rape ... ;

(h) Persecution ... ;

(i) Enforced disappearance of persons;

(j) The crime of apartheid;

(k) Other inhumane acts. ...

Source: Web site of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by David E. Scherman
 Time Life Pictures/Getty Images)Chart: ''INHUMAN ACTS''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); IRAQ WAR
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); SENTENCING (77%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); VERDICTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); SETTLEMENTS
& DECISIONS (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%);
TERRORISM (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); IMMUNITY (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(71%); ASSASSINATION (67%); MURDER (57%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Capital Punishment; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)
International Criminal Court

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) Noah Feldman; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (79%); GERMANY (69%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Letter Tells of Difficulties in Prosecuting Detainee Abuse

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


A Justice Department team responsible for reviewing accusations of abuse of
detainees by civilian government employees in Iraq and Afghanistan has
encountered ''delays'' and ''unique difficulties,'' the department said in a
letter on Tuesday.

The letter, to Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, said prosecutors
found that some accusations were not credible. Some victims could not be
identified, it said, and a few had been released from custody and could not be
found.

In one case, two lawyers were prepared to travel to an unidentified Middle
Eastern country to interview people who say they had been abused, but canceled
the trip because the country's officials refused to allow the prosecutors to
meet with them.

''As with an American suspected of a crime, those Americans who are the subject
of the referrals are innocent until proven guilty,'' the letter said. ''When
career prosecutors conclude that we cannot prove allegations of a crime beyond a
reasonable doubt, the department -- consistent with its longstanding practices
and policies -- will not prosecute.''

The Justice Department provided the report in response to questions posed by
Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, who in a letter on Dec. 18
asked government lawyers for a progress report. Democrats have expressed
skepticism about the department's inability to bring cases to trial.

The letter described the reasons no charges would be brought in most of the
cases, saying, ''All were declined for insufficient evidence to warrant criminal
prosecution for one or more of the following reasons: insufficient evidence of
criminal conduct; insufficient evidence of the subject's involvement;
insufficient evidence of criminal intent; low probability of conviction.''

A government lawyer who worked on some of the cases said Tuesday that the
problems made prosecutions unlikely in nearly all of the 21 abuse accusations
the team reviewed.

But the official, who did not want to speak on the record about pending
investigations, said prosecutors had tried hard to assemble cases.

''We took these allegations very seriously,'' the official said. ''We tried hard
to get the complete story, to get these cases to prosecution. A lot of effort
has gone into this.''

Of 10 accusations referred to the Justice Department by the inspector general of
the Central Intelligence Agency, one remains under investigation, the official
said. The unclassified version of the letter, which is heavily edited to remove
classified information, provides no details.

Some human rights lawyers said the open case could be that of an Iraqi man who
died during an interrogation at Abu Ghraib prison in November 2004 after he was
turned over to the C.I.A. by the military. Of 10 accusations referred by
military authorities against civilian contractors, one was dropped, the official
said. Nine remain open, but the officials said it was uncertain if any action
would be taken because the offenses could be misdemeanors.

One additional case, stemming from an F.B.I. accusation of abuse at the
detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, also remains open. The official said
there had been no referrals from any agency to the Justice Department after
January 2006.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); EVIDENCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CIVIL
SERVICES (78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); TERRORISM (76%); MISCONDUCT
(73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%) Terrorism;
Torture; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (91%) Justice Department

PERSON: RICHARD DURBIN (58%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) Patrick J (Sen) Leahy; David
Johnston

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%); IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 20, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editor Who Spoke for Turkey's Ethnic Armenians Is Slain

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU; Susanne Fowler contributed reporting from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 774 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 19


A prominent newspaper editor, columnist and voice for Turkey's ethnic Armenians
who was prosecuted for challenging the official Turkish version of the 1915
Armenian genocide, was shot dead as he left his office on a busy street in
central Istanbul on Friday.

Television images showed the editor, Hrant Dink, lying on the crowded sidewalk
covered with a white sheet outside the office of his bilingual Turkish-Armenian
weekly, Agos. Officials said they detained three suspects. Investigators were
monitoring surveillance tapes from nearby shops.

Mr. Dink, 53, a Turk of Armenian descent, often provoked widespread anger in
Turkey for his comments on the genocide -- which Turkey denies, saying the
deaths of hundreds of thousands of Armenians resulted from hunger and other
suffering in World War I. He also angered some ethnic Armenians for opposing
their demand that Turkey recognize the genocide as a condition of entry to the
European Union. He viewed entry into the Union as the clearest route to
strengthening democracy in Turkey.

In recent articles, Mr. Dink (pronounced deenk) described increasing death
threats against him. ''I do not know how real these threats are,'' he wrote,
''but what's really unbearable is the psychological torture that I'm living in,
like a pigeon, turning my head up and down, left and right, my head quickly
rotating.''

Reaction to the daylight shooting, both here and abroad, was swift and deep.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan condemned the shooting as a direct attack on
Turkey's peace and stability. ''A bullet was fired at freedom of thought and
democratic life in Turkey,'' he said in a nationally broadcast news conference.
''Once again, dark hands have chosen our country and spilled blood in Istanbul
to achieve their dark goals.''

In an unusual show of anger and regret, the prime minister's remarks were echoed
by the head of the armed forces, the president and other officials. The Armenian
patriarch in Istanbul, Archbishop Mesrob Mutafyan, declared 15 days of mourning
for the small Armenian, Christian population of Turkey.

Several thousand people marched from Mr. Dink's office to Taksim Square on
Friday evening to protest the killing. People held pictures of Mr. Dink,
decorated his office door with flowers, waved black flags and chanted,
''Shoulder to shoulder against fascism,'' and, ''We are all Hrant; we are all
Armenians.''

European officials and human rights groups also expressed horror and called on
Turkey to do more to protect free expression.

Mr. Dink was one of a number of intellectuals convicted under Article 301 of the
Turkish Penal Code, which penalizes remarks against the state or the Turkish
identity. It been harshly criticized by the European Union as a violation of
freedom of expression, as Turkey moves toward membership.

Turkey has been changing some laws to try to meet the European Union's
membership criteria, but faced a setback last month when ministers in Brussels
decided to freeze talks on 8 of 35 areas of discussion because of Turkey's
refusal to open its airports and seaports to Cyprus, a member of the Union.

Among the crowd that gathered Friday night, the common fear was that this
assassination would be added to the list of unsolved murders. ''This is an
attack against our democracy,'' said Ayhan Aydin, an international financial
consultant, who worked on the same street on which Mr. Dink was shot.

''We're here to show that sensible people wish this assassination to be
clarified and want the perpetrators to be brought to justice,'' Mr. Aydin said,
standing in the crowd. ''We all fear that this insane attack might be swept
under the carpet once it gets too complicated to resolve, like other murders
did.''

Turkey's ambition to become a European Union member requires further
democratization and a better functioning legal system. The group has been
particularly critical of Article 301.

Derya Sazak of the Milliyet newspaper said of the law, ''This legal system
brings forward the culture of hatred and lynching, in which Hrant became an open
target. The murderers always go after the moderate voices, which Turkey needs
the most.''

Mr. Dink, a father of three, founded Agos in 1996. The bilingual community
newspaper has a weekly circulation of 5,000.

Haluk Sahin, a columnist for the Radikal newspaper, a strong supporter of Mr.
Dink's legal struggles, said Turkey had been hit in the heart.

''Those who wanted to harm Turkey couldn't have chosen a better target,'' Mr.
Sahin said. ''As opposed to other killings in the past, Turkish public reaction
against this murder will show us where Turkey stands in the world.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Protesters rallied in Istanbul yesterday, some holding up signs
of Hrant Dink, a newspaper editor and ethnic Armenian who was shot dead outside
his office earlier in the day. Officials said they detained three suspects.
(Photo by Lynsey Addario for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (88%); EUROPEAN
UNION (88%); WORLD WAR I (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION
(73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (72%); TORTURE
(72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (70%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (66%); PRIME MINISTERS (64%); PRESS CONFERENCES (63%); CRIMINAL LAW
(62%); RELIGION (61%) News and News Media; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (58%) Sebnem Arsu; Hrant Dink

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (94%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (99%); TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(92%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canadian to Remain on U.S. Terrorist Watch List

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Despite a Canadian inquiry that cleared a Syrian-born Canadian citizen of any
terrorist ties, the Bush administration has formally refused a Canadian
government request that it remove the man, Maher Arar, from the terrorist watch
list, saying that the United States has secret information justifying his
inclusion.

On Monday, the Justice Department released a letter affirming the Mr. Arar's
listing sent last week by Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales and Michael
Chertoff, the homeland security secretary, to the Canadian minister of public
safety, Stockwell Day.

In the letter, dated Jan. 16, Mr. Gonzales and Mr. Chertoff said their
departments and American intelligence agencies ''have re-examined the materials
in the possession of the United States regarding Mr. Arar.

''Based on this re-examination,'' he added, ''we remain of the view that the
continued watch listing of Mr. Arar is appropriate.''

After the letter was sent, Mr. Day met last week with Mr. Chertoff and Mr.
Gonzales and reviewed the American dossier on Mr. Arar in its entirety, but
still disagreed with the American decision, Canadian and American officials
said.

For human rights advocates, Mr. Arar became a symbol of the United States'
counterterrorism policies gone drastically awry, when he was detained in New
York in 2002 while trying to change planes and then sent to Syria. He was
imprisoned in Syria for more than a year and beaten repeatedly with a heavy
metal cable before the Syrian authorities released him in October 2003.

A two-year investigation by a Canadian government commission concluded in
September that Mr. Arar had no terrorist ties and that the Canadian authorities
had passed misleading information about him to the United States before he was
sent to Syria. The disclosures led to the resignation of the head of the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police and a formal protest by the Canadian government to the
Bush administration over Mr. Arar's treatment.

The Bush administration refused to provide documents or witnesses to Canada's
Arar Commission, and it has never admitted to any mistakes in its handling of
Mr. Arar.

At a hearing last week, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who is the
new Democratic chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, angrily pressed Mr.
Gonzales about the case. In a statement on Monday, Senator Leahy said he was
''puzzled'' by the decision to keep Mr. Arar on the watch list.

''This abhorrent practice stains America's reputation as a defender and
protector of human rights, and I hope this administration will renounce it at
long last,'' Senator Leahy said. Mr. Gonzales has agreed to brief Mr. Leahy and
Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, the top Republican on the committee, on
the case.

Spokesmen for Mr. Gonzales and Mr. Chertoff declined Monday to discuss the case,
noting that a federal lawsuit filed by Mr. Arar against the United States
government and dismissed last year is still on appeal.

An attorney for Mr. Arar, Maria C. LaHood, said the recent exchange provided
more support for a statement last month by the Canadian prime minister, Stephen
Harper, that ''we simply have a U.S. government that won't admit it's wrong.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maher Arar at a news conference in December. He was detained in
New York in 2002 and then sent to Syria. (Photo by Chris Wattie/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); WITNESSES (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); LITIGATION (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); POLICE FORCES (70%) Terrorism; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (58%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
(57%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%); MICHAEL CHERTOFF (79%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%);
ARLEN SPECTER (58%) Scott Shane; Maher Arar

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (99%); SYRIA (96%)

REGION: Canada; Syria

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Holocaust Denier Deniers

BYLINE: By PATRICIA COHEN; Compiled by Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section E; Column 5; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Arts, Briefly; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 182 words


More than 100 Iranian artists and intellectuals signed a statement condemning a
Holocaust conference, largely given over to Holocaust deniers, that was
sponsored by the Iranian government in Tehran in December. The statement, which
appears in the forthcoming issue of The New York Review of Books and on its Web
site (nybooks.com), begins by acknowledging ''our diverse views on the
Israeli-Palestinian question.'' It condemns the conference's ''attempt to
falsify history'' and pays ''homage to the memory of the millions of Jewish and
non-Jewish victims of the Holocaust,'' as well as ''other victims of crimes
against humanity across the world.'' Azar Nafisi, the author of ''Reading Lolita
in Tehran,'' who helped to create the statement with Roya and Ladan Boroumand,
the founders of a human-rights group in Iran, said in a telephone interview that
many people could not voice their objections to the conference inside Iran for
fear of reprisals, but that ''we felt that as Iranians, we should make a
statement'' that the conference ''should not come out in our names.''
PATRICIA COHEN

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (94%); GENOCIDE (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); INTERVIEWS
(73%); WRITERS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); WEB SITES (57%) Nazi
Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

PERSON: Patricia Cohen

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
ISRAEL (92%); IRAN (88%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Leader to Visit Sudan For Talks on Darfur Conflict

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH; Fan Wenxin contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI, Jan. 24


Chinese officials announced Wednesday that President Hu Jintao would visit Sudan
in early February and would seek a diplomatic solution to the conflict in the
country's western Darfur region, which the United States has described as
genocide.

Mr. Hu's visit to Sudan will be part of an eight-country tour of Africa, the
latest of a string of high-level visits to the continent by Chinese officials.

In recent months, China has faced widespread criticism for its economic
engagement with Sudan at a time when government-allied militias known as the
janjaweed have carried out frequent attacks on civilian populations in western
Darfur. At least 200,000 people have died in the conflict since early 2003, and
many thousands have been forced to flee their homes.

China has played a leading role in building a thriving oil industry in Sudan
amid the violence in Darfur, and now imports more than 64 percent of Sudan's oil
exports, accounting for nearly 5 percent of China's petroleum imports.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman said that China would use its diplomatic influence
to encourage a settlement of the Darfur crisis, but that China would not
publicly pressure Sudan or threaten it with sanctions.

''The Sudan issue should be resolved like any other -- through peaceful
negotiation,'' Assistant Foreign Minister Zhai Jun said at a news conference in
Beijing. ''Using pressure and imposing sanctions is not practical and will not
help settle the issue.''

Mr. Zhai acknowledged China's prominent role as a leading trading partner of
Sudan's and said China would sign new economic agreements with the country
during Mr. Hu's visit. ''With Sudan, we have cooperation in many aspects,
including military cooperation,'' he said. ''In this, we have nothing to hide.''

China's intense engagement with the continent has brought increasing scrutiny,
and very often criticism, from Western governments and from international human
rights groups and others who say China ignores questions of governance and of
rights as it pursues business opportunities in Africa.

Despite the vow not to pressure the Sudanese government, Chinese diplomatic
analysts said the announcement of a diplomatic initiative with Sudan was a
turning point in China's foreign policy and in its relations with Africa in
particular.

''This is a remarkable change,'' said Shi Yinhong, an expert in international
relations at People's University in Beijing. ''It would boost China's image in
the West, and would be welcomed in Africa, too.''

Mr. Shi said that during the recent China-Africa summit meeting in Beijing, Mr.
Hu had pushed the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, in private to
cooperate with the United Nations.

''China has begun to follow a different pattern on this issue,'' Mr. Shi said,
adding, ''When the world talks about China's rise, naturally that places demands
and pressure on China to take on more responsibility.''

An expert in African affairs, however, expressed more caution. ''China now is
showing slightly different tactics, paying more attention,'' said He Wenping,
director of African studies at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, in
Beijing. ''Hu's visit at least gives a clear signal that China thinks the Sudan
issue is important and China wants to play a role. But China's strategy remains
the same, and as always, it uses quiet diplomacy to keep a constructive
engagement, rather than waving a stick.''

In the last two years, Africa has been the focus of a huge push by Chinese
diplomats and companies to expand China's influence abroad. Africa's many
countries offer China a rich source of support in United Nations votes and help
in securing petroleum and other natural resources needed by China's booming
economy.

Africa is also a stage of China's bitter diplomatic contest with Taiwan, with
China offering large amounts of foreign aid and investment to countries in order
to keep them from recognizing Taiwan, which this country regards as a breakaway
province.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman, Mr. Zhai, acknowledged that there had been
problems in certain countries, like Zambia, where there were riots last year at
a Chinese-controlled copper mine after a labor dispute over working conditions.
''We are also trying to educate Chinese businesses who have interests in Africa
and investments there to respect social conventions and observe local laws and
regulations,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: China is applying quiet diplomacy with Sudan, whose president,
Omar Hassan al-Bashir, was in Beijing in November for summit talks. (Photo by
Frederic J. Brown/Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%);
IMPORT TRADE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PETROLEUM
EXPORTS & IMPORTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); OIL & GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS (90%); FOREIGN
POLICY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%);
BUSINESS FORECASTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); EXPORT TRADE (73%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (73%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (68%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (67%); FINES & PENALTIES (51%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

PERSON: HU JINTAO (91%) Howard W French; Hu Jintao (Pres)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Sudan; China; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Officer to Face Court-Martial on 8 Charges in Abu Ghraib Abuse

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: HAGERSTOWN, Md., Jan. 26


The only United States military officer charged with a crime in the Abu Ghraib
abuse scandal will be court-martialed on eight charges, including cruelty and
maltreatment of prisoners, the Army said Friday.

The officer, Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan, 50, a reservist from Virginia who ran
the interrogation center at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, was accused of
failing to exert his authority as the prison descended into chaos, with
prisoners being stripped naked, photographed in humiliating poses and
intimidated by snarling dogs. Colonel Jordan was also charged with lying to
investigators.

He has not been accused of torturing or humiliating prisoners, and he was not
seen in any of the photographs revealing the abuses.

Maj. Gen. Guy C. Swann, commander of the Military District of Washington,
decided that Colonel Jordan must stand trial, said Col. Jim Yonts, an Army
spokesman.

Colonel Jordan was charged in April with 12 offenses. General Swann dismissed
four of them after Colonel Jordan was given an Article 32 hearing, the military
equivalent of a civilian preliminary hearing, in October. Most of the dropped
charges stemmed from accusations that Colonel Jordan had falsified vehicle
repair records.

Besides cruelty and maltreatment, the charges include disobeying a superior
officer, willful dereliction of duty and making false statements. The remaining
charges carry a total maximum prison term of 22 years.

Colonel Jordan's military lawyers did not return calls for comment.

At his October hearing, Colonel Jordan said he had had no operational control
over interrogations and had spent much of his time trying to improve soldiers'
deplorable living conditions.

The government says that Colonel Jordan's actions or inaction subjected
detainees to forced nudity and intimidation by dogs. He is also accused of lying
to investigators in denying that he saw any abuse.

Colonel Jordan's ''tacit approval'' of violence by military police during an
episode in November 2003 ''can be pointed to as the causative factor that set
the stage for the abuses that followed for days afterward,'' concluded Maj. Gen.
George R. Fay and Lt. Gen. Anthony R. Jones, who investigated the abuses.

Eleven other United States soldiers, all enlisted, have been convicted in
connection with Abu Ghraib, with former Cpl. Charles A. Graner Jr. receiving the
harshest sentence, a 10-year prison term.

A general and other officers have received reprimands or demotions that ended or
blighted their careers.

Since being charged in April, Colonel Jordan has been on active duty with the
Intelligence and Security Command at Fort Belvoir, Va.

Hina Shamsi of Human Rights First, a civil rights group based in New York, said
the decision to hold a court-martial was a welcome development toward
accountability.

''We're actually starting to hold more senior-level officers accountable for
what were clearly systemic failures,'' Ms. Shamsi said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan, 50. (Photo by Steve Ruark/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (93%); MILITARY COURTS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); SEX
SCANDALS (90%); ARMIES (90%); SCANDALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); TORTURE
(78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(76%); LAWYERS (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); EMPLOYEE
DEMOTIONS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); GENOCIDE (68%); LIVING CONDITIONS
(66%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (62%) United States Armament and Defense;
Courts-Martial; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Steven L (Lt Col) Jordan

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Our Moral Guide

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 41 words


To the Editor:

Re ''German Court Confronts U.S. on Abduction'' (front page, Feb. 1):

The United States has become a leader in human rights abuses, while Germany has
become our attempted moral guardian.Lonnie HanauerWest Orange, N.J., Feb. 1,
2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); TERRORISM (84%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (84%)
Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%) Central
Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Lonnie Hanauer

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (90%)

REGION: Germany

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 14, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Argentina: Formal Request For Ex-President's Return
From Spain

BYLINE: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 43 words


Argentina formally asked Spain to extradite Maria Estela de Peron, the former
president, as part of an investigation into past human rights abuses, a Foreign
Ministry official said. Ms. Peron, known as Isabel, is 75 and has lived in exile
in Spain since 1980.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (84%) Freedom and Human Rights; Extradition;
Drug Abuse and Traffic

PERSON: Isabel Martinez De Peron; Elisabeth Malkin; Felix (Mayor) Salgado
Macedonio

COUNTRY: SPAIN (95%)

REGION: Argentina; Spain; Acapulco (Mexico)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Maurice Papon, Convicted Vichy Official, 96, Is Dead

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1849 words


Maurice Papon, a prominent French functionary convicted in 1998 of complicity in
Nazi crimes against humanity during the German occupation in World War II, died
yesterday at a private clinic near Paris. He was 96.

He underwent heart surgery related to his pacemaker on Tuesday, and died in his
sleep, said his lawyer, Francis Vuilleman, The Associated Press reported.

In the end, Mr. Papon served less than three years of his 10-year sentence for
deporting hundreds of Jews to their deaths in German concentration camps from
southwestern France, where he was an official of the Vichy government, which
collaborated with the Germans. He always protested that he had done only what
the Germans had made him do.

He appealed after his trial ended in April 1998, but fled to Switzerland the
next year rather than go to jail, where French law required him to be before his
appeal could be heard.

Soon caught and bundled back to France, where his attempted escape had
invalidated his appeal, he started serving his sentence in October 1999. The
European Court of Human Rights ruled in 2002 that the French law on appeals had
violated his civil rights, but he stayed in the Sante Prison in Paris until that
September, when a French court agreed with a new appeal that heart trouble and
advanced age should spare him further jail time.

''I have no objection to putting Vichy on trial,'' he had said before facing
charges. ''I just don't want the trial to take place on my back.''

Vichy did go on trial with him, and the verdict seemed to confirm, as President
Jacques Chirac had first acknowledged in 1995, that France bore criminal
responsibility for what officials like Mr. Papon had done in collaborating with
the Germans. Mr. Chirac and many others who believed this were later
disappointed by his success in evading punishment.

''Obviously,'' observed Michel Slitinsky, a Holocaust survivor who hunted down
some of the documentation of Mr. Papon's collaboration, ''there is a double
standard when it comes to justice in France.''

Tall and self-assured, Mr. Papon looked the model French elite civil servant,
and for 50 years he seemed to be one, overcoming the taint of collaboration
after the war to be taken under the wing of the hero of the Resistance, Charles
de Gaulle. Mr. Papon became a powerful police official and eventually a Gaullist
government minister before his past finally caught up with him in his old age,
which then abbreviated the punishment that survivors of his victims believed he
deserved.

He was assigned to the civil administration in Bordeaux by the collaborationist
government in Vichy, but as the tide of war turned, he developed contacts with
Resistance leaders who vouched for him after the Liberation.

After the war, Mr. Papon rose through the bureaucracy. He became prefect of
police in Paris, one of the country's top security posts, in 1958, when
divisions over how to deal with Algeria's war for independence threatened to
bring on civil war in France. After de Gaulle agreed to take power under a new
French Constitution, he confirmed Mr. Papon in the key police position.

In Paris Mr. Papon again presided over police actions that would not be fully
exposed until decades later, when it became clear that the forces of order had
taken the law into their own hands, beating up and killing scores of Algerians
in the riot-torn year of 1962, just before the colony achieved its independence.

A career in Gaullist politics followed his retirement from the civil service in
1967.

It was not until 1981, when he was France's budget minister, that he was
confronted with his past. Mr. Slitinsky, whose father died in Auschwitz after
being arrested by the French police in Bordeaux in 1942, had found documents
showing that Mr. Papon had signed the transport order, and many more besides.

It took until 1983 for French judicial authorities to investigate and indict
him, and 14 more years to bring him to trial.

By then, France was ready to confront the dark side of its wartime past in a way
it had not since sentencing Vichy leaders to death for treason immediately after
the war.

Mr. Papon was only the second French citizen to be tried on charges of crimes
against humanity for actions during the war. Paul Touvier, the chief of the
wartime paramilitary militia in Lyon, was sentenced to life in prison in 1994
after being convicted of ordering the execution of seven Jews. He died in
prison.

Mr. Papon's trial in Bordeaux was a six-month lesson in French collaboration for
a new generation, but his lawyers argued successfully that the Nazis had kept
even the Vichy government in the dark about their larger scheme. He was found
guilty only of the deportations, not of having knowingly taken part in
systematic Nazi plans to kill millions of Jews.

Maurice Arthur Jean Papon was born in Gretz, a town east of Paris in the
Seine-et-Marne district, on Sept. 3, 1910. He was the third child of a local
notable who saw to it that his only son went to good schools in Paris, the Lycee
Montaigne and later the Lycee Louis-le-Grand.

After graduating in 1929, he studied law, psychology and sociology in Paris
until 1932, when he joined the army as a reserve officer. That year, he married
Paulette Asso, who died at age 88 a week before the end of his trial in 1998.
They had three children: Aline, born in 1934; Alain, born in 1945; and Muriel,
born in 1948. All three survive him, The A.P. reported.

In 1935, after finishing his studies in public law and economics at the
University of Paris, he took the civil service examinations and joined the
Ministry of the Interior. He was drafted to work in the Foreign Ministry, where
in 1937 and 1938 Mr. Papon helped form policy toward Morocco, Tunisia and the
Middle East.

In 1939, with war nearing, Mr. Papon was called back to active army duty and
sent to Syria. He was there when France was overrun. Mr. Papon, like most other
French civil servants, decided not to follow de Gaulle to London. Instead, he
went to Vichy after the collaborationist government was set up there, and
Maurice Sabatier, in charge of administration, took Mr. Papon under his wing.

In 1942, when Prime Minister Pierre Laval asked Mr. Sabatier to head the French
regional administration in Aquitaine, Mr. Sabatier offered his young protege the
job of secretary general in the Gironde prefecture, in Bordeaux.

Unlike Vichy, Bordeaux was in German-occupied territory. Mr. Papon tried, he
said later, to balance German demands against the interests of France and of the
Jews and others that the Germans soon started asking him to dispossess, arrest
and finally deport to concentration camps.

At first, Mr. Papon and his superiors rounded up foreign Jews, telling
themselves that this way they would at least spare French Jews. But as 1942 wore
on and the Germans grew more demanding, the French officials were drawn into the
fatal machinery, still telling themselves it would be worse without them.

Writing to a subordinate in January 1944, Mr. Papon seemed aware that many of
the people rounded up at the French concentration camp in Merignac, outside
Bordeaux, and then shipped off in trains to Drancy, north of Paris, would never
return.

''We have to try,'' Mr. Papon wrote, ''to free or, if not, keep in Merignac,
Jews of interest: holders of the military Legion d'Honneur or Croix de Guerre,
war invalids, wives of prisoners.''

But when the Germans said people like these had to go too, they went. The orders
signed by Mr. Papon went into the files, where researchers like Mr. Slitinsky
and Serge Klarsfeld, a lawyer who has documented the fates of almost all of the
74,721 Jews (out of 330,000) deported from France during the war, found the
documents decades later. All but a few died in Nazi extermination camps.

The Germans who dealt with Mr. Papon found him ''correct and readily
cooperative,'' as one field report put it in 1943. ''He works well with the
Kommandatura and he is fast and competent,'' the report added.

By mid-1944, with the Allies landed in Normandy and the days of the German
occupation clearly numbered, Mr. Papon was cultivating contacts with Gaston
Cusin, a Resistance leader who named him prefect of the Landes after the Allies
took control in August.

To other Resistance fighters who expressed surprise and indignation, Mr. Cusin
said that Mr. Papon had several times refused Vichy promotions, showing that his
heart had been on the right side.

Mr. Papon was soon promoted to Paris, where in 1945 and 1946 he was involved in
administering the affairs of Algeria, then a French overseas department. After a
brief interlude as chief government administrative officer on Corsica, in 1949
he went to Constantine, Algeria, to be regional prefect, then spent time in
Morocco, before returning to Algeria in 1956 to direct counterinsurgency tactics
in the war of independence.

The war was reaching a climax by the time Mr. Papon left Algeria, in 1958,
telling superiors in Paris: ''France is on the offensive on all fronts. The
populations are returning to us.''

In Paris, though, attacks on the police by supporters of Algerian independence
had led to a major morale crisis, and Mr. Papon was called in as prefect to
control the violence.

When a demonstration on Oct. 17, 1961, turned violent, there was retaliation: At
least 48 Algerians were killed, probably by police officers, and their bodies
thrown into the Seine, a report to the government 38 years later established.

At the time and later, Mr. Papon insisted that only three Algerians were killed,
and denied he had covered up the truth.

The Paris police also brutally put down a demonstration against the shadowy
Secret Army Organization, a cabal of officers trying to keep de Gaulle from
granting independence to Algeria, in February 1962.

When eight civilians died in a crush after a police charge drove them down into
a subway station, Mr. Papon's response was that the demonstration had been
forbidden. And when a Moroccan opposition leader, Mehdi ben Barka, was abducted
on the Boulevard Saint-Germain in daylight in 1965 by two policemen, turned over
to Moroccan gangsters and never seen alive again, Mr. Papon said he was not
responsible. The police service, he said, had been betrayed by the officers
involved.

Mr. Papon retired from the civil service with honors in 1967 and, following a
classic French technocratic pattern, went off to run a state-owned industry,
Sud-Aviation, which was then involved in introducing the supersonic Concorde.

The following year he went into Gaullist politics, winning a seat in Parliament
in from the Cher, the rural central French district his father and grandfather
had come from. Over the next decade he rose steadily in Parliament, becoming
head of the finance committee in 1972. In April 1978 he was named budget
minister under Prime Minister Raymond Barre.

It was three years later, shortly after the election of France's first Socialist
president, Francois Mitterrand, that Mr. Papon's Vichy past resurfaced.

He spent the rest of his life defending himself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Crime and Law Enforcement

PERSON: Maurice Papon

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maurice Papon in February 1999, and in January 1946. (Photo by
Michel Lipchitz/Associated Press)
 (Photo by Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%); GENOCIDE (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); HEART DISEASE (77%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
(77%); JEWS & JUDAISM (76%); LAWYERS (75%); CIVIL SERVICES (75%); POLICE FORCES
(75%); SURGERY & TRANSPLANTATION (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%) Nazi
Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Biographical Information; Deaths
(Obituaries); Sentences (Criminal); Deportation; Concentration Camps

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

JACQUES CHIRAC (58%) Craig R Whitney; Maurice Papon

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (90%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (99%); GERMANY (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: France

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 19, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Maurice Papon, French Nazi Collaborator, Dies at 96

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1721 words


Maurice Papon, a prominent French functionary convicted in 1998 of complicity in
Nazi crimes against humanity during the German occupation in World War II, died
Saturday at a private clinic near Paris. He was 96.

He underwent heart surgery related to his pacemaker on Tuesday, and died in his
sleep, said his lawyer, Francis Vuillemin, The Associated Press reported.

In the end, Mr. Papon served less than three years of his 10-year sentence for
deporting hundreds of Jews to their deaths in German concentration camps from
southwestern France, where he was an official of the Vichy government, which
collaborated with the Germans. He always protested that he had done only what
the Germans made him do.

He appealed after his trial ended in April 1998, but fled to Switzerland the
next year rather than go to jail, where French law required him to be until his
appeal could be heard.

Soon caught and bundled back to France, where his escape had invalidated his
appeal, he started serving his sentence in October 1999. The European Court of
Human Rights ruled in 2002 that the French law on appeals had violated his civil
rights, but he stayed in the Sante prison in Paris until that September, when a
French court agreed with a new appeal that heart trouble and advanced age should
spare him further jail time.

''I have no objection to putting Vichy on trial,'' he had said before facing
charges. ''I just don't want the trial to take place on my back.''

Vichy did go on trial with him, and the verdict seemed to confirm, as President
Jacques Chirac had first acknowledged in 1995, that France bore criminal
responsibility for what officials like Mr. Papon had done. Mr. Chirac and many
others who believed this were later disappointed by his success in evading
punishment.

''Obviously,'' observed Michel Slitinsky, a Holocaust survivor who hunted down
some of the documentation of Mr. Papon's collaboration, ''there is a double
standard when it comes to justice in France.''

Tall and self-assured, Mr. Papon looked the model French elite civil servant,
and for 50 years he seemed to be one, overcoming the taint of collaboration
after the war to be taken under the wing of the hero of the Resistance, Charles
de Gaulle. Mr. Papon became a powerful police official and eventually a Gaullist
government minister before his past finally caught up with him in his old age,
which then abbreviated the punishment that surviving relatives of his victims
believed he deserved.

He was assigned to the civil administration in Bordeaux by the Vichy government,
but as the tide of war turned, he developed contacts with Resistance leaders who
vouched for him after the liberation.

After the war, Mr. Papon rose through the bureaucracy. De Gaulle, who agreed to
take power under a new French Constitution, confirmed Mr. Papon as prefect of
police in Paris in 1958. The appointment gave him one of the country's top
security posts at a time when divisions over how to deal with Algeria's war for
independence threatened to bring on civil war in France.

In Paris, Mr. Papon again presided over police actions that would not be fully
exposed until decades later, when it became clear that the forces of order had
taken the law into their own hands, beating up and killing scores of Algerians
in the riot-torn year of 1962, just before the colony achieved its independence.

A career in Gaullist politics followed his retirement from the civil service in
1967.

It was not until 1981, when he was budget minister, that he was confronted with
his past. Mr. Slitinsky, whose father died in Auschwitz after being arrested by
the French police in Bordeaux in 1942, had found documents showing that Mr.
Papon had signed the transport order, and many more besides.

It took until 1983 for French judicial authorities to investigate and indict
him, and 14 more years to bring him to trial.

By then, France was ready to confront the dark side of its wartime past in a way
it had not since sentencing Vichy leaders to death for treason immediately after
the war.

Mr. Papon was only the second French citizen to be tried on charges of crimes
against humanity for actions during the war. Paul Touvier, chief of the wartime
paramilitary militia in Lyon, was sentenced to life in prison in 1994 after
being convicted of ordering the execution of seven Jews. He died in prison.

Mr. Papon's trial in Bordeaux was a six-month lesson in French collaboration for
a new generation, but his lawyers argued successfully that the Nazis had kept
even the Vichy government in the dark about their larger scheme. He was found
guilty only of the deportations, not of having knowingly taken part in
systematic Nazi plans to kill millions of Jews.

Maurice Arthur Jean Papon was born in Gretz, a town east of Paris in the
Seine-et-Marne district, on Sept. 3, 1910. He was the third child of a local
notable who saw to it that his only son went to good schools in Paris.

After graduating in 1929, he studied law, psychology and sociology in Paris
until 1932, when he joined the army as a reserve officer. That year, he married
Paulette Asso, who died at age 88 a week before the end of his trial in 1998.
They had three children: Aline, born in 1934; Alain, born in 1945; and Muriel,
born in 1948. All three survive him, The A.P. reported.

In 1935, after finishing his studies at the University of Paris, he joined the
Ministry of the Interior. He was drafted to work in the Foreign Ministry, where
he helped form policy toward Morocco, Tunisia and the Middle East.

In 1939, with war nearing, Mr. Papon was called back to active army duty and
sent to Syria. He was there when France was overrun. Mr. Papon, like most other
French civil servants, decided not to follow de Gaulle to London. Instead, he
went to Vichy after the collaborationist government was set up there, and
Maurice Sabatier, in charge of administration, took Mr. Papon under his wing.

In 1942, when Prime Minister Pierre Laval asked Mr. Sabatier to head the French
regional administration in Aquitaine, Mr. Sabatier offered his young protege the
job of secretary general in the Gironde prefecture, in Bordeaux.

Unlike Vichy, Bordeaux was in German-occupied territory. Mr. Papon tried, he
said later, to balance German demands against the interests of France and of the
Jews and others that the Germans soon started asking him to dispossess, arrest
and finally deport to concentration camps.

At first, Mr. Papon and his superiors rounded up foreign Jews, telling
themselves that this way they would at least spare French Jews. But as 1942 wore
on and the Germans grew more demanding, the French officials were drawn deeper
into the fatal machinery, still telling themselves it would be worse without
them.

Writing to a subordinate in January 1944, Mr. Papon seemed aware that many of
the people rounded up at the French concentration camp in Merignac, outside
Bordeaux, and then shipped off in trains to Drancy, north of Paris, would never
return.

''We have to try,'' Mr. Papon wrote, ''to free or, if not, keep in Merignac,
Jews of interest: holders of the military Legion d'honneur or Croix de Guerre,
war invalids, wives of prisoners.''

But when the Germans said people like these had to go too, they went. The orders
signed by Mr. Papon went into the files, where researchers like Mr. Slitinsky
and Serge Klarsfeld, a lawyer who has documented the fates of almost all of the
74,721 Jews (out of 330,000 French Jews) deported from France during the war,
found the documents decades later. All but a few died in Nazi extermination
camps.

The Germans who dealt with Mr. Papon found him ''correct and readily
cooperative,'' as one field report put it in 1943. ''He works well with the
Kommandatura and he is fast and competent,'' the report added.

By mid-1944, with the Allies landed in Normandy and the days of the German
occupation clearly numbered, Mr. Papon was cultivating contacts with Gaston
Cusin, a Resistance leader who named him prefect of Landes, in southwestern
France, after the Allies took control in August.

To other Resistance fighters who expressed surprise and indignation, Mr. Cusin
said that Mr. Papon had several times refused Vichy promotions, showing that his
heart had been on the right side.

Mr. Papon was soon promoted to Paris, where in 1945 and 1946 he was involved in
administering the affairs of Algeria, then a French overseas department. After a
brief posting on Corsica, in 1949 he went to Constantine, Algeria, to be
regional prefect, then spent time in Morocco, before returning to Algeria in
1956 to direct counterinsurgency tactics in the war of independence.

The war was reaching a climax by the time Mr. Papon left Algeria in 1958,
telling superiors in Paris: ''France is on the offensive on all fronts. The
populations are returning to us.''

In Paris, though, attacks on the police by supporters of Algerian independence
had led to a major morale crisis, and Mr. Papon was called in as prefect to
control the violence.

When a demonstration on Oct. 17, 1961, turned violent, there was retaliation. At
least 48 Algerians were killed, probably by police officers, and their bodies
thrown into the Seine, a report to the government 38 years later established.

At the time and later, Mr. Papon insisted that only three Algerians were killed,
and denied he had covered up the truth.

The Paris police also brutally put down a demonstration against the shadowy
Secret Army Organization, a cabal of officers trying to keep de Gaulle from
granting independence to Algeria, in February 1962.

When eight civilians died in a crush after a police charge drove them down into
a subway station, Mr. Papon's response was that the demonstration had been
forbidden. And when a Moroccan opposition leader, Mehdi ben Barka, was abducted
on the Boulevard Saint-Germain in daylight in 1965 by two policemen, turned over
to Moroccan gangsters and never seen alive again, Mr. Papon said he was not
responsible.

He retired from the civil service with honors in 1967 and the following year
entered politics and won a seat in Parliament. He rose steadily there and became
budget minister in 1978.

Three years later, Mr. Papon's Vichy past resurfaced. He spent the rest of his
life defending himself. Reprinted from yesterday's late editions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: Maurice Papon

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maurice Papon in 1999, before he fled to Switzerland to avoid
prison. (Photo by Michel Lipchitz/Associated Press)
 Mr. Papon in 1946, resuming his civil service career after the war. (Photo by
Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (94%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WORLD WAR II
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%);
GENOCIDE (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HEART DISEASE (77%); CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE (77%); LAWYERS (75%); CIVIL SERVICES (75%); SURGERY & TRANSPLANTATION
(73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (70%); POLICE FORCES
(70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%) Nazi Policies
Toward Jews and Minorities; Concentration Camps; Deaths (Obituaries);
Biographical Information; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

JACQUES CHIRAC (58%) Craig R Whitney; Maurice Papon

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (90%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (97%); GERMANY (93%); SWITZERLAND (92%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gambian Defends the International Criminal Court's Initial Focus on Africans

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 25


The windows of Fatou Bensouda's office high up in the International Criminal
Court's headquarters here offer her a sweeping view of orderly Dutch flatlands.
But her attention is turned to her native Africa, on the chaos and killing at
the heart of the court's first atrocities cases.

Mrs. Bensouda, a 45-year-old Gambian with an open and easy manner, is one of the
court's top officials. She is the deputy to the chief prosecutor, and is in
charge of trials concerning war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

All of the cases set to be taken up by the five-year-old court so far involve
Africa, and the people she hopes to try include a list of warlords from four
nations, leaders who were most prominent in Africa's recent conflagrations, some
of which continue today.

The Darfur region of Sudan looms large on that agenda, because on Tuesday the
prosecution plans to file its first criminal charges linked to the conflict
between the Sudanese government and the rebel fighters. The prosecution will
disclose the names of several senior figures it believes to be among those most
responsible for Darfur's devastating bloodshed and human disaster. Other names
are expected to follow.

The arrest of the Sudanese suspects is not certain. Court officials said Sudan,
while insisting it was cooperating, had done its best to obstruct the court's
investigations, ordered by the United Nations Security Council two years ago.

In one of the newly outfitted courtrooms, though, Mrs. Bensouda has already met
one of the warlords on her list. Thomas Lubanga, a Congolese citizen and once a
powerful militia leader, has been charged with conscripting and abusing
children, some as young as 10, during the fighting in the country's Ituri
region. He is the only suspect in the court's custody, and his trial, expected
later this year, will be the first since the tribunal opened for business in
2002.

Besides Darfur, other cases under investigation involve the civil war in Congo
and conflicts in Uganda and the Central African Republic, which have caused tens
of thousands of deaths and created millions of refugees. Requests for the
investigations, except in the case of Darfur, came from the countries
themselves, but that has not prevented concern among Africans that their
continent is the new court's principal target.

Mrs. Bensouda calmly dismisses that notion. ''This court does not intend to
focus only on Africans; it will prove that in the future,'' she said. ''But at
the moment, Africa clearly presents the gravest situations.''

''This is also our court. It is not imposed on us -- we want to believe in it,''
she continued, pointing out that of the 104 nations who are now full members of
the court, among the first to sign on were numerous African states. Some larger
nations, including China, Russia and the United States, which distrust the
court's powers, are not members.

Mrs. Bensouda's country, Gambia, has mostly escaped the kind of serious violence
on which her career now focuses. But it was her revolt against widespread
injustice that drew her to the law from an early age.

''I was not suffering, but around me there were many victims of violence and
crime, often women, who had no means to defend themselves,'' she said. One of
her uncles, a judge, ''had a deep influence on me.''

Today, Mrs. Bensouda is a prosecutor who, over the course of a career that now
spans two decades, has gained wide experience, rising to become her country's
minister of justice and a senior prosecutor at the United Nations tribunal
dealing with the Rwandan genocide in the 1990s.

She has long worked for gaining more legal protection for women, by having laws
changed at home, and by emphasizing large-scale sexual abuse of women during
conflicts.

It was her past as an advocate for women's legal rights that led many women's
groups to applaud her election to the International Court -- and now, more
recently, to criticize her, along with the broader prosecution strategy in Mr.
Lubanga's case.

Human rights advocates have said the Congolese trial has been far too narrow in
its scope, focusing only on charges of conscription of children by Mr. Lubanga,
rather than addressing the worst crimes of the militia under his command.

Last year, eight human rights groups, known for their support for the court,
wrote an open letter to the chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno Ocampo, deploring that
two years of investigations had not produced a broader range of charges. It was
well known, the letter said, that Mr. Lubanga, leader of the Union of Congolese
Patriots, a violent militia, ''has committed numerous other serious crimes,
including murder, torture and sexual violence.''

In a meeting with the prosecutor, some human rights activists said that
prosecuting only child conscription, which war victims do not regard as serious
as the many killings, rapes and mutilations, sent the wrong signal to victims.

''Yes, we have been criticized,'' Mrs. Bensouda said, ''but we believe that the
problem of child soldiers is very, very serious. Some are turned into killers,
others are used as sex slaves. It is affecting a whole generation of children
who are very difficult to reintegrate into society. Fighting is often all they
know. It's a problem in many places, and we want to highlight this here.''

According to a United Nations report, after the Congolese conflict more than
18,000 children were released from armed groups and thousands more escaped on
their own in the past two years. Worldwide, as many as a quarter-million young
children are forced to serve in wars, by some estimates.

Torture, rape and other sexual offenses, she said, were very much part of the
other investigations before the court. As for Mr. Lubanga, she added, ''for now
he will be tried for child conscription because that is where we had the best
evidence at the time we issued charges.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fatou Bensouda is preparing prosecutions of African warlords.
(Photo by Jan Daniels/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (77%); CIVIL WAR (75%); REFUGEES (71%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (70%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); CHILD ABUSE (50%) Biographical Information;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (54%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marlise Simons; fatou bensouda

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); AFRICA (95%); GAMBIA (94%); UGANDA (92%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

REGION: Africa; Darfur Province (Sudan); Sudan; Congo; Uganda; Central African
Republic; Africa; Gambia

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing Northwest: Washington: Impeachment Resolution Urged

BYLINE: By MARTIN STOLZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 99 words


Mayor Rocky Anderson of Salt Lake City appeared before a committee of the State
Senate in Olympia in support of a resolution asking Congress to begin
impeachment proceedings against President Bush. Mr. Anderson, a Democrat, said
the case for impeachment was not partisan. He said the president should face
impeachment for ''heinous human rights violations, breaches of trust, abuses of
power injurious to the nation, war crimes, misleading Congress and the American
people,'' among other reasons. Mr. Anderson also submitted a 22-page, heavily
footnoted statement to legislators.   MARTIN STOLZ

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMPEACHMENT (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); POLITICS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); WAR CRIMES (83%) United States Politics
and Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Impeachment

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%) Martin Stolz; Rocky (Mayor) Anderson; George W
(Pres) Bush

CITY: SALT LAKE CITY, UT, USA (93%)

STATE: UTAH, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Salt Lake City (Utah)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: China: Report Hits Back On Rights

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 92 words


China issued a response to the annual State Department report on human rights
conditions globally and criticized the United States, saying it had violated the
sovereignty of several nations, caused the deaths of civilians in Iraq, and
violated the Geneva Conventions in its treatment of foreign prisoners. The
Chinese report also listed a litany of domestic woes, from crime to racial
tension. The American report said China had tightened restrictions on speech,
the press and the Internet and had continued to detain political activists.
JIM YARDLEY

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%)
United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Jim Yardley

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: China

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 10, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Swiss Convict Turkish Politician For Denying Armenian Genocide

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 323 words

DATELINE: LAUSANNE, Switzerland, March 9


A prominent Turkish politician was convicted Friday of breaching Swiss
antiracism laws by saying that the early 20th-century killing of Armenians could
not be described as genocide.

The Turkish Foreign Ministry reacted swiftly to the decision, saying in a
statement that it was saddened by the Swiss court's ruling to punish the
politician, Dogu Perincek, leader of the Turkish Workers' Party, and to ignore
''his freedom of expression.''

Mr. Perincek was ordered to pay a fine of $2,450; an additional penalty of
$7,360 was suspended.

He was charged with breaking Swiss law by denying during a visit to Switzerland
in 2005 that the World War I era killings of up to 1.5 million Armenians
amounted to genocide. He has since repeated his statements, including at his
trial this week.

In Turkey it is a crime to use the word genocide to describe the killings.

Mr. Perincek accused the judge of ''racist hatred'' toward Turkey and said he
would appeal the verdict to Switzerland's supreme court.

If necessary, Mr. Perincek told Turkey's government-run Anatolia news agency, he
would take his case to the European Court of Human Rights.

In his closing statement, Judge Pierre-Henri Winzap described the defendant as
an intelligent and cultivated person but added that to deny the Armenian
genocide was an arrogant provocation because it was an accepted historical fact.
Most Western governments consider the killings genocide.

Switzerland's antiracism legislation has previously been applied to Holocaust
denial.

The case has caused diplomatic tension between Switzerland and Turkey, which
insists that Armenians were killed in civil unrest during the tumultuous
collapse of the Ottoman Empire and not in a planned campaign of genocide.

In its response to the verdict the Turkish Foreign Ministry called into question
the legitimacy of the Swiss law and said the case was ''inappropriate, baseless
and debatable in every circumstance.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); WORLD WAR I (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%);
CRIMINAL FINES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); VERDICTS (89%); HISTORY (78%); FINES &
PENALTIES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); HOLOCAUST
(73%); POLITICS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (71%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (66%) Politics and Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; World War I (1914-18); Fines (Penalties)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

PERSON: Dogu Perincek

STATE: VAUD, SWITZERLAND (78%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (98%); ARMENIA (97%); SWITZERLAND (95%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Turkey; Switzerland; Armenia

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pushing the Fight Against Racial Segregation

BYLINE: By MARCELLE S. FISCHLER.

E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; CIVIL RIGHTS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: SYOSSET


GROWING up in an African-American neighborhood in Port Washington, V. Elaine
Gross had a childhood that was ''pretty segregated,'' she said, revolving around
a small cluster of streets and the local church.

In elementary school, one incident in particular made clear to Ms. Gross, now
56, that ''the color of my skin made a difference.''

After a white classmate came to her house to play, Ms. Gross walked her back to
her own home close to the Sands Point School, now the John J. Daly School.

''Her mother saw me coming up the walkway and just was screaming, screaming at
her daughter, screaming at me: 'What are you doing with her? You get away from
here,' '' Ms. Gross recalled. ''It was very traumatic at the time.''

The girls' paths never crossed much after that. But Ms. Gross, who trained as a
social worker, dedicated her professional career to exploring the causes of
social, political and economic inequities and finding ways to thwart
discrimination in daily living.

As the founder and president of Erase Racism, a nonprofit research and advocacy
group here, Ms. Gross has been trying to get Long Island off the nation's list
of most segregated suburbs. According to a report the organization produced
using 2000 census data, she said, it hovers around No. 3.

''The Island was developed to be segregated,'' Ms. Gross said, noting that in
Levittown, the nation's first post-World War II suburb, racially restrictive
covenants initially prevented African-Americans from buying or renting homes. In
1948 the Supreme Court determined that such discrimination was illegal.
Exclusionary practices had preceded Levittown, however; in 1927 Gordon Heights
in Suffolk County was one of the first housing developments in the country
marketed solely to African-Americans.

New fair-housing laws that took effect in January in Nassau and Suffolk Counties
were spurred by a 2005 report by Erase Racism, ''Long Island Fair Housing: A
State of Inequity.'' It stated that the ''fair-housing enforcement system is
inefficient and lethargic'' and that little had been done to discourage housing
discrimination like the steering of African-Americans and members of other
ethnic minorities to low-income communities. The study found that 84 percent of
whites on the Island lived in nonintegrated communities, regardless of income,
while nonwhites were concentrated in other neighborhoods.

Ms. Gross, who lives with her husband, Jess, a computer programmer, in an area
of Huntington she calls ''a little integrated but not a lot,'' said some real
estate agents illegally perpetuate segregation by shepherding African-Americans
into largely black communities.

In Nassau, the new law imposes fines of up to $50,000 on real estate agents,
mortgage companies or management companies if the county's Human Rights
Commission finds they have discriminated against prospective home buyers or
renters on the basis of race, religion, gender, sexual orientation or
disability. Previously, buyers or renters who believed that they had been
discriminated against had to pursue complaints through the State Division of
Human Rights.

''The enforcement systems were so fragmented and so dysfunctional that it seemed
like it made more sense to look at the counties,'' Ms. Gross said.

When Ms. Gross started Erase Racism in 2001 after being approached by the Long
Island Community Foundation, a philanthropy that finances social-service
organizations, people told her that Long Islanders would not ''want to deal with
any organization that has racism in their name,'' she recalled.

''It was kind of a taboo subject,'' said Ms. Gross, who had worked in tenant
advocacy and community development in Boston. ''I am really proud that as a
result of our work it's not such a taboo subject and we have policy leaders who
will talk about racial segregation, and who will take seriously the need to
implement policies that address that.''

Ms. Gross, who is a member of the Long Island Regional Planning Board, said that
if the full Island housing market were equally desirable, it would bring prices
down.

''There is a premium on housing in certain communities because not everybody has
access to housing in all communities,'' she said. Neither amenities nor
resources are evenly spread across the Island, she added.

''We are really shooting ourselves in the foot by not dealing with this, by not
thinking about the region as a region,'' she added.

Erase Racism, whose full name is Education Research Advocacy Support to
Eliminate Racism, is now taking a hard look at the Island's 127 school
districts.

''We have segregated schools here on Long Island that are very unequal,'' Ms.
Gross said, referring both to entire districts and to segregation within
individual districts. ''It is a combination of both the way we fund the schools
and the way the district lines are drawn.''

''People gain access to schools based on where they live,'' she added, ''and
where they live is segregated because we haven't had enforcement of fair
housing.''

She said Erase Racism hoped to release a report on local education by the fall
that has recommendations, not just bad news.

''The hard part is always figuring out what path to take,'' said Ms. Gross, who
has a full-time staff of three and a number of part-time employees and
consultants. ''We really want to make some changes.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: CRUSADER -- V. Elaine Gross, the founder of the Syosset-based
group Erase Racism. (Photo by Vic DeLucia for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACE & RACISM (93%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); REAL ESTATE (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); FAIR LENDING (87%); RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (77%); LEGISLATION (76%);
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS (73%); ETHNICITY (72%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ISLANDS & REEFS (71%); REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT (69%); REAL PROPERTY LAW (69%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (68%); PUBLIC
HEALTH & WELFARE LAW (68%); FINES & PENALTIES (67%); CENSUS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(65%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (63%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (60%); MORTGAGE
BANKING & FINANCE (50%); WORLD WAR II (50%) Blacks; Discrimination; Suburbs

ORGANIZATION: Erase Racism (Orgn)

PERSON: V Elaine Gross; Marcelle S Fischler

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Long Island (NY)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwean Leaders Accused of Abducting Opponents

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES; A Zimbabwean journalist contributed reporting from
Harare.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, March 28


Hundreds of Zimbabwean political and civic advocates have been abducted and
severely beaten in recent days by unidentified assailants, government critics
said Wednesday, in dead-of-night assaults that appear to be part of a new
government campaign to smother rising unrest.

The attacks came to light on Wednesday after hundreds of police officers raided
the Harare headquarters of Zimbabwe's main opposition party, the Movement for
Democratic Change, and detained its best-known leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, and
about 20 members. Party officials said the police ransacked the offices,
destroying furniture and taking stacks of documents. Lawyers for some advocates
said they had been warned not to go to the central police station in Harare, the
capital, in search of their clients because of the threat of violence against
the lawyers. The government has repeatedly denied any systematic repression of
opposition members, saying it has acted solely to root out crimes.

A police spokesman said Wednesday that the officers were searching the
opposition party's offices for firebombs. Zimbabwe's news media have been filled
in recent days with reports of firebomb attacks on police stations, trains and
stores, all of which the government has attributed to the Movement for
Democratic Change.

The opposition party has called the firebombing reports lies, planted in the
state-controlled news media to discredit critics.

Zimbabwe's government was broadly criticized after the police arrested and beat
Mr. Tsvangirai and scores of other political and civic advocates two weeks ago,
after they sought to hold what they described as a prayer meeting in Harare.

''The government of Zimbabwe has intensified its brutal suppression of its own
citizens in an effort to crush all forms of dissent,'' Georgette Gagnon, deputy
Africa director at Human Rights Watch, said Wednesday, referring to the events
of recent weeks. Since those arrests, tensions have been high throughout
Zimbabwe, especially in the poor urban neighborhoods that are centers of
government opposition.

Some political specialists in Harare said that the abductions and beatings in
recent days might signal a new and crucial phase in Zimbabwe's economic and
political crises, now more than six years old.

The national economy is all but dysfunctional, with inflation exceeding 1,700
percent a year and rapidly increasing. Eight in 10 people are jobless, and a
huge share of the 10 million or so citizens survive on remittances from the 3
million Zimbabweans who have left the country.

President Robert G. Mugabe, the 83-year-old autocrat who has led the nation
since it ended white rule 27 years ago, is battling a reinvigorated opposition
and a growing movement in his own party to oust him. He sought in December to
extend his legal rule by two years, to 2010, but received an unprecedented
rebuff from members of his party. He has since said he would seek a full
six-year term in the next election, in 2008.

But broad elements of his party, the Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic
Front, are working to thwart his ambitions. Local and international news
agencies have reported widely that some in Mr. Mugabe's party are negotiating
with Mr. Tsvangirai's opposition movement on a succession plan.

Given those power struggles, one Harare political analyst said Wednesday, it is
unclear whether the beatings of potential political opponents are a
governmentwide strategy or a narrower effort by Mr. Mugabe's backers to shore up
his remaining power.

''The state is behaving repressively on a very, very wide scale, but is the
state doing it, or a state within a state?'' the analyst said on condition of
anonymity for fear of reprisal. ''I think there's good reason to believe there's
a third force operating here.''

No one knows how many have been abducted, but advocates in Zimbabwe said the
victims have included political organizers, students, members of civic groups
and leaders of the Combined Harare Residents Association, which has organized
Harare's poor neighborhoods to press for better city services.

Nelson Chamisa, the spokesman for Mr. Tsvangirai's faction of the Movement for
Democratic Change, said that nearly 200 party workers and advocates had been
seized in the last three days, usually in raids on their homes after midnight.

In almost all documented cases, he said, the victims were taken in unmarked
vehicles to remote locations where they were beaten, then abandoned. An unknown
number of party members have not turned up after being kidnapped, he said.

Among the abducted, he said, are two members of the party's national executive
committee, one of whom was kidnapped with his wife, and a member of Zimbabwe's
Parliament from Glenview, a poor Harare neighborhood that is a locus of
government opposition.

Mr. Chamisa was attacked last week at a check-in counter at Harare's airport as
he prepared to board a flight to Europe for a political meeting. Four men with
iron bars fractured his skull and crushed an eye socket.

''It's state terrorism,'' he said.

Lovemore Madhuku, who leads Zimbabwe's largest civic group, the National
Constitutional Assembly, said that at least 16 of his members had been abducted
in the last week. Most have since been hospitalized, he said.

''The strategy is that any person who seems to be active and who is perceived to
be a mobilizer or local organizer is targeted for abduction,'' he said. Violence
against government critics has been common in the past, particularly before
elections, but the latest abductions and beatings appear to be far more
systematic and widespread.

Arrests, beatings and abductions of civic and political figures have mounted
since the violent breakup of the so-called prayer meeting on March 11. They
appear to have quickened after an important group of Mr. Mugabe's supporters,
the Zimbabwe National Liberation War Veterans Association, held a major meeting
last weekend in Harare to plot a strategy against Mr. Mugabe's critics,
according to advocates and a local journalist.

The veterans were members of a guerrilla army led in part by Mr. Mugabe that won
Zimbabwe's liberation from white rule in the 1970s. When they became restive in
the late 1990s, Mr. Mugabe sealed their loyalty by granting them huge cash
bonuses.

The war veterans were the muscle behind Mr. Mugabe's decision in 2000 to seize
the nation's 5,000 white-owned commercial farms and redistribute them to
political allies and landless peasants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Robert G. Mugabe addressed supporters at a meeting
last weekend in Harare to plot strategy against his critics.
 The opposition figure Sekai Holland arrived last week at an airport near
Johannesburg from Harare after Zimbabwe's high court let her go abroad for
treatment of injuries she said she received in a police beating. (Photographs by
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); POLITICS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
POLICE FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); ARRESTS (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); TRENDS (72%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (65%); INFLATION (65%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(65%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (60%); CITY LIFE (50%); CITIES (50%) Freedom and Human
Rights; Economic Conditions and Trends; Politics and Government

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (78%) Michael Wines; Robert G (Pres) Mugabe;
Morgan Tsvangirai

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (94%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (99%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Zimbabwe; Harare (Zimbabwe); Zimbabwe

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Russia: Strongman Becomes President Of Chechnya

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 136 words


The widely feared strongman Ramzan A. Kadyrov was inaugurated as the new
president of Chechnya with a blessing from the Kremlin, which has relied on him
to stabilize the region after more than a decade of separatist fighting. Human
rights groups say that security forces under Mr. Kadyrov's control abduct and
torture civilians suspected of ties to Chechnya's separatist rebels. Some
suggest that he was tied to the murder last year of the journalist Anna
Politkovskaya. But Mr. Kadyrov, 30, is credited with a reconstruction boom that
he administered as the region's prime minister, under which the capital, Grozny,
is being transformed from a moonscape of rubble and shattered buildings. ''My
main goal is to make Chechnya prosperous and peaceful,'' he said at the
inauguration ceremony in Gudermes, east of Grozny.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPARATISM & SECESSION (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (87%); TORTURE (87%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (52%) Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Ramzan A (Pres) Kadyrov

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); EUROPE (91%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Indian Victims of Sexual Assault, a Tangled Legal Path

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1204 words


As a Cherokee woman charging rape by a non-Indian, Jami Rozell could not go to
the tribal court, which handles only crimes by Indians against Indians in Indian
country. So after five months of agonizing, she went to the district attorney in
Tahlequah, Okla., and testified at a preliminary hearing.

''It was the hardest thing I've ever done, get up there in front of my family
with all these men I've grown up with all my life,'' said Ms. Rozell, now 25 and
a first grade teacher in another town. But that was not the worst of it. The
police, she said she was soon told, had cleaned up the evidence room and thrown
out her rape kit, and with it all chances of prosecution.

However, Chief Stephen Farmer of the Tahlequah police says the department had
received permission to destroy the evidence after Ms. Rozell initially declined
to press charges.

Human rights advocates say such troubled cases involving Indian victims are
common. And, American Indian women are voicing growing anger at what they call
their disproportionate victimization in crimes of sexual assault, most often
committed by non-Indians, and attitudes and laws that they say deter many from
even reporting an attack.

''Indian women suffer two and a half times more domestic violence, three and a
half times more sexual assaults, and 17 percent will be stalked -- and I'm a
victim of all three,'' said Pauline Musgrove, executive director of the Spirits
of Hope Coalition, an advocacy group in Oklahoma.

Now Amnesty International has taken up the issue, calling on Congress to extend
tribal authority to all offenders on Indian land, not just Indians, and to
expand federal spending on Indian law enforcement and health clinics.

In a report released yesterday, the American arm of the organization said sexual
violence against American Indians had grown out of a long history of
''systematic and pervasive abuse and persecution.''

Chris Chaney, deputy director of the office of justice services at the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, and a member of the Seneca-Cayuga tribe of Oklahoma, said that
Indians fell victim to crime at a higher rate than members of any other ethnic
group and that domestic violence was on the rise because of methamphetamine
abuse.

But Mr. Chaney said that the bureau recognized the problem and that the new
federal budget proposed an increase of $16 million to aid Indian law enforcement
agencies.

With just over 4 million American Indian and Alaska Native people in 550
federally recognized tribes scattered over Indian and non-Indian lands
throughout the United States, jurisdictional questions often throw cases into
limbo, Amnesty International found. In cases where tribal courts have
jurisdiction, they can only impose punishments of up to a year in jail and a
$5,000 fine. The report cited Justice Department figures suggesting that more
than one in three American Indian and Alaska Native women would be raped in
their lifetime, almost double the national average of 18 percent.

In 86 percent of the cases, the report said, the perpetrators were non-Indian
men, while in the population at large, the attacker and victim are usually from
the same ethnic group.

Larry Cox, executive director of Amnesty International USA, said the
organization had been studying violence against women worldwide ''and then
somebody said why not look at what's happening here.''

The 73-page report focused on Indian communities in Alaska, Oklahoma and South
Dakota.

Alaska has the highest incidence of forcible rapes of all women, the report
said, and Native Alaskans in Anchorage were nearly 10 times more likely to be
victims of sexual assault than non-natives. Oklahoma's 401,000 American Indians
(according to 2005 Census estimates that include people listing mixed racial
heritages) share 39 tribal governments and a patchwork of Indian and non-Indian
lands; there are no reservations in Oklahoma, which is second only to California
in its Indian population.

At Help in Crisis, a shelter for Indian women and their children in Tahlequah in
eastern Oklahoma, many told of suffering assaults, often by husbands, without
filing complaints.

Among them was Kendra Hunter, 25, who said she had been raped by three white men
who held her captive for three days in 2001. Ms. Hunter said that she did report
it, but that police officers turned away the complaint, saying that the sex was
consensual and that with three witnesses against her, there was no chance of a
case. ''I had cigarette burns on me, and they called it consensual,'' she said.

Deana Franke, director of the shelter, showed off an exercise room she had built
for the women but added, ''I should be building a shooting range.''

Nearby in Tahlequah, at offices of the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians
in Oklahoma, the director, Sonya K. Cochran, and two advocates, Lois Fuller and
Sue Gaytan, displayed the legal records of a local Indian woman who complained
of having been raped and sodomized by a brother-and-sister team of attackers in
Fort Smith, Ark., in 2004, only to have the charges dropped after a prosecutor
said the woman had repeatedly missed court dates. The woman contends she was in
court.

Culturally, some advocates said, Indians, fearing humiliation, are often
reluctant to press a complaint, seeing it as a test of faith or preferring to
''let the creator take care of it,'' as one said.

The jurisdictional complexities were evident outside the offices of the Citizen
Potawatomi Nation in Shawnee. A nearby fast-food drive-in stands on state land,
the north lane of the road is on city land and the south lane is Potawatomi
land, where Jason O'Neal, chief of the Lighthorse Police of the Chickasaw
Nation, has jurisdiction.

Chief O'Neal said that increasingly, Indian and non-Indian police departments
are recognizing each other with cross-designations of authority.

But even on Indian land, if a crime is committed by, or suffered by, a
non-Indian, federal law applies -- except in states (not including Oklahoma)
where such jurisdiction has been ceded to the state. Yet tribal courts enjoy
concurrent jurisdiction when the crime is committed by an Indian, regardless of
the victim, on Indian land. And the federal government retains jurisdiction over
14 major crimes, including rape, committed by Indians in Indian country. Another
problem is figuring out just who is an Indian -- an enrolled member of a tribe,
for sure, and less certainly, anyone a tribe considers Indian, but beyond that
definitions blur.

''I can't get a U.S. attorney to take a domestic violence case unless there's
severe physical harm or use of a deadly weapon,'' said Kelly Stoner, director of
the Native American Legal Resource Center at the Oklahoma City University School
of Law. ''If you just knock a tooth out it's not enough.''

Renee Brewer, a child welfare and family violence counselor at the Potawatomi
Nation and a member of the Creek Muskogee tribe, said she recently had four
agencies arguing over jurisdiction after a woman from the Absentee Shawnee
Nation called 911 to say she had been raped.

''The D.A. was so confused,'' Ms. Brewer said. The woman eventually left the
state. And the accused rapist? ''Oh, he walked,'' Ms. Brewer said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pauline Musgrove, above left, an advocate for women in
Oklahoma, clenched her fists as she described how her then-husband beat her.
Kendra Hunter, top right, says she was a victim of rape. Deana Franke, bottom
right, runs a shelter for Indian women and their children in Oklahoma.
(Photographs by Michael Stravato for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (90%);
ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); NATIVE AMERICANS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LANDS & GOVERNMENT (89%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LAW
(89%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (89%); DOMESTIC OFFENSES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); FINES & PENALTIES (87%); BUDGETS (86%); ETHNICITY
(78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMINAL FINES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); FORENSIC
DNA TESTING (78%); STALKING (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (75%); LAWYERS (74%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); LEGISLATION (71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (71%);
GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE
(61%); BUDGET PROPOSALS (60%); CLINICS & OUTPATIENT SERVICES (50%); ETHNIC
GROUPS (50%); METHAMPHETAMINE (50%) Sex Crimes; Indians, American; Law and
Legislation; Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%) Amnesty International (Orgn)

PERSON: Ralph Blumenthal

STATE: OKLAHOMA, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: United States; United States

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Criminal Charges Are Expected Against Marines, Official Says

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 520 words


The Marine Corps is expecting criminal charges against at least five marines
from a Special Operations unit that killed 10 civilians in eastern Afghanistan
last month after a suicide bomb attack on their patrol convoy, a marine official
said yesterday.

Marine and civilian lawyers involved in the case have been told to expect
charges against five to seven marines involved in the shootings, possibly
including one officer, said the marine official, who spoke on condition of
anonymity.

The official added that a formal inquiry by naval investigators is continuing
and could result in fewer or no marines being charged. The official declined to
provide the names or ranks of those likely to be charged.

At least two marines have hired civilian lawyers, said a government official
with knowledge of the developing case.

The Marine unit involved in the shootings arrived in Afghanistan in February,
the first to be deployed from a new Special Operations Command formed by the
Marine Corps last year to carry out specialized reconnaissance, intelligence and
commando missions.

Several marines among about 30 who were on patrol began firing at civilians
along a stretch of road near Jalalabad, in eastern Afghanistan, after a suicide
bomber in a vehicle rammed their convoy and detonated his explosives, according
to a preliminary investigation by the American military.

No marines were killed in the attack, but several marines, believing they were
under small arms fire, began firing at bystanders near the scene and along the
roadside as the convoy sped away, the military investigation found.

Over several miles, marines killed at least 10 civilians and wounded 33 others,
including women and elderly men, according to the military investigation, which
was ordered by Maj. Gen. Frank Kearney of the Army, the commander of all
American Special Operations forces in the region. The investigation found no
evidence that the marines were being fired upon.

A separate investigation by the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
said the marines had killed 12 civilians and injured 35 others.

The killings recall a similarly violent reaction by marines in Haditha, Iraq, in
2005, after a roadside bomb killed one of their comrades. In that incident, in
the heart of a region rife with Sunni Arab insurgents, marines killed 24 unarmed
Iraqis, including women and children in their beds, in a sweep of homes near the
road.

After the killings in Afghanistan last month, General Kearney ordered the
marines' whole company to leave the country and referred the matter to the Naval
Criminal Investigative Service.

The unit remains stationed somewhere in the Middle East but is expected to
return to its base at Camp Lejeune, N.C., in coming weeks. A second Marine
Special Operations company, at Camp Pendleton, Calif., is to deploy soon, said a
marine spokesman, who would not say where the unit is headed.

Maj. Cliff Gilmore, a spokesman for the Marine Special Operations Command, known
as Marsoc, said the group's commanders had not been advised about any impending
charges against marines in the incident.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); ARMIES (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); LAWYERS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%);
DISMISSALS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); GENOCIDE
(62%); SENIOR CITIZENS (50%) Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (93%)

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer

CITY: JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (78%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Security Contractor Defends His Team, Which, He Says, Is Not a Private Army

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; READING FILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 564 words


In his new best-selling book, ''Blackwater: The Rise of the World's Most
Powerful Mercenary Army'' (Nation), the writer Jeremy Scahill describes the
company as the private and secretive Praetorian Guard of the Bush
administration. He has called Blackwater, ''one of the greatest beneficiaries of
the 'war on terror,' '' profiting from lucrative contracts with the Pentagon and
the Central Intelligence Agency, and deploying battalions of secret soldiers in
nine countries, notably Iraq and Afghanistan.

Gary Jackson, the president of Blackwater USA since October 2001, keeps a
decidedly low profile, but he recently granted an interview to the author R. J.
Hillhouse, who runs an unusual blog on security and intelligence called The Spy
Who Billed Me. She is both skeptical and sympathetic toward private military
contractors, which are dominated by companies like Blackwater, and often run by
special-operations veterans like Mr. Jackson and retired C.I.A. officers. Here
are excerpts from Mr. Jackson's comments.   TIM WEINER  On whether Blackwater is
a private army:

We have no private army. What we do have is a team of military and law
enforcement veterans and other motivated, capable Americans who protect
diplomats, provide training and offer logistic services, and we do those things
in support of friendly-nation peace operations around the world, including
support of some of our Muslim allies.  On the loyalties of Blackwater employees:

Legally we can't require anyone to swear the oath [to the Constitution], but
nearly everyone volunteers to do so. As far as the third-country nationals that
we are required by United States government contract to use, we can't ask them
to swear the same oath, but all of Blackwater's deploying professionals, both
U.S. and third-country nationals, undergo extensive training in core values,
leadership and human rights before they deploy. Each of them is issued a copy of
the U.N.'s Universal Declaration of Human Rights in their native language to
carry with them and remind them of their commitment to legal, moral and ethical
standards.  On whether Blackwater employees can be held accountable for crimes:

Actually, there are quite a few federal laws that regulate contractors. The
Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act creates jurisdiction for federal
court trials, and the wrongdoing itself is covered under statutes like the War
Crimes Act, the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act, the
Anti-Torture Statute, the Defense Base Act, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
and a whole raft of other domestic regulations, not to mention international
prohibitions. The issue has never been about regulation; rather, it has always
been about a lack of enforcement. I can't put it any more simply: we don't need
a new law; we need to enforce the ones we have.   On whether Blackwater can be
hired against American interests:

Our first commitment is to supporting the national security and foreign policies
of the United States. We won't entertain any client that would conflict with
that. Blackwater has turned down many opportunities for work. Put simply, no
U.S. company or citizen can supply military- or police-type goods or services to
foreign persons without a license from the U.S. Department of State or
Department of Commerce and they certainly aren't going to grant a license
involving an unfriendly nation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Danger -- In 2004, four Blackwater contractors were killed in
Falluja. (Photo by Salman Amer/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (90%); WRITERS (90%); DEFENSE
CONTRACTING (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JURISDICTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); BESTSELLERS (78%);
ESPIONAGE (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING
(76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%);
ARMED FORCES (73%); WAR ON TERROR (72%); ETHICS (71%); TERRORISM (71%);
LEGISLATION (71%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (71%); BUSINESS LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT
(70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); CORRUPTION (67%); TORTURE (67%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (60%); US FOREIGN CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT (50%) Defense Contracts;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations

COMPANY: ACADEMI LLC (98%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%) Blackwater Usa

INDUSTRY: NAICS561612 SECURITY GUARDS & PATROL SERVICES (98%); NAICS561611
INVESTIGATION SERVICES (98%)

PERSON: Tim Weiner; R J Hillhouse; Gary (Blackwater USA) Jackson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Sri Lanka: U.S. Halts Some Aid

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 81 words


The United States has halted some aid to Sri Lanka as human rights abuses rise
in the renewed civil war, Richard A. Boucher, the assistant secretary of state
for South and Central Asia, said as he wrapped up a three-day visit. He said
Washington was concerned by a spate of abductions and killings attributed to
each side in the conflict, as well as freedom of the press. Britain last week
suspended $3 million in debt relief aid, citing rights abuses and mushrooming
military spending.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (83%) United States International Relations; Foreign Aid; Freedom and
Human Rights; Freedom of the Press

PERSON: Richard A (Asst Sec) Boucher

COUNTRY: ASIA (94%); SRI LANKA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%);
SOUTH CENTRAL ASIA (92%)

REGION: Sri Lanka

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Congressman Faces Foes in Japan as He Seeks an Apology

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1237 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Calif.


ON a recent sunny Sunday morning, Michael M. Honda was kicking back at his
90-year-old mother's house here, some green tea and rice crackers within arm's
reach. She was off to church, and his younger brother had dropped by to fix the
plumbing.

''Oh yeah, I ran across a buddy of yours -- he says he golfs with you -- a
big-set hakujin guy,'' Mr. Honda told his brother, using the Japanese word for
Caucasian.

Mr. Honda, a Democratic congressman and third-generation Japanese-American, was
wrapping up a weekend visit to his district here in Silicon Valley. After
attending an event at a local high school, he would fly back to Washington,
where his resolution calling on the Japanese government to unequivocally
acknowledge its history of wartime sex slavery and apologize for it was steadily
gaining co-sponsors.

The resolution was also drawing sometimes surprising reaction in Japan, making
Mr. Honda one of the most famous American congressmen in his ancestral land and
riling Japan's conservatives. They have accused a bemused Mr. Honda, 65, of
being an agent of a Chinese government bent on humiliating Japan on American
soil. During one television interview, an announcer asked Mr. Honda how he could
back such a resolution when he has a Japanese face.

''I told her I could have a black face, a brown face, a white face -- I could be
Mexican, I could be Indian -- it doesn't matter,'' Mr. Honda recalled.

He said he saw the resolution, which has received strong backing from
Korean-American groups, as an affirmation of universal human rights. His foes in
Japan view it through the prism of Northeast Asia's stark divisions.

The House Committee on Foreign Affairs, led by Representative Tom Lantos, a
Democrat from California, is expected to vote on the resolution later in May.
Mr. Lantos supported a similar resolution, sponsored by Lane Evans, an Illinois
Democrat who was forced to retire last year because of Parkinson's disease, that
wilted in the Republican-controlled Congress.

Although the resolution is not binding, the Japanese government, with the
support of the Bush administration, has lobbied fiercely against it. The
resolution drew little attention until Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who has long
pressed a revisionist view of Japan's wartime history, denied that the Japanese
military had coerced women into sex slavery, causing furor in the rest of Asia
and the United States.

During his recent visit to Washington, Mr. Abe told House leaders and President
Bush in carefully calculated language that he apologized for Japan's history
with the women, known euphemistically as comfort women, but he did not take back
his initial denial. A news conference with Mr. Bush culminated in an odd moment
when the president said he accepted Mr. Abe's apology.

The apology, Mr. Honda said, was not Mr. Bush's to accept.

MR. HONDA'S grandparents came from Kumamoto, a prefecture in southwestern Japan,
in the early 1900s, part of the first wave of Japanese immigrants to the United
States. His mother, Fusako, was born in San Jose's Japantown in 1916 and grew up
there. His father, Giichi, was also born and raised in California, but spent
some years living in Tokyo.

After the outbreak of war between the United States and Japan in 1941, his
family, like other Japanese-Americans, was sent to an internment camp in
Colorado. They spent a total of 14 months there -- an experience that would
later influence Mr. Honda's politics.

''It taught me that if governments make mistakes, they should apologize,'' he
said.

The family returned to San Jose a few years after the end of the war. At home,
the father spoke in English to Mr. Honda and his younger brother and sister; his
mother addressed them in Japanese. To this day, Mr. Honda has retained the habit
of sprinkling his English with some Japanese words when he speaks with relatives
or Japanese-Americans. Japanese food was served at home.

''The only American food I remember eating was Spam,'' he said.

His parents struggled, working as strawberry sharecroppers, though his father
eventually found more stable employment in the post office. His mother cleaned
houses.

''As I went into politics, people would say, 'I know you from someplace,'
because I used to go pick up my mom from different places,'' Mr. Honda said.
''All the places she would clean were homes of prominent people.

''I wouldn't tell them,'' he said. ''I'd say we met a long time ago. But finally
one guy pushed me and said, 'I just know you from someplace.' I said, 'If you
really need to know, my mom used to clean your house.' He said, 'Oh.' I said,
'You don't have to apologize. It was good work. It was dignified work, and you
treated her well. I appreciated it. It put rice in our rice bowl.' ''

After college, Mr. Honda went to El Salvador as a Peace Corps volunteer and then
became a teacher in the public schools here. His late wife, Jeanne -- a survivor
of the Hiroshima atomic bomb who immigrated here at the age of 11 -- was also a
teacher.

Mr. Honda said his politics, first as a state assemblyman and then as a
congressman, had been influenced by his career as a teacher and the successful
campaign by Japanese-Americans to obtain an official apology and compensation
from the United States in 1988 for their internment.

He has supported efforts by victims of wartime Germany and Japan to purse
lawsuits in California, in keeping with his belief that the universality of
human rights allowed them to seek compensation in the United States if German or
Japanese courts rebuffed them.

His resolution on Japan's wartime sex slavery, he said, would provide justice to
surviving women who were drafted into Japanese military brothels from Korea,
Taiwan, China, the Philippines and other Asian countries occupied by Japanese
troops.

In 1993, the Japanese government's chief cabinet secretary issued a statement
acknowledging Japan's history of sex slavery, but it was not endorsed by the
cabinet or Parliament. In recent years, nationalist politicians have pushed to
rescind that declaration, and they have succeeded in eliminating references to
the so-called comfort women from government-approved school textbooks.

''I was a schoolteacher, and so I know what happens in a country when you don't
teach history correctly,'' Mr. Honda said. ''It's insane not to teach your
children the truth.''

IT was almost time to go to the high school event, then catch a plane back to
Washington. The weekend trip home had been productive. He had started that
Friday with breakfast with former teaching colleagues; presented awards at an
Asian-American organization; attended a celebration at his alma mater, San Jose
State University; and met executives at a high-tech laser company.

Mr. Honda's mother had yet to return from church. He began locking up, bringing
lawn chairs in from the backyard.

Mr. Abe's recent comments have sharpened worries, even among conservative
American thinkers, that being too closely tied to Japan's nationalist leadership
may hurt American interests in Asia. How the Democratic-controlled House votes
on Mr. Honda's resolution could presage changes in American policy toward Japan,
particularly if Democrats take control of the White House.

''If we wanted to help Japan,'' Mr. Honda said, ''it should be in the light of,
'If you want to be a global leader, you have to first gain the trust and
confidence of your neighbors.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: Michael M. Honda

GRAPHIC: Photo: MICHAEL M. HONDA (Photo by Peter DaSilva for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); SLAVERY (88%); US
PRESIDENTS (84%); CONSERVATISM (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); ASIAN AMERICANS
(75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); HISTORY (73%); AUTOMOTIVE RECALLS (73%); WORLD WAR II
(73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (63%) World War II (1939-45); Japanese-Americans;
History; Sexual Slavery; United States International Relations

COMPANY: HONDA MOTOR CO LTD (93%)

TICKER: HMC (NYSE) (93%); 7267 (TSE) (93%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336991 MOTORCYCLE, BICYCLE & PARTS MANUFACTURING (93%);
NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK & UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (93%); NAICS336111
AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (93%)

MICHAEL M HONDA (96%); SHINZO ABE (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (77%); TOM LANTOS (58%)
Norimitsu Onishi; Michael M (Rep) Honda; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: SAN JOSE, CA, USA (90%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SILICON
VALLEY, CA, USA (56%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); JAPAN (95%); ASIA (92%); CHINA (79%); NORTHERN
ASIA (79%)

REGION: Japan; San Jose (Calif)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gitmo: A National Disgrace

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 556 words


Ever since President Bush rammed the Military Commissions Act of 2006 through
Congress to lend a pretense of legality to his detention camp at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, we have urged Congress to amend the law to restore basic human rights and
judicial process. Rulings by military judges this week suggest that the special
detention system is so fundamentally corrupt that the only solution is to tear
it down and start again.

The target of the judges' rulings were Combatant Status Review Tribunals, panels
that determine whether a prisoner is an ''unlawful enemy combatant'' who can be
tried by one of the commissions created by the 2006 law. The tribunals are, in
fact, kangaroo courts that give the inmates no chance to defend themselves,
allow evidence that was obtained through torture and can be repeated until one
produces the answer the Pentagon wants.

On Monday, two military judges dismissed separate war crimes charges against two
Guantanamo inmates because of the status review system. They said the Pentagon
managed to get them declared ''enemy combatants,'' but not ''unlawful enemy
combatants,'' and moved to try them anyway under the 2006 law. That law says
only unlawful combatants may be tried by military commissions. Lawful combatants
(those who wear uniforms and carry weapons openly) fall under the Geneva
Conventions.

If the administration loses an appeal, which it certainly should, it will no
doubt try to tinker with the review tribunals so they produce the desired
verdict. Congress cannot allow that. When you can't win a bet with loaded dice,
something is wrong with the game.

There is only one path likely to lead to a result that would allow Americans to
once again hold their heads high when it comes to justice and human rights.
First, Congress needs to restore the right of the inmates of Guantanamo Bay to
challenge their detentions. By the administration's own count, only a small
minority of the inmates actually deserve a trial. The rest should be sent home
or set free.

Second, Congress should repeal the Military Commissions Act and start anew on a
just system for determining whether prisoners are unlawful combatants. Among
other things, evidence obtained through coercion and torture should be banned.

And Congress should shut down Guantanamo Bay, as called for in bills sponsored
by two California Democrats, Representative Jane Harman in the House and Senator
Dianne Feinstein in the Senate. Both lawmakers are intimately familiar with the
camp and have concluded it is beyond salvaging.

Their bill would close Gitmo in a year and the detainees would be screened by
real courts. Those who are truly illegal combatants would be sent to military or
civilian jails in the United States, to be tried under time-tested American
rules of justice, or sent to an international tribunal. Some would be returned
to their native lands for trial, if warranted. The rest would be set free, as
they should have been long ago.

The Guantanamo camp was created on a myth -- that the American judicial system
could not handle prisoners of ''the war against terror.'' It was built on a lie
-- that the hundreds of detainees at Gitmo are all dangerous terrorists. And it
was organized around a fiction -- that Mr. Bush had the power to create this
rogue system in the first place.

It is time to get rid of it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY COURTS (91%); PRISONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); EVIDENCE (88%); LAW
OF WAR (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CORRUPTION
(77%); VERDICTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%)

PERSON: JANE HARMAN (58%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudanese Lawyers Receive Guidance for Possible Trials Over Darfur

BYLINE: By ERIC PFANNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 6


As international pressure increases over the situation in Darfur, Sudanese
lawyers are looking ahead to the day when victims of mass rape and torture seek
justice in tribunals like the International Criminal Court in The Hague.

The court issued arrest warrants in April for two Sudanese men charged with
planning and taking part in war crimes in Darfur, where more than 200,000 people
have died and 2.5 million have lost their homes in fighting between
government-backed forces and rebels. Sudan has refused to turn over the
suspects, including a government minister.

But an unusual training program in London this week is bringing together
Sudanese lawyers and American and European legal experts to discuss ways to be
heard at the court.

''The situation in Darfur is absolutely appalling,'' said Hyat Musa Suliman, a
lawyer and human rights advocate who counsels rape victims and others in refugee
camps in northern Darfur, speaking through an interpreter. ''I hope the
procedures and trials of the I.C.C. will bring back the confidence of the people
in the justice system.''

Ms. Suliman is one of nine Sudanese lawyers who have traveled to London to take
part in the weeklong program, organized by the litigation section of the
American Bar Association. Experts from the association, nongovernmental
organizations and the International Criminal Court explain the complexities of
the court, and a mock trial is set for Friday.

Brad D. Brian, a lawyer from Los Angeles who organized the course, said it was
meant to teach skills to the Sudanese, who have little experience with
international legal affairs, let alone lengthy war crimes trials. Mr. Brian said
the program was the first of its kind for the bar association, showing the
degree of concern about Darfur in American society even though the United
States, like Sudan, has not joined the International Criminal Court.

''In war crimes cases, it's important to give victims a voice,'' said Mr. Brian,
a partner at the firm of Munger, Tolles & Olson in Los Angeles. Mr. Brian's
involvement began in 2005, when he met Salih Mahmoud Osman, a Sudanese lawyer
and human rights advocate.

The training program, financed largely by a $183,000 grant from the MacArthur
Foundation, has a ''faculty'' of 13 legal professionals, including Terree A.
Bowers, a former United States Attorney in Los Angeles. Ms. Bowers worked with
the prosecution in the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
in the 1990s, which tried Slobodan Milosevic, the former leader of Serbia. Mr.
Milosevic died last year before the four-year trial reached a verdict.

The group has also brought in outside speakers like Paolina Massidda, the
principal counsel in the Office of Public Counsel for Victims at The Hague. Ms.
Massidda explained some of the nuances of that tribunal, noting that victims of
crimes were typically allowed greater participation than they were in other
courts. In many courts people who say they are victims are often permitted to
appear only as witnesses. At the International Criminal Court, victims can call
for experts, witnesses or evidence and can question the accused.

That means the Sudanese lawyers may play a significant role if cases related to
Darfur make their way to The Hague, Mr. Brian said. While the lawyers at this
session are unlikely to serve as prosecutors at the court, they might represent
the victims.

The Sudanese lawyers might also be called on to make the case for the
International Criminal Court to hear any cases in the first place, because the
court cannot accept a case until national courts have been ruled out as a
suitable venue.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (87%); SEX OFFENSES
(78%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (78%); LEGAL SERVICES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); MAJOR US
LAW FIRMS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); GRANTS & GIFTS
(76%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%);
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (72%); ARREST WARRANTS (72%);
ARRESTS (72%); VERDICTS (72%); FOUNDATIONS (71%)

COMPANY: MUNGER TOLLES & OLSON LLP (52%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (52%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (52%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New U.N. Chief Invites Controversy by Declining to Oppose Hussein Execution

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 2


On his first day of work as secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, the mild-spoken
South Korean diplomat who had suggested he would bring new caution to the post,
invited controversy by declining to criticize the death penalty applied to
Saddam Hussein.

Mr. Ban commented on the execution of Mr. Hussein just after entering United
Nations headquarters on Tuesday morning to start his job.

''Saddam Hussein was responsible for committing heinous crimes and unspeakable
atrocities against the Iraqi people,'' Mr. Ban said in response to questions
from a crush of reporters outside the Security Council's chambers. ''We should
never forget the victims of his crimes, '' he said.

''The issue of capital punishment is for each and every member state to
decide,'' he added.

''While I am firmly against impunity, I also hope the members of the
international community should pay due regard to all aspects of international
humanitarian laws.''

Mr. Ban's remarks appeared to contradict bedrock United Nations policy opposing
the death penalty on human rights grounds.

He seemed to have tripped in his effort to tread lightly on the political views
of the many United Nations members.

The remarks also seemed to show that Mr. Ban, who was South Korea's foreign
minister when he was chosen in October as secretary general, had not completed
the transition from representing his country to leading the United Nations.

Michele Montas, Mr. Ban's spokeswoman, said the death penalty was legal in South
Korea.

On Dec. 30, hours after Mr. Hussein was hanged, the United Nations special
representative for Iraq, Ashraf Qazi, said in Baghdad that although the United
Nations ''understands the desire for justice felt by many Iraqis,'' it could not
support the execution.

''Based on the principle of respect for the right to life,'' Mr. Qazi said,
''the United Nations remains opposed to capital punishment, even in the case of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.''

Ms. Montas, whose first day on the job also was Tuesday, said Mr. Ban had not
intended to change United Nations policy, but had added his own ''nuance.'' Mr.
Hussein was hanged in a hasty execution at dawn on Dec. 30, in a chamber where
many Iraqis had been killed under his brutal rule.

In public comments before his first meeting with United Nations staff, Mr. Ban
said, ''We have to show the international community that we are ready and eager
to change.'' He said the organization had faced ''harsh and sometimes unfair
criticism,'' and acknowledged that ''staff morale has plummeted.'' But he said
United Nations workers must be ready to ''multitask'' and to move frequently
from armchair jobs at headquarters in New York into the field.

''My watchword will be meritocracy,'' he said, in words that should be well
received by the Bush administration, which backed Mr. Ban to succeed Kofi Annan,
who served two five-year terms, in part because of Mr. Ban's pledges to
streamline the United Nations bureaucracy.

In veiled words, Mr. Ban seemed to hint that he would not overreach his power,
but that he expected cooperation from the United States. Speaking of the many
crises facing the organization, he said, ''Not a single person, including the
secretary general of the United Nations; not a single country, however strong,
powerful, resourceful, maybe, can address this.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ban Ki-moon in the U.N. cafeteria yesterday, his first day in
the top job. (Photo by Frank Franklin II/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); VIOLENT CRIME (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); LAW OF WAR (72%); GENOCIDE (71%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (61%); WORKPLACE MORALE (60%) Capital Punishment

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United
Nations

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (94%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%) Julia Preston; Ban Ki-Moon (Sec
Gen); Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scowcroft's Strategy For the Middle East

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 618 words



To the Editor:

Brent Scowcroft (''Getting the Middle East Back on Our Side,'' Op-Ed, Jan. 4)
asserts that ''a vigorously renewed effort to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict
could fundamentally change both the dynamics in the region and the strategic
calculus of key leaders.''

Yes, peace would be a blessing. It would realize Israel's yearning from its
founding in 1948 for coexistence with its Arab neighbors. And it would give a
new start to the Palestinian people, who for too long have been fed a misguided
diet of all-or-nothing by their leaders.

But Mr. Scowcroft is wrong to believe that the conflict, even if it were ripe
for resolution (a risky assumption given the current upper hand of Hamas, the
internecine warfare between Hamas and Fatah, and the existential threats to
Israel posed by a swaggering Iran and its regional proxies) would transform the
region.

As the 2003 Arab Human Development Report noted, the region suffers from three
foundational problems: a knowledge deficit, a gender deficit and a freedom
deficit. In each of these areas, the report stressed, Arab nations lag far
behind other countries.

It would be self-delusional to believe that the region's real challenges -- from
corrupt, despotic regimes to fundamentalism; from the Shiite-Sunni split to
human rights repression -- can be addressed by focusing on the Arab-Israeli
conflict and not on these core issues.

David A. Harris
Executive Director
American Jewish Committee
New York, Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Brent Scowcroft is right on target when he calls for ''a vigorously renewed
effort to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict.'' But his description of this
effort doesn't mention two key groups: the two peoples and the Palestinian
leadership.

The Joint Palestinian-Israeli Public Opinion Poll released on Dec. 25 finds a
strong preference in both publics for the comprehensive settlement option, with
58 percent of the Israelis and 81 percent of the Palestinians supporting this
track.

President Mahmoud Abbas seeks to negotiate with Israel, but Hamas, which heads
the Palestinian legislature and cabinet, refuses to recognize Israel or renounce
terror.

The renewed effort must therefore begin with measures, led by the United States,
to strengthen the Abbas faction at the expense of those opposed to negotiations
for peace.

This would also counteract the expansion of Iran's influence into the
Palestinian territories through Hamas described by Mr. Scowcroft.

Seymour D. Reich
David M. Elcott
New York, Jan. 4, 2007

The writers are, respectively, president and executive director of the Israel
Policy Forum.

To the Editor:

Brent Scowcroft suggests that a vigorous push for peace between Israel and its
neighbors will lay the groundwork for stabilizing Iraq and ending centuries-old
blood feuds among the Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds.

A few short years ago, we were told that a newly democratic Iraq would allow
peace and harmony to bloom across the Middle East.

It is time to recognize the simple truth that the Iraqi morass and the
Arab-Israeli conflict are two unrelated problems, each requiring and meriting
its own attention and its own solution.

Daniel Wolf
Teaneck, N.J., Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Brent Scowcroft warns us as a nation that ''we cannot afford to fail that test''
of establishing a friendly government from the ashes of Saddam Hussein's
authoritarian regime.

I think that we already sat down for that test, without studying or bringing our
trusty No. 2 pencils, and failed.

We can keep sitting at the desk staring at our blank test sheet, but maybe it
would be better if we just switched majors. International studies does not seem
to be our forte.

Dane M. Chetkovich
Chicago, Jan. 5, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
AL FATAH (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); RELIGION (76%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); POLLS &
SURVEYS (70%); FUNDAMENTALISM (70%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (66%); CORRUPTION (65%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%) Fatah; Hamas

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%) Brent Scowcroft; David A Harris; Seymour D Reich;
David Elcott; Daniel Wolf; Dane M Chetkovich

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); MIDDLE EAST (94%);
UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: Israel; Iraq; Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Imperial Presidency 2.0

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 976 words


Observing President Bush in action lately, we have to wonder if he actually
watched the election returns in November, or if he was just rerunning the 2002
vote on his TiVo.

That year, the White House used the fear of terrorism to scare American voters
into cementing the Republican domination of Congress. Mr. Bush and Vice
President Dick Cheney then embarked on an expansion of presidential power
chilling both in its sweep and in the damage it did to the constitutional system
of checks and balances.

In 2006, the voters sent Mr. Bush a powerful message that it was time to rein in
his imperial ambitions. But we have yet to see any sign that Mr. Bush
understands that -- or even realizes that the Democrats are now in control of
the Congress. Indeed, he seems to have interpreted his party's drubbing as a
mandate to keep pursuing his fantasy of victory in Iraq and to press ahead
undaunted with his assault on civil liberties and the judicial system. Just
before the Christmas break, the Justice Department served notice to Senator
Patrick Leahy -- the new chairman of the Judiciary Committee -- that it intended
to keep stonewalling Congressional inquiries into Mr. Bush's inhumane and
unconstitutional treatment of prisoners taken in anti-terrorist campaigns. It
refused to hand over two documents, including one in which Mr. Bush authorized
the Central Intelligence Agency to establish secret prisons beyond the reach of
American law or international treaties. The other set forth the interrogation
methods authorized in these prisons -- which we now know ranged from abuse to
outright torture.

Also last month, Mr. Bush issued another of his infamous ''presidential signing
statements,'' which he has used scores of times to make clear he does not intend
to respect the requirements of a particular law -- in this case a little-noticed
Postal Service bill. The statement suggested that Mr. Bush does not believe the
government must obtain a court order before opening Americans' first-class mail.
It said the administration had the right to ''conduct searches in exigent
circumstances,'' which include not only protecting lives, but also unspecified
''foreign intelligence collection.''

The law is clear on this. A warrant is required to open Americans' mail under a
statute that was passed to stop just this sort of abuse using just this sort of
pretext. But then again, the law is also clear on the need to obtain a warrant
before intercepting Americans' telephone calls and e-mail. Mr. Bush began openly
defying that law after Sept. 11, 2001, authorizing the National Security Agency
to eavesdrop without a court order on calls and e-mail between the United States
and other countries.

News accounts have also reminded us of the shameful state of American military
prisons, where supposed terrorist suspects are kept without respect for civil or
human rights, and on the basis of evidence so deeply tainted by abuse, hearsay
or secrecy that it is essentially worthless.

Deborah Sontag wrote in The Times last week about the sorry excuse for a
criminal case that the administration whipped up against Jose Padilla, who was
once -- but no longer is -- accused of plotting to explode a radioactive ''dirty
bomb'' in the United States. Mr. Padilla was held for two years without charges
or access to a lawyer. Then, to avoid having the Supreme Court review Mr. Bush's
power grab, the administration dropped those accusations and charged Mr. Padilla
in a criminal court on hazy counts of lending financial support to terrorists.

But just as the government abandoned the ''dirty bomb'' case against Mr.
Padilla, it quietly charged an Ethiopian-born man, Binyam Mohamed, with
conspiring with Mr. Padilla to commit that very crime. Unlike Mr. Padilla, Mr.
Mohamed is not a United States citizen, so the administration threw him into
Guantanamo. Now 28, he is still being held there as an ''illegal enemy
combatant'' under the anti-constitutional military tribunals act that was rushed
through the Republican-controlled Congress just before last November's
elections.

Mr. Mohamed was a target of another favorite Bush administration practice:
''extraordinary rendition,'' in which foreign citizens are snatched off the
streets of their hometowns and secretly shipped to countries where they can be
abused and tortured on behalf of the American government. Mr. Mohamed -- whose
name appears nowhere in either of the cases against Mr. Padilla -- has said he
was tortured in Morocco until he signed a confession that he conspired with Mr.
Padilla. The Bush administration clearly has no intention of answering that
claim, and plans to keep Mr. Mohamed in extralegal detention indefinitely.

The Democratic majority in Congress has a moral responsibility to address all
these issues: fixing the profound flaws in the military tribunals act, restoring
the rule of law over Mr. Bush's rogue intelligence operations and restoring the
balance of powers between Congress and the executive branch. So far, key
Democrats, including Mr. Leahy and Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois, chairman
of a new subcommittee on human rights, have said these issues are high
priorities for them.

We would lend such efforts our enthusiastic backing and hope Mr. Leahy, Mr.
Durbin and other Democratic leaders are not swayed by the absurd notion
circulating in Washington that the Democrats should now ''look ahead'' rather
than use their new majority to right the dangerous wrongs of the last six years
of Mr. Bush's one-party rule.

This is a false choice. Dealing with these issues is not about the past. The
administration's assault on some of the nation's founding principles continues
unabated. If the Democrats were to shirk their responsibility to stop it, that
would make them no better than the Republicans who formed and enabled these
policies in the first place.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); ESPIONAGE (86%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (86%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%);
POLITICS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%);
TORTURE (70%); CHRISTMAS (68%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) United States Politics and Government; Editorials

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%); DICK CHENEY (58%) George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Resume Their Attacks In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 252 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Jan. 7


The Taliban appeared to be resuming their campaign of violence after a week of
quiet over the Islamic festival of Id al-Adha.

Two newborn babies, their mother and a grandmother were killed in a roadside
bombing in eastern Afghanistan as they were returning home from the hospital on
Sunday, said the provincial police chief of Khost, Muhammad Ayub, who called the
attack ''inhuman.'' Three others in the car, a woman and two men, were wounded,
he said.

In a separate attack, gunmen on a motorcycle killed a high school headmaster in
the southern province of Helmand as he was walking home from morning prayers at
his local mosque, according to an Interior Ministry spokesman.

American soldiers thwarted a suicide car-bomb attack on their outpost in the
eastern province of Paktika on Saturday. The troops began shooting at the
advancing vehicle, and it crashed into an outside barrier and exploded,
according to a NATO statement. Five soldiers were wounded, and the bomber was
killed.

A NATO soldier was also wounded in a roadside explosion in Kandahar Province on
Saturday, a NATO spokesman said.

More than 600 civilians have been killed in the past three years, including
those killed as a result of operations by NATO, American and Afghan troops as
well as attacks by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission reported Sunday. The commission appealed for the military to take
more care to avoid civilian casualties and called for compensation to be given
to the victims' families.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); CHILDREN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
EID AL-ADHA (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (77%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (73%); SUICIDE
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); MOTOR VEHICLES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); POLICE
FORCES (57%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (55%) Terrorism; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Id Al-Adha (Muslim Observance)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (93%); AL-QAEDA (54%) Taliban

PERSON: Abdul Waheed Wafa

CITY: KHOST, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Sarajevo Siege General On Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 126 words


Gen. Dragomir Milosevic, left, the Bosnian Serb commander of troops that
encircled Sarajevo and terrorized residents with artillery and sniping, went on
trial at the international war crimes tribunal. He is charged with war crimes
and crimes against humanity for directing the latter part of the 44-month siege
of the Muslim part of the city in the early 1990s in which more than 11,000
people were killed. General Milosevic, who is not a relative of the late
Yugoslavian president Slobodan Milosevic, surrendered to the court in 2004 and
faces a possible sentence of life imprisonment. His predecessor as commander of
the forces that besieged Sarajevo, Gen. Stanislav Galic, is so far the only
tribunal defendant to receive a life term, its maximum penalty.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); SENTENCING (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
ARMED FORCES (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%) Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Dragomir Milosevic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Sarajevo (Bosnia); Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Palestine Peace Not Apartheid'

SECTION: Section 7; Column 3; Book Review Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 625 words



To the Editor:

Ethan Bronner's review of Jimmy Carter's ''Palestine Peace Not Apartheid'' (Jan.
7) mentions that the Anti-Defamation League took out advertisements accusing
Carter of propagating myths about Jewish power. This deserves further comment.

We did so because charges of Jewish control of the media and American Middle
East policy are surfacing too often and in respectable circles. Carter's charges
follow those of John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt in The London Review of Books,
which themselves follow charges at the beginning of the Iraq war about excessive
influence of Jewish neoconservatives.

In a world where anti-Jewish conspiracy theories range from blaming Jews for
9/11 to accusing Jews of concocting the Holocaust, it is particularly disturbing
and dangerous that someone like Jimmy Carter is contributing to this atmosphere.
The history of 20th-century anti-Semitism, culminating in the Holocaust, rested
heavily on the power of such conspiracy theories. The dangers in this volatile
world should be self-evident.

Carter's anti-Israel bias as reflected in his offensive and inaccurate use of
the term ''apartheid'' is bad enough. Contributing to conspiracy theories about
Jews is even worse and is playing with fire.

Abraham H. Foxman
New York

The writer is national director of the Anti-Defamation League.

To the Editor:

Ethan Bronner criticizes Jimmy Carter for not once mentioning Al Qaeda in his
book. Al Qaedais not relevant to the Israel-Palestinian conflict. During the
40-year occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, Al Qaeda was never involved in
terrorist attacks against Israel.Although there have been reports of recent
contacts between Hamas andHezbollah, the influence of Al Qaeda isconsidered to
be minimal.

The book is not about terrorism but about the history of the Palestinian-Israel
conflict and the need for America to get involved to bring about a just
solution. Carter may be naive, and even with American participation a solution
to the conflictmay not be attainable. However, there is little doubt that if the
United States showed a more evenhanded approach, our prestige in the Arab world
would get a much-needed boost.

Bronner also criticizes Carter for not challenging statements made to him by
Arab leaders. Carter contends that these views have not been given adequate
attention in the American news media. His purpose was to inform the American
people about the views of Arab leaderspast and present.

In my view the book is a must-read for those interested in the history leading
to the present conflict, the situation as it stands today and the resolutions
and agreements that have been made and broken.

Marvin Bograd
East Windsor, N.J.

To the Editor:

Ethan Bronner states that ''the biggest complaint against'' Carter's book is its
use of the word ''apartheid'' in the title, ''with its false echo of the racist
policies of the old South Africa.'' In fact, the comparison of Israeli policies
in the occupied territories with South Africa is commonplace among informed
commentators. For example, the editorial board of Israel's leading newspaper,
Haaretz, observed in September 2006 that ''the apartheid regime in the
territories remains intact; millions of Palestinians are living without rights,
freedom of movement or a livelihood, under the yoke of ongoing Israeli
occupation.''

In addition to Haaretz, those sharing Carter's view include the Nobel Prize
winner Desmond Tutu, the father of human rights law in South Africa; John
Dugard, a South African professor of international law; and the Israeli human
rights organization B'Tselem, among many others. Bronner's opinion demonstrates
the truth of Carter's assertion that Americans get only one side of the story.

Geoffrey V. Gray
Jupiter, Fla.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (91%); JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); AL-QAEDA (86%); WRITERS
(78%); HAMAS (78%); LITERATURE (75%); IRAQ WAR (75%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%) Books and Literature

ORGANIZATION: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (84%); AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (92%) Abraham H Foxman; Marvin Bograd; Geoffrey V Gray;
Jimmy Carter

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL
(94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Official Publishes Rebuke of Bush

BYLINE: By JOSEPH KAHN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 1


A senior Chinese government official issued a rare public rebuke of President
Bush on Thursday, accusing him of waging a ''unilateral'' battle against
terrorists that had worsened global tensions.

The official, Ye Xiaowen, director of China's State Bureau of Religious Affairs,
said in a front-page article in the overseas edition of The People's Daily that
Mr. Bush's past references to a ''crusade'' and to ''Islamic fascism'' were
verbal gaffes that revealed his effort to turn the fight against terrorism into
a religious war.

Partly as a result, he said, the United States had lost support for the war in
Iraq and had frittered away the good will Americans gained after the 9/11
attacks.

''The more they oppose terrorism, the more terror they produce,'' Mr. Ye said in
the article. ''How many more troops will they send to die in the meat grinder''
of Iraq.

Mr. Ye wrote that Mr. Bush had effectively ''hijacked'' one religion,
Christianity, to engage in a battle against another one, Islam. That has
strengthened Islamic fundamentalists and made the war unwinnable, he contended.

''Unilateralism and terrorism breed each other, but neither can overcome the
other,'' he wrote.

While such assessments of Mr. Bush's leadership are not new among his opponents
in the United States and abroad, Chinese officials generally take pains to
maintain cordial relations with Washington. Beijing remained on the sidelines
when the United States invaded Iraq, and Chinese officials have refrained from
commenting extensively on the difficulties the American military has faced
there.

Even when China opposes American policies, it is rare for a sitting official to
cast aspersions on an American president by name, a step often considered a
breach of diplomatic etiquette.

It is unclear if Mr. Ye cleared his comments with other top leaders before
publishing them in the overseas edition of the newspaper, the Communist Party's
most authoritative publication.

Mr. Ye's bureau manages China's official Christian, Buddhist and Islamic
associations. The associations regulate religious practice in China, which is
officially atheist.

In the past, Mr. Ye has clashed with American officials who have pressed China
to allow greater religious freedom, and he has tended to speak bluntly when
defending religious policies.

The American Embassy in Beijing did not offer any immediate response to Mr. Ye's
article.

Beijing at least initially embraced the American-led fight against terrorists.
Human rights groups say China has used Mr. Bush's policies to justify a broader
crackdown on its Muslim Uighur population in the western region of Xinjiang,
where it says separatist groups operate.

Yet even as that crackdown has continued, the Chinese religious authorities have
sought to improve relations with Islamic nations and Islamic religious leaders
at home and abroad.

Last year, the Foreign Ministry officially condemned Danish cartoons that
Muslims considered an insult to the Prophet Muhammad. This year, Chinese
propaganda officials have ordered the Chinese news media to play down images or
references to pigs ahead of the Year of the Pig in the Chinese zodiac, because
China's Hui Muslim minority considers pigs offensive.

Mr. Ye suggested that Mr. Bush follow China's more accommodating approach. Mr.
Bush should ''abandon unilateralism'' and ''respect that differences can exist
in harmony,'' Mr. Ye wrote.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); TERRORISM (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (77%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); MANNERS & ETIQUETTE (70%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); ARMED FORCES (67%) Terrorism; Islam; United States
International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: People's Daily (Chinese Newspaper)

PERSON: Joseph Kahn; Ye Xiaowen; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: China

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

History's Tangled Threads

BYLINE: By Fergus M. Bordewich.

Fergus M. Bordewich is the author of ''Bound for Canaan: The Underground
Railroad and the War for the Soul of America.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1021 words


FEW aspects of the American past have inspired more colorful mythology than the
Underground Railroad. It's probably fair to say that most Americans view it as a
thrilling tapestry of midnight flights, hairbreadth escapes, mysterious codes
and strange hiding places.

So it's not surprising that the intriguing (if only recently invented) tale of
escape maps encoded in antebellum quilts -- enshrined in a metastasizing library
of children's books and teachers' lesson plans and perhaps even in a Central
Park memorial to Frederick Douglass -- should also seize the popular
imagination.

But faked history serves no one, especially when it buries important truths that
have been hidden far too long. The ''freedom quilt'' myth is just the newest
acquisition in a congeries of bogus, often bizarre, legends attached to the
Underground Railroad. Despite a lack of documentation, tales of actual tunnels
through which fugitives supposedly fled persist in communities from the Canadian
border to the Mason-Dixon Line.

Popular songs associated with the underground rarely withstand scrutiny, either.
Recent research has revealed that the inspirational ballad ''Follow the Drinking
Gourd'' -- perhaps the single best-known ''artifact'' of the Underground
Railroad -- was first published in 1928, and that much of the text and music as
we know it today was actually composed by Lee Hays of the Weavers in 1947. Nor
do its ''directions'' conform to any known underground route.

Legend has also elevated to nearly superhuman status the underground conductor
Harriet Tubman, typically claiming that she led north more than 300 slaves. The
actual number was closer to 70, according to a Tubman biographer, Kate Clifford
Larson. The truth takes nothing away from Tubman, a remarkable woman by any
measure, but her deification as the embodiment of the Underground Railroad has
obscured the work of many lesser-known African-American activists -- among them
New York's David Ruggles, who organized the city's underground in the 1830s and
helped more than 600 former slaves to freedom.

The notion of maps hidden in quilts surfaced in the 1980s -- in a children's
book, according to a quilting historian, Leigh Fellner, who has shown that many
of the patterns supposed to contain ''coded'' directions for fugitives date from
the 20th century.

Such fictions rely for their plausibility on the premise that the operations of
the Underground Railroad were so secret that the truth is essentially
unknowable. In fact, there is abundant documentation of the underground's
activities to be found in antebellum antislavery newspapers, narratives of
escape written by former slaves and the recollections of participants recorded
after the Civil War, when there was no longer danger of reprisal. None mention
quilts, tunnels or, with the rarest of exceptions, any hiding place more exotic
than a barn or attic.

Most successful fugitives were enterprising and well informed. The vast majority
had little need for coded maps, since they came from the border states of
Maryland, Virginia and Kentucky, just a few days' or hours' walk from the
nearest free state.

The Underground Railroad provided shelter, transportation and guides, but
through most of the North its work was hardly secret. Abolitionist newspapers
reported news of fugitives in detail -- their passage through town, the names of
people who'd assisted them. In some places, activists distributed handbills
announcing what they were doing and how many fugitives they had helped. Jermain
Loguen, the African-American leader of the underground in Syracuse, advertised
his address in local newspapers as an aid to freedom-seekers.

The larger importance of the Underground Railroad lies not in fanciful legends,
but in the diverse history of the men and women, black and white, who made it
work and in the far-reaching political and moral consequences of what they did.
The Underground Railroad was the nation's first great movement of mass civil
disobedience after the American Revolution, engaging thousands of citizens in
the active subversion of federal law, as well as the first mass movement that
asserted the principle of personal responsibility for others' human rights. It
was also the nation's first interracial political movement, which from its
beginning in the 1790s joined free blacks, abolitionist whites and sometimes
slaves in a collaboration that shattered racial taboos.

During the long dark night of Jim Crow politics, these deeper truths of the
Underground Railroad were suppressed: in a nation committed to segregation and
blind to racism, the story of a politically radical, biracial movement led in
part by African-Americans was far too subversive to accept.

Eye-catching quilts and mysterious tunnels satisfy the human penchant for easily
digestible history. Myths deliver us the heroes we crave, and submerge the
horrific reality of slavery in a gilded haze of uplift. But in claiming to honor
the history of African-Americans, they serve only to erase it in a new way.

Americans still have a difficult time talking about race and slavery, and the
Underground Railroad deserves to be part of the national discussion. It forced
Americans to think about slavery in new ways, by delivering tens of thousands of
former slaves into Northern communities.

There, for the first time, whites began to learn firsthand about the realities
of slavery -- the physical and emotional cruelties, the ruptured families, the
abuse of enslaved women -- and to empathize with black Americans as people like
themselves, with the same human needs and desires, the same vulnerabilities, the
same devotion to family and faith.

In an age when self-interest has been elevated in our culture to a public and
political virtue, the Underground Railroad still has something to teach: that
every individual, no matter how humble, can make a difference in the world, and
that the importance of one's life lies not in money or celebrity, but in doing
the right thing, even in silence or secrecy, and without reward. This truth
doesn't need to be encoded in fiction in order to be heard.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Daniel Bejar)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); QUILTS & QUILTING (89%); SLAVERY (89%);
SEWING & NEEDLECRAFTS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HISTORY (78%);
BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (76%); WRITERS (76%); TEACHING MATERIALS & MEDIA (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (68%) Slavery; History; Politics and
Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Demonstrations and Riots; Slavery

PERSON: Fergus M Bordewich

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); CANADA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Challenging the Mullahs, One Signature at a Time

BYLINE: By MAURA J. CASEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial Observer; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 673 words


''Well-behaved women rarely make history,'' my favorite bumper sticker says. It
surely applies to Shirin Ebadi, the Iranian lawyer and 2003 Nobel Peace Prize
winner whose relentless campaign against discrimination has enraged the mullahs
for more than 25 years.

In a country where the law values a woman's life at only half the price of a
man's, Ms. Ebadi will not be quiet, and she is urging other women to find their
voices. Her newest effort is to help collect the signatures of one million
Iranian women on a petition protesting their lack of legal rights.

The concept is simple and revolutionary, melding education,
consciousness-raising and peaceful protest. Starting last year, women armed with
petitions began to go to wherever other women gathered: schools, hair salons,
doctors' offices and private homes.

Every woman is asked to sign. But whatever a woman decides, she receives a
leaflet explaining how Iran's interpretation of Islamic law denies women full
rights.

The material explains how Iran's divorce law makes it easy for men, and
incredibly difficult for women, to leave a marriage, and how custody laws give
divorced fathers sole rights to children above the age of 7.

Ms. Ebadi says the petition drive has already trained ''400 young women to
educate others'' about these injustices. The movement, made up of a network of
women's organizations and publications, has no formal leadership, in part to
lessen the chances of retaliation. That didn't help three female journalists who
were arrested late last month after they wrote articles for feminist
publications backing the drive. They have since been released but will face a
hearing in two months. Ms. Ebadi will defend them.

It's only natural to wonder how many more women will be arrested as they rebel,
one signature at a time. And only natural to marvel about the courage of the
30,000 women who have already signed.

The movement is doing on a grand scale what Ms. Ebadi has done for her entire
adult life. When I last spoke with her, eight years ago in her Tehran home, she
had emerged as a tenacious human rights campaigner after being forced to step
down as a judge by the Islamic revolution. She was blunt about the lack of
freedom in Iran and well aware of the price for such outspokenness.

She's been arrested and imprisoned and the target of death threats. In New York
in January for meetings at the United Nations, she was just as defiant and just
as unafraid as I remembered. Winning the Nobel Prize has not given her immunity.

There's a lot to speak out about. When Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, is
not propagating lies about the Holocaust or cheering on Iran's nuclear program,
he's having independent journalists arrested. But he is not the only problem.
Above him is the hard-line Council of Guardians and above it the supreme
religious leader. The Council of Guardians vetoed legislation increasing civil
liberties and banned most moderates from running for Parliament in 2004.

Given the breadth of the institutional opposition arrayed against them, the
Change for Equality Petition Drive is especially clever. Rather than directly
confronting the system, it goes around it. Even women who don't sign the
petition will be better informed about their second-class status. The hope is
that they will then be less likely to accept injustice indefinitely. And if
Iran's women start questioning their lack of rights, perhaps Iran's men will
have the courage to speak out, too.

The government certainly understands the implications. Just a few weeks ago, it
blocked access to the campaign's Web site. But within hours the women had
another Web site up and running.

Ms. Ebadi, the lifelong agitator, does not mask her pride or her belief that
women's voices will someday make all the difference. ''By getting one million
signatures, the world will know we object to these conditions,'' she said. And I
can't help but think that instead of one courageous woman for the government to
contend with, it will have reaped a million.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FAMILY LAW (90%); NOBEL PRIZES (90%); RELIGION (90%); AWARDS & PRIZES
(90%); WOMEN (90%); PETITIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); JOURNALISM (86%); WRITERS (86%); ARRESTS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); MARRIAGE LAW (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(75%); CHILD CUSTODY & SUPPORT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CHILDREN (74%);
DIVORCE & DISSOLUTION (72%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (64%); HOLOCAUST (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%);
PHYSICIAN PRACTICES (54%); HAIR STYLING SERVICES (54%) Women; Discrimination;
Freedom and Human Rights; Editorials

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (52%) Shirin Ebadi; Maura J Casey

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); UNITED STATES (79%); IRAN (58%)

REGION: Iran

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russian Official Says Insurgency In Chechnya Has Been Tamed

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 11


Russia's defense minister said Sunday that Russia had succeeded in its latest
war in Chechnya, defeating separatists and what he called their ''emissaries
from 50 states.''

''We have scored a success in Chechnya,'' said the defense minister, Sergei B.
Ivanov. ''The problem has been solved.''

Mr. Ivanov, speaking before an international audience of defense officials and
diplomats at the Munich Conference on Security Policy, underscored the Kremlin's
confidence that the second war in Chechnya since the dissolution of the Soviet
Union had largely ended, and that the separatists' ranks had been shrunk by
military operations and offers of amnesty.

The second Chechnya war began late in 1999. There has been a sharp turn in
Russia's favor since late 2004, and the insurgents have not conducted a
large-scale guerrilla operation since 2005 or a major terrorist attack since the
seizure of a public school in the autumn of 2004.

The military situation in Chechnya contrasts sharply with that of the United
States in Afghanistan and Iraq, where American forces are struggling against
growing insurgencies.

Attacks still occur in and near Chechnya, and an insurgency persists, mixing
militant Islam, separatism and local vengeance codes.

But the pace of fighting is much slower than it was two years ago, and many of
the insurgency's principal leaders -- including Shamil Basayev, the terrorist
leader -- have been killed since 2005.

The turnaround has defied predictions from many analysts and critics of Russia,
who believed that its army was hopelessly bogged down and that its rough and
often indiscriminate tactics were creating more insurgents than were killed.

Russia has also found strong indigenous forces to serve as local proxies to do
much of the continued fighting. These military allies, criticized by human
rights organizations as corrupt and ruthlessly brutal, are now largely in
control of the region's government.

Mr. Ivanov drew a distinction between Chechnya and the wars that the United
States is fighting. He noted, for example, that Chechnya ''is a small territory
compared to Afghanistan or Iraq.''

Mr. Ivanov is viewed as a possible successor to President Vladimir V. Putin,
whose second term ends next year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TERRORISM (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY
POLICY (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ARMIES (78%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); RELIGION (51%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(50%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

PERSON: SERGEI IVANOV (79%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (59%) C J Chivers; Sergei B (Min)
Ivanov

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ
(92%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia); Russia

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canada's Move to Restore Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 567 words


The United States was not the only country to respond to the horror of the Sept.
11 terrorist attacks with policies that went much too far in curtailing basic
rights and civil liberties in the name of public safety. Now we see that a
nation can regain its senses after calm reflection and begin to rein back such
excesses, but that heartening news comes from Canada and not the United States.

Canada's Supreme Court has struck down a law that the government used to detain
foreign-born terrorism suspects indefinitely -- employing secret evidence and
not filing charges -- while orders to deport them were reviewed. The law was
actually passed in 1978, but was primarily employed to detain and deport foreign
spies. After the 2001 attacks, the Canadian government began using it
aggressively to hold terrorism suspects, claiming that it was an important tool
for keeping Canada safe.

That is just the sort of argument the Bush administration used to ram the
excesses of the Patriot Act and the 2006 Military Commissions Act through
Congress, and offered as an excuse for other abusive policies, like President
Bush's illegal wiretapping of international calls and e-mail.

The Canadian justices rejected their government's specious national security
claim with a forceful 9-to-0 ruling that upheld every person's right to fair
treatment. ''The overarching principle of fundamental justice that applies here
is this: before the state can detain people for significant periods of time, it
must accord them a fair judicial process,'' Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin
wrote.

The contrast with the United States could not be more disturbing. The Canadian
court ruling came just days after a federal appeals court in Washington ruled
that Congress could deny inmates of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp the
ancient right to challenge their confinement in court. The 2006 military
tribunals law revoked that right for a select group who had been designated
''illegal enemy combatants'' without a semblance of judicial process.

In late January, Canada created another unflattering contrast with United States
policy when it offered a formal apology and financial compensation to Maher
Arar, a Canadian citizen who was a victim of Mr. Bush's decision to approve
open-ended detentions, summary deportations and even torture after 9/11. Mr.
Arar was detained in the United States and deported to Syria, where he was held
for nearly a year and tortured.

Instead of apologizing to Mr. Arar, who was cleared of any connection to
terrorism by a Canadian investigatory panel, Justice Department lawyers are
fighting a lawsuit he has brought in this country, using their usual flimsy
claim of state secrets. The Bush administration still refuses to remove Mr. Arar
from its terrorist watch list.

The United States Supreme Court has ruled twice in favor of Guantanamo detainees
on statutory grounds, but it has yet to address the profound constitutional
issues presented by American practices, including the abuses Congress authorized
when it passed the Military Commissions Act. Such a showdown does not seem far
off, but Congress also has a duty to revoke or rewrite the laws that have been
abused in the name of national security, starting with the 2006 tribunals law.

Lawmakers have only to look to the Canadian court for easy-to-follow directions
back to the high ground on basic human rights and civil liberties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(76%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (76%); SUPREME COURTS (76%); ESPIONAGE (75%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (75%); LAWYERS (74%); APPROVALS (74%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(72%); MILITARY BASES (72%); APPEALS COURTS (71%); PRISONS (70%); WIRETAPPING
(70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (70%); NAVIES (67%) Terrorism; Editorials; Law and
Legislation; Security and Warning Systems; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and
Legislation; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (90%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: Canada; United States

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: China: Growth Creates Migrant 'Underclass'

BYLINE: By DAVID LAGUE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 97 words


Although the estimated 200 million urban migrant workers in China have fueled
the country's rapid economic growth, they continue to suffer abuse and
discrimination, and the authorities should do more to ensure that they were
properly paid and provided with essential services, Amnesty International said
in a report. Terming the migrants a growing urban underclass, the report said
they were routinely exploited, lived in dire conditions and were denied health
care and other services because they were ineligible for residence permits in
the cities where they worked.   DAVID LAGUE

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MIGRANT WORKERS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES
(88%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (88%); LIVING CONDITIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%) Labor;
Freedom and Human Rights; Migrant Labor; Discrimination; Wages and Salaries

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%) Amnesty International

PERSON: David Lague

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: China

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Justice, No Peace

BYLINE: By Richard May.

Richard May, a former captain with the Army's 82nd Airborne Division who served
in Afghanistan and Iraq, is a fellow at the World Security Institute's Center
for Defense Information.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


LATE last month some 25,000 people held a rally in the Afghan capital, Kabul.
Were they calling for more aid? Were they rallying to demand military action
against the Taliban? No, they were urging President Hamid Karzai to sign a law
providing legal amnesty for actions committed during the civil war that raged in
Afghanistan during and after the Soviet occupation.

While the law has passed both houses of Afghanistan's Parliament, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and several humanitarian groups have
argued against it on the grounds that it eliminates any possibility for justice
for the people killed, tortured and raped during that awful period. Some have
made subtle threatens, saying that should Mr. Karzai sign the law, he might have
a harder time getting international aid. I understand such humanitarian feelings
and the calls for justice, but President Karzai should sign the law -- for four
good reasons.

First, while most international groups feel that the law is simply about
absolving the most violent warlords, the fact is that almost all Afghans have
blood on their hands. In a country that has been enmeshed in war for more than
25 years it is hard to find people who have not taken up arms at some point in
their lives. Children drafted into militias and farmers who armed themselves to
protect their homes could easily be called ''soldiers'' of the warlords at some
point and face charges.

Second, political participation like the pro-amnesty rally is a good sign for
the future. While many saw it as an effort to forgive warlords, I saw something
much better: progress through participation. When the people of a country that
has experienced only war and tyranny for 25 years feel free to go to the streets
to have their voices heard, democracy is working.

It is worth noting that not a single person was hurt during this rally -- not
one police officer or soldier or marcher. Whatever the views of the crowd, they
demonstrated their position through a nonviolent method -- a tremendous advance
in recent Afghan history. And, while the global humanitarian groups want to
resolve the past, the rally showed that many of the survivors of those dark
years want nothing more than to put it behind them and rebuild their country
democratically.

Third, the rejection of the amnesty law could easily turn the people against the
government and the coalition forces that operate in Afghanistan. Should Mr.
Karzai refuse to sign, it would convince many Afghans that their government is
more interested in the views of the international community than that of its own
people.

Fourth, calls for justice tend to ignore the reality of the civil war. When
Westerners hear the term ''warlord'' they think of tyrannical criminals who are
self-serving instruments of death. But in Afghanistan things are more complex.
Most warlords came to power protecting their families, clans and land from
Soviet troops. The members of the militias the warlords commanded were cousins,
sons and neighbors. The warlords were, and in many cases still are, closer to
the people than the Kabul government has ever been. By negating the amnesty law,
Mr. Karzai would effectively shun a large segment of the population and
potentially turn it toward the Taliban.

The fragile government in Kabul cannot focus on dividing its country over past
acts. It must look to the future with a vision that accepts all elements of its
society. President Karzai should err on the side of unity and act not for the
future of his government, but for the future of Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Edel Rodriguez)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); AMNESTY (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(75%); TORTURE (75%); ARMED FORCES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%);
CHILDREN (70%); RIOTS (67%); PARDONS (60%) Amnesties and Pardons; Law and
Legislation; Demonstrations and Riots

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (57%) Taliban
(Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (91%) Richard May; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Russia; Kabul (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Strike Kills 9 Family Members Near Kabul, Afghans Say

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, March 5


Nine members of a family, including five women and three children, were killed
in an American airstrike in central Afghanistan late Sunday during a battle with
militants, Afghan officials said Monday.

The American military acknowledged that it dropped two 2,000-pound bombs on a
compound on Sunday night, but said that it could not confirm the casualties.

The strike occurred 12 hours after American forces in eastern Afghanistan fired
on civilians following a suicide car bombing next to an American convoy. The
American fire killed at least 10 people and wounded 25, Afghan officials said.
In response, protests on Sunday blocked the main highway in the area.

On Sunday night, American forces at a small base in Tape Ahmed Beg, in Kapisa
Province, northeast of the capital, Kabul, came under rocket fire at 9 p.m., the
United States military said in a statement. When two men with Kalashnikov rifles
were spotted entering a compound, the Americans called an airstrike, which ended
the engagement, it said.

''Coalition forces observed two men with AK-47s leaving the scene of the rocket
attack and entering the compound,'' Lt. Col. David Accetta, a military
spokesman, said in the statement. ''These men knowingly endangered civilians by
retreating into a populated area while conducting attacks against coalition
forces.''

''We did this in self-defense,'' said Gen. Muhammad Eiwaz Masloom, the police
chief of Kapisa Province, whose men work beside Americans at the base. ''The
enemy of Afghanistan is trying to use different tactics to destroy the peace and
stability in our area, especially in the districts of Tagab and Nejarab, and
they have repeatedly attacked our bases.''

He said that members of the Islamic Party, which is led by the renegade
mujahedeen commander Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and Taliban supporters were active in
the area.

But a local representative of the provincial council, Suraya Bahadur, who comes
from Nejarab district, where the bombing happened, condemned it. ''I condemn
both the suicide attacks and the rocket attacks by the enemy of Afghanistan, and
also I condemn these type of mistakes,'' by American and NATO forces, she said.
''We never want our civilian people to be killed.''

John Sifton, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch, which is based in New
York, also expressed concern about the level of force. ''That is heavy firepower
to respond to two men, even if they have Kalashnikovs,'' he said in a telephone
interview. ''If that version of events bears up, it would strongly suggest that
the attack was disproportionate.'' Mr. Sifton said insurgents also regularly
violated the rules of war by using force near civilian areas.

On Monday, President Hamid Karzai condemned the killing of the civilians in
eastern Afghanistan on Sunday morning. He blamed the ''enemies of Afghanistan''
for the suicide bombing, which ''caused the American forces to fire on civilian
people and demonstrators that killed 10 people.'' He ordered a government
delegation to the scene to investigate with the American military.

The American military, in a statement, revised its account to 8 civilians killed
and 35 wounded, from 16 dead and 24 wounded, saying that the latest figures were
its most accurate. A spokesman at Bagram Air Base, Sgt. Dean Welch, said that as
the day progressed and after coordination with Afghan officials, the initial
reports were corrected.

The statement said the military deeply regretted the loss of civilian life.
''This attack put every innocent man, woman and child buying food or clothing in
the bazaar at risk,'' Col. John Nicholson of the United States Army said. The
statement said American forces would work with the Afghan authorities to
''investigate and identify those responsible.''

Nine witnesses, including five Afghans recuperating from bullet wounds in a
hospital, told The Associated Press that the American forces had fired
indiscriminately along at least six miles of one of eastern Afghanistan's
busiest highways -- a route often filled with cars, trucks and Afghans on foot
and bicycles.

The NATO secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, said in Brussels that he
understood that both episodes involved American-led coalition forces rather than
NATO's forces in Afghanistan, but he said, ''Every civilian casualty is one too
many,'' Reuters reported.

Mr. Sifton urged Afghanistan, NATO and coalition forces to develop protocols for
troops in such cases.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); INTERVIEWS (69%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); POLICE FORCES (57%); RELIGION (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shutting Out Terrorism's Victims

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 553 words


Terrorists terrorize people. That's no surprise. What is shocking, and
scandalous, is that American law currently bars the entry to the United States
of some of terrorism's most abused victims: refugees who have been forced, often
at gunpoint, to provide so-called material assistance.

Among those excluded by these provisions are a 13-year-old Ugandan girl taken
away by the Lord's Resistance Army and forced to gather food and cook for her
abductors, and a Sri Lankan fisherman kidnapped by Tamil Tiger rebels and forced
to pay a ransom for his freedom. Some who fought as irregulars alongside
American troops in Indochina also now find themselves excluded because they have
been wrongly classed as terrorists. Watching all that, Iraqis may well ask why
they should now risk their lives in support of American policies if this is what
they can expect if they ever have to seek refuge in the United States.

Just about everyone, including Bush administration officials, agrees that these
rules need to be fixed. But the remedy that the Homeland Security Department has
recently proposed -- chiefly a promise of discretionary waivers -- does not go
nearly far enough. Unless the administration comes up with an acceptable
solution soon, Congress will have to.

The problem begins with a sloppy definition of terrorism written into a 1990
immigration law. It was compounded after the 9/11 terrorist attacks by the Bush
administration's overly aggressive and rigid interpretation of what constitutes
material support for terrorism. Standard legal definitions of terrorism
characterize it as planning or committing unlawful, violent acts aimed at
killing, injuring or intimidating innocent civilians. But the 1990 law defined
it in a way that could encompass virtually any illegal civilian use of weapons
-- even to resist a violent dictatorship or to fight alongside American troops.

The Bush administration, using the Patriot Act and other tools, turned this into
a much bigger problem by pumping up the number of groups -- and individuals --
officially labeled as terrorist and aggressively enforcing the concept of
material support.

In response to complaints from both parties in Congress and from religious and
human rights groups, the administration recently agreed to consider selective
waivers of the material support ban. But the waivers would apply only if the
groups doing the intimidating were not on any of the State Department's lists of
terrorist organizations. That is a cruel and irrelevant distinction. Duress is
duress, no matter which group coerced the cooperation.

Unless the administration is prepared to make waivers available to all who
deserve them, Congress needs to rewrite the underlying legislation so that no
one who was coerced into providing material support to any group will be
automatically excluded. Congress also needs to tighten the 1990 immigration
law's overly broad interpretation of terrorism, bringing it into line with
definitions in other statutes.

And as with so many other excesses of the Bush administration, officials need to
stop, think and exercise sense rather than zealotry when they define who is a
terrorist and what constitutes providing support to terrorism. In the name of
keeping out terrorists, Washington should not slam the door on terrorism's
victims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(89%); SCANDALS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (79%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (79%); US PATRIOT ACT (79%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%) Immigration and
Refugees; Editorials; Law and Legislation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (82%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (57%) Homeland Security Department

PERSON: George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (79%); SRI LANKA (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Sudan: Trial Of Darfur Suspect Delayed

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 96 words


The authorities delayed their trial of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman, a member
of the country's security forces sought by the International Criminal Court in
The Hague, after he appealed, court sources said. Sudan has said the
international court has no jurisdiction to try its citizens for alleged war
crimes in Darfur and said it would try Mr. Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb,
itself on unspecified charges related to Darfur. But yesterday, the courthouse
in El Geneina, in West Darfur, was empty and judges from Sudan's special court
for crimes in Darfur had not arrived.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%);
JURISDICTION (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%) Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court of
Justice

PERSON: Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al- Rahman

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); NETHERLANDS (92%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 535 words


INTERNATIONAL   3-18Regional Talks Begin in IraqPrime Minister Nuri Kamal
al-Maliki of Iraq opened a much-anticipated regional security conference in
Baghdad with a plea to Iraq's neighbors to refuse to finance attacks in Iraq or
allow people to cross borders in order to participate in them as suicide bombers
or militia members.   1 On one of the holiest days in the Shiite calendar, a
suicide car bomber detonated a vehicle outside a military checkpoint near Sadr
City, a Shiite stronghold, killing at least seven Iraqi soldiers and three
pilgrims and wounding scores of civilians, officials said.   16Estimates of the
number of Shiite pilgrims traveling to Karbala for Arbaeen, the Shiite ritual
commemorating the killing of the Prophet Muhammad's grandson, ranged from three
million to seven million.

Iraqi officials said this was the largest celebration of the holiday in
decades.Bush Continues Tour in UruguayPresident Bush continued his tour of Latin
America in Uruguay, meeting with President Tabare Vazquez, a left-leaning leader
who has shown a willingness to buck the anti-American push of regional
strongmen.  4 In Colombia, the president's next stop, a scandal tying
paramilitary death squads and drug traffickers to close supporters of President
Alvaro Uribe threatens to overshadow Mr. Bush's brief visit.   4Hungary's
Rallying CryDuring protests in Hungary last October, the government put up
barriers around Parliament. Despite international pressure to take them down,
they still stand, and they have become a symbol for opposition in a country with
a history of protest.   6 Dismay Over U.N. Rights PanelThe newly formed United
Nations Human Rights Council is set to begin a session in Geneva amid
expressions of frustration from rights advocates at its early performance.   8
NATIONAL 20-27Romney's Gifts to the RightIn the months before announcing his bid
for the Republican presidential nomination, former Gov. Mitt Romney of
Massachusetts contributed tens of thousands of dollars of his personal fortune
to several conservative groups in a position to influence his image on the
right.   1 Couples Separate to SleepNot since the Victorian age of starched
sheets and starchy manners, builders and architects say, have there been so many
orders for separate bedrooms. Couples and sociologists say that often it has to
do with snoring, and getting a good night's sleep.   1 Iraqi Refugees in
AmericaAs the violence rages in Iraq and tens of thousands flee to neighboring
countries, a small stream of Iraqis is trickling into the United States despite
improbable odds.   20 NEW YORK/REGION 29-34Bridging a Muslim DivideThe
congregations of the Mosque of Islamic Brotherhood in Harlem, serving
African-Americans, and the Islamic Center of Long Island, serving immigrants of
South Asian and Arab descent, represent the largest Muslim populations in the
United States. Yet a gulf divides them, one marked by race, class and history.
1 New Life for Local NewspapersLast fall, Rupert Murdoch purchased TimesLedger
Newspapers, a chain of 16 local weeklies in Queens, reflecting the vigor of
community weeklies and marking a new period for the borough's independent
newspapers. 1Chess 33Weather SP 12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%);
RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); RELIGION (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (88%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (88%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); IMMIGRATION
(79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (78%); REFUGEES (77%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (72%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (72%); LIBERALISM (72%); CONSERVATISM (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); WEALTHY
PEOPLE (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); SOCIOLOGY (61%); GRANDCHILDREN (54%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (51%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (51%); US PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (91%); MITT ROMNEY (71%); ALVARO URIBE (51%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); HUNGARY (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);
URUGUAY (79%); ASIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); COLOMBIA (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indentured Servants In America

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 720 words


A must-read for anyone who favors an expansion of guest worker programs in the
U.S. is a stunning new report from the Southern Poverty Law Center that details
the widespread abuse of highly vulnerable, poverty-stricken workers in programs
that already exist.

The report is titled ''Close to Slavery: Guestworker Programs in the United
States.'' It will be formally released today at a press conference in
Washington.

Workers recruited from Mexico, South America, Asia and elsewhere to work in
American hotels and in such labor-intensive industries as forestry, seafood
processing and construction are often ruthlessly exploited.

They are routinely cheated out of their wages, which are low to begin with. They
are bound like indentured servants to the middlemen and employers who arrange
their work tours in the U.S. And they are virtual hostages of the American
companies that employ them.

The law does not allow these ''guests'' to change jobs while they're here. If a
particular employer is unscrupulous, as is very often the case, the worker has
little or no recourse.

One of the guest workers profiled in the report was a psychology student
recruited in the Dominican Republic to work at a hotel in New Orleans in the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. The woman had taken on $4,000 in debt to cover
''fees'' and other expenses that were required for her to get a desk job that
paid $6 an hour.

But after a month, her hours were steadily reduced until she was working only 15
or 20 hours a week. That left her with barely enough money to survive, and with
no way of paying off her crushing debt.

The woman and her fellow guest workers had hardly enough money for food. ''We
would just buy Chinese food because it was the cheapest,'' she said. ''We would
buy one plate a day and share it between two or three people.'' She told the
authors of the report: ''I felt like an animal without claws -- defenseless. It
is the same as slavery.''

Steven Greenhouse of The Times recently reported on a waiter from Indonesia who
took on $6,000 in debt to become a guest worker. He arrived in North Carolina
expecting to do farm work but found that there was no job for him at all.

The report focused primarily on the 120,000 foreign workers who are allowed into
the U.S. each year to work on farms or at other low-skilled jobs. In most cases
the guest workers take on a heavy debt load to participate in the program,
anywhere from $500 to more than $10,000. Worried about the welfare of their
families back home, and with the huge debt hanging over their heads, the workers
are most often docile, even in the face of the most egregious treatment.

The result, said the report, is that they are ''systematically exploited and
abused.''

Some of the worst abuses occur in the forestry industry. The report said,
''Virtually every forestry company that the Southern Poverty Law Center has
encountered provides workers with pay stubs showing that they have worked
substantially fewer hours than they actually worked.''

A favorite (and extremely cruel) tactic of employers is the seizure of guest
workers' identity documents, such as passports and Social Security cards. That
leaves the workers incredibly vulnerable.

''Numerous employers have refused to return these documents even when the worker
simply wanted to return to his home country,'' the report said. ''The Southern
Poverty Law Center also has encountered numerous incidents where employers
destroyed passports or visas in order to convert workers into undocumented
status.''

Without their papers the workers live in abject fear of encountering the
authorities, who will treat them as illegals. They are completely at the mercy
of the employers.

President Bush has been relentless in his push to greatly expand guest worker
programs as part of his effort to revise the nation's immigration laws. To
expand these programs without looking closely at the gruesome abuses already
taking place would be both tragic and ridiculous.

''This is not a situation where there are just a few bad-apple employers,'' said
Mary Bauer, director of the Immigrant Justice Project at the Southern Poverty
Law Center, which has initiated a number of lawsuits on behalf of abused
workers. ''Our experience is that it's the very structure of the program that
lends itself to abuse.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FOREIGN LABOR (91%); REFUGEES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PUBLIC HEALTH & WELFARE LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAGES &
SALARIES (89%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (89%); SLAVERY (89%); POOR POPULATION
(78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); FARM LABOR (78%); LITIGATION
(74%); HOSTAGE TAKING (71%); HOTELS & MOTELS (70%); HURRICANE KATRINA (65%);
IMMIGRATION (63%); PRESS CONFERENCES (56%); SEAFOOD PROCESSING (55%); TROPICAL
STORMS (51%) Immigration and Refugees; Foreign Labor; Wages and Salaries; Frauds
and Swindling; Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and Litigation; Immigration and
Refugees

COMPANY: SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER (91%)

ORGANIZATION: SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER (91%) Southern Poverty Law Center

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (91%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (91%)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush; Mary Bauer

CITY: NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); LOUISIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); ASIA (79%); INDONESIA (79%);
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Confession at Guantanamo by 9/11 Mastermind May Aid Other Qaeda Defendants

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1320 words


The admissions made by the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks illuminated and
transformed the cases against him and the 13 other Qaeda leaders transferred
last year from C.I.A. prisons to the Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

In acknowledging last Saturday his role in more than 30 terrorist attacks and
plots, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed certainly simplified the case against himself and
may have effectively signed his own death warrant when he eventually faces a
military trial.

But those same statements, released on Wednesday by the Pentagon, may complicate
the prosecution of his former colleagues.

Speaking to a military tribunal that considers just the narrow question of
whether Guantanamo detainees were properly designated as enemy combatants, Mr.
Mohammed was so expansive in his acceptance of responsibility that other
defendants might be able to use his statements in their own defense.

In a transcript of the hearing, Mr. Mohammed also disavowed information he had
told Central Intelligence Agency interrogators about his accomplices, again
potentially helping the other defendants.

A revised version of the transcript released Thursday added another chilling
confession. Mr. Mohammed said he decapitated Daniel Pearl, a reporter for The
Wall Street Journal, in Pakistan in 2002. The military said it had held back the
passage about Mr. Pearl while it notified his family.

That confession could figure in the case of Ahmed Omar Sheikh, who is appealing
his death sentence in Pakistan for his role in Mr. Pearl's abduction and murder.
Mr. Mohammed and the other Qaeda leaders will eventually face charges before
military commissions that they are guilty of war crimes, many of which carry
death sentences.

Unlike the recent proceedings, before Combatant Status Review Tribunals, those
trials will largely resemble ones before civilian criminal courts. Officials
have said that they intend to charge the men this year and that those trials
could start early next year.

The trials of three less significant detainees, none of them among the 14
leaders, are expected to begin soon.

It is not clear whether Mr. Mohammed was really involved in as many terrorism
plots as he said or whether he was simply indulging in a penchant for drama and
self-aggrandizement. Nonetheless, his confession could have a significant effect
on the round of tribunals. Several lawyers said his statement could be used
against him in other settings.

''This statement is admissible and substantially hampers the ability of the
defense to argue that he is not guilty,'' said David B. Rivkin, an official in
the administrations of Ronald Reagan and the first President George Bush. ''The
other side may argue that the poor dear was so stressed out by his earlier
treatment that it had a lingering effect. That dog ain't going to hunt.''

John Sifton, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch, said he questioned
whether the statement read for Mr. Mohammed by his representative authentically
reflected his views.

''The grammar of it alone, when juxtaposed with his version of English, suggests
it was prepared for him,'' Mr. Sifton said. ''It looked to me like it was
printed out of whitehouse.gov.''

But Mr. Mohammed in places amended and then expressly adopted the statement,
telling tribunal officials that he was not under any pressure or duress as he
did so. He later freely discussed aspects of his terrorism activities in an
extended monologue to the tribunal.

The debate over the consequences of Mr. Mohammed's admissions rekindled a larger
one, about whether he and other terrorism suspects should be considered
criminals or combatants. Mr. Mohammed embraced the administration view at the
informal hearing on Saturday. He was, he said, a soldier. He compared his
actions to the revolutionary zeal of George Washington, spoke on behalf of
people he said were improperly detained after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and
criticized American and Israeli foreign policy.

By giving him that platform on a military level, the United States has dignified
and legitimized a criminal, Mr. Sifton said, adding that could have been avoided
by charging Mr. Mohammed with crimes in ordinary American courts.

John Yoo, an architect of the administration's legal response to the Sept. 11
attacks who is now a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley,
drew a different conclusion from the transcript.

''K.S.M.'s statements show that he in fact was and is a treasure trove of
intelligence information on Al Qaeda,'' Professor Yoo said, referring to Mr.
Mohammed by his initials. ''He knew not just of past plots to attack the United
States, but threats that were in motion at the time of his capture, threats that
had to be stopped.

''The criminal justice system cannot handle the demand both for an open trial
with the right to remain silent and the need to collect that intelligence and
act on it swiftly and secretly.''

Mr. Rivkin said Mr. Mohammed's statement confirmed the correctness of treating
him as a combatant rather than a criminal.

''The only people who don't think we're at war are the critics,'' Mr. Rivkin
said. ''We think we're at war, and they think they're at war.''

In the transcript, Mr. Mohammed said he had made false statements to ''C.I.A.
peoples,'' and he gave examples, though the military deleted most of the
details. Although the transcripts were redacted, they hinted of the aggressive
questioning of Mr. Mohammed in his more than three years in C.I.A. custody.

They also showed some of the limitations of the hearings. Mr. Mohammed was
denied what in criminal proceedings would be rudimentary protections, including,
notably, the right to a lawyer.

The ''personal representative'' provided to Mr. Mohammed by the military, an Air
Force lieutenant colonel whose name was not released, recited a 31-point
statement in which Mr. Mohammed confessed to a vast array of crimes.

A criminal defense lawyer, by contrast, would have almost certainly advised a
client to say nothing.

The two roles are very different, said Jumana Musa, an advocacy director at
Amnesty International USA, which has been sharply critical of the detention
policies.

''A personal representative is not a lawyer,'' she said. ''There is not
privileged relationship. He can turn over any information he learns from the
detainee, whether exculpatory or incriminatory.''

A second high-value Guantanamo detainee refused to appear before a status
tribunal last Friday. But, through his representative, the detainee, Abu Faraj
al-Libbi, submitted a comprehensive critique of the procedures used by the
military.

''No lawyer, either assigned to the detainee or by the detainee's choosing, has
been made available to the detainee to assist in determining the nature of the
evidence presented against him, its legality and its validity as evidence,'' Mr.
Libbi's statement said. ''The detainee needs legal guidance as to what kind of
testimonies and statements are enough to refute the evidence presented against
him.

''I am extremely keen to exercise my rights fully according the law of the
United States.''

Lawyers for some Guantanamo detainees have asked the United States Supreme Court
to hear their challenge to a recent law, the Military Commissions Act, that
barred them from questioning the legality of their detentions in civilian courts
through petitions for writs of habeas corpus.

The hurried status proceedings over the weekend may have been intended to
demonstrate to the court that an alternative procedure is available and
operating.

Professor Yoo said the military system was adequate and appropriate.

''The C.S.R.T. and military-commission process,'' he said, using the initials of
the review tribunals, ''are the best way to balance the wartime needs for the
trove of intelligence that K.S.M. has, while still creating a process that
reviews whether he should remain in detention.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); NAVIES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); SENTENCING
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
LAWYERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); TRANSCRIPTS (73%); US PRESIDENTS (60%);
MURDER (58%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center
(NYC); Terrorism

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (55%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%); US NAVY (84%) Central
Intelligence Agency; Wall Street Journal

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); RONALD REAGAN (50%) Adam Liptak; Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed; Daniel (1963-2002) Pearl; Ahmed Omar Sheikh

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (94%); PAKISTAN (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(92%)

REGION: Russia; Grozny (Chechnya); Chechnya (Russia); Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba); New York City; Washington (DC); Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran's Operative in the White House

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 773 words


If an 18-year-old American soldier were caught slipping obscure military
paperwork to Iranian spies, he would be arrested, pilloried in the news media
and tossed into prison for years.

But in fact there's an American who has provided services of incalculably
greater value to Iran in recent years. So you have to wonder: Is Dick Cheney an
Iranian mole?

Consider that the Bush administration's first major military intervention was to
overthrow Afghanistan's Taliban regime, Iran's bitter foe to the east. Then the
administration toppled Iran's even worse enemy to the west, the Saddam Hussein
regime in Iraq.

You really think that's just a coincidence? That of all 193 nations in the
world, we just happen to topple the two neighboring regimes that Iran despises?

Moreover, consider how our invasion of Iraq went down. The U.S. dismantled
Iraq's army, broke the Baath Party and helped install a pro-Iranian government
in Baghdad. If Iran's ayatollahs had written the script, they couldn't have done
better -- so maybe they did write the script

We fought Iraq, and Iran won. And that's just another coincidence?

Or think about broader Bush administration policies in the Middle East. For six
years, the White House vigorously backed Israeli hard-liners and refused to
engage seriously in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, thus nurturing
anti-Americanism and religious fundamentalism. Then last summer, the White House
backed Israel's invasion of Lebanon, which turned Iran's proxies in Hezbollah
into street heroes in much of the Arab world.

Consider also the way the administration has systematically antagonized our
former allies in Europe and Asia, undermining chances of a united front to block
Iranian development of nuclear weapons. Mr. Cheney may nominally push for
sanctions against Iran, but by alienating our allies he makes strong sanctions
harder to achieve.

And by condoning torture and extralegal detentions in Guantanamo, the White
House antagonized Muslims around the world and made us look like hypocrites when
we criticize Arab or Iranian human rights abuses. Take Mr. Cheney's endorsement
of the torture known as waterboarding, which simulates drowning: ''It's a
no-brainer for me,'' he said. The torturers in Iran's Evin prison must have
cheered. They got a pass as well.

Even at home, Iran's leaders have been bolstered by President Bush and Mr.
Cheney. Iran's hard-liners are hugely unpopular and the regime is wobbly, but
Bush administration policies have inflamed Iranian nationalism and given cover
to the hard-line president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

Why focus on Dick Cheney rather than his boss? Partly because Mr. Cheney, even
more than Mr. Bush, has systematically pushed an extreme agenda that has
transparently served Iranian purposes. And domestically, his role in the Scooter
Libby scandal -- and his disgraceful refusal to explain just what he was doing
at the crime scene -- ended up paralyzing executive decision-making and
humiliating our government.

Is that really just one more coincidence? Or could it be another case of Mr.
Cheney's following instructions from his Iranian bosses to damage America?

O.K., O.K. Of course, all this is absurd. Mr. Cheney isn't an Iranian mole. Nor
is he a North Korean mole, though his we-don't-negotiate-with-evil policy toward
North Korea has resulted in that country's quadrupling its nuclear arsenal. It's
also unlikely that he is an Al Qaeda mole, even though Al Qaeda now has an
important new base of support in Iraq.

Like Kennedy and Johnson wading into Vietnam, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney harmed
American interests not out of malice but out of ineptitude. I concede that they
honestly wanted the best for America, but we still ended up getting the worst.

So what are the lessons from this episode?

Our national interests are as vulnerable to incompetence as to malicious damage.
So we must identify and abandon the policies that backfired so catastrophically.
The common threads of those damaging policies are clear: a refusal to negotiate
with ''evil''; an aggressive willingness to use military force to solve
problems; contempt for our allies; and the bending of legal and moral principles
to allow indefinite detention and even torture, particularly for anyone with
olive skin and a Muslim name.

Whenever we've suspected a mole in our midst, we've gone to extreme lengths to
find the traitor. This time, betrayed not by a mole but by failed policies,
let's be just as resolute. It's time to uproot policies that in the last
half-dozen years have damaged American interests incomparably more than any mole
or foreign spy ever has in the last 200 years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); PRISONS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); TORTURE (85%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); FUNDAMENTALISM (75%);
ARRESTS (73%); RELIGION (69%); HEZBOLLAH (65%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(65%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (65%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (63%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (61%) Atomic Weapons; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (89%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (75%); MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (56%)
Nicholas D Kristof; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; George W (Pres) Bush; Saddam (Pres)
Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
ISRAEL (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ASIA
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iran; Afghanistan; Iraq; Iran

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The President's Prison

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 773 words


George Bush does not want to be rescued.

The president has been told countless times, by a secretary of state, by members
of Congress, by heads of friendly governments -- and by the American public --
that the Guantanamo Bay detention camp has profoundly damaged this nation's
credibility as a champion of justice and human rights. But Mr. Bush ignored
those voices -- and now it seems he has done the same to his new defense
secretary, Robert Gates, the man Mr. Bush brought in to clean up Donald
Rumsfeld's mess.

Thom Shanker and David Sanger reported in Friday's Times that in his first weeks
on the job, Mr. Gates told Mr. Bush that the world would never consider trials
at Guantanamo to be legitimate. He said that the camp should be shut, and that
inmates who should stand trial should be brought to the United States and taken
to real military courts.

Mr. Bush rejected that sound advice, heeding instead the chief enablers of his
worst instincts, Vice President Dick Cheney and Attorney General Alberto
Gonzales. Their opposition was no surprise. The Guantanamo operation was central
to Mr. Cheney's drive to expand the powers of the presidency at the expense of
Congress and the courts, and Mr. Gonzales was one of the chief architects of the
policies underpinning the detainee system. Mr. Bush and his inner circle are
clearly afraid that if Guantanamo detainees are tried under the actual rule of
law, many of the cases will collapse because they are based on illegal
detention, torture and abuse -- or that American officials could someday be held
criminally liable for their mistreatment of detainees.

It was distressing to see that the president has retreated so far into his
alternative reality that he would not listen to Mr. Gates -- even when he was
backed by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who, like her predecessor, Colin
Powell, had urged Mr. Bush to close Guantanamo. It seems clear that when he
brought in Mr. Gates, Mr. Bush didn't want to fix Mr. Rumsfeld's disaster; he
just wanted everyone to stop talking about it.

If Mr. Bush would not listen to reason from inside his cabinet, he might at
least listen to what Americans are telling him about the damage to this
country's credibility, and its cost. When Khalid Shaikh Mohammed -- for all
appearances a truly evil and dangerous man -- confessed to a long list of
heinous crimes, including planning the 9/11 attacks, many Americans reacted with
skepticism and even derision. The confession became the butt of editorial
cartoons, like one that showed the prisoner confessing to betting on the
Cincinnati Reds, and fodder for the late-night comedians.

What stood out the most from the transcript of Mr. Mohammed's hearing at
Guantanamo Bay was how the military detention and court system has been debased
for terrorist suspects. The hearing was a combatant status review tribunal -- a
process that is supposed to determine whether a prisoner is an illegal enemy
combatant and thus not entitled in Mr. Bush's world to rudimentary legal rights.
But the tribunals are kangaroo courts, admitting evidence that was coerced or
obtained through abuse or outright torture. They are intended to confirm a
decision that was already made, and to feed detainees into the military
commissions created by Congress last year.

The omissions from the record of Mr. Mohammed's hearing were chilling. The
United States government deleted his claims to have been tortured during years
of illegal detention at camps run by the Central Intelligence Agency. Government
officials who are opposed to the administration's lawless policy on prisoners
have said in numerous news reports that Mr. Mohammed was indeed tortured,
including through waterboarding, which simulates drowning and violates every
civilized standard of behavior toward a prisoner, even one as awful as this one.
And he is hardly the only prisoner who has made claims of abuse and torture.
Some were released after it was proved that they never had any connection at all
to terrorism.

Still, the Bush administration says no prisoner should be allowed to take
torture claims to court, including the innocents who were tortured and released.
The administration's argument is that how prisoners are treated is a state
secret and cannot be discussed openly. If that sounds nonsensical, it is. It's
also not the real reason behind the administration's denying these prisoners the
most basic rights of due process.

The Bush administration has so badly subverted American norms of justice in
handling these cases that they would not stand up to scrutiny in a real court of
law. It is a clear case of justice denied.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (79%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); MILITARY BASES (77%); RULE OF LAW (76%);
CORRECTIONS (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); NAVIES (70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (67%); TERRORISM (64%) Terrorism; Editorials; Freedom
and Human Rights; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Shutdowns (Institutional);
Torture; Confessions

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); ROBERT M GATES (79%); DICK CHENEY (73%); ALBERTO
GONZALES (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) George W (Pres) Bush; Robert M (Sec)
Gates

CITY: CINCINNATI, OH, USA (76%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gates Signals Willingness to Close Prison

BYLINE: Bloomberg

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 188 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates indicated Thursday a willingness to close the
United States prison for terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as long as
a way could be found to keep the most dangerous detainees behind bars.

''I came to this job thinking that Guantanamo Bay should be closed,'' Mr. Gates
told a House appropriations subcommittee, adding that he now believed two issues
must be resolved first.

One problem, he said, is the reluctance of many nations to take back detainees
whom the United States does not consider particularly dangerous.

The second is the realization that ''there are some people who have made it very
clear they would come back to attack this country,'' he said.

Mr. Gates said he wanted to know if there was a legal solution ''to address the
concerns about some of these people who really need to be incarcerated forever,
but that doesn't get them involved in a judicial system where there is the
potential of them being released.''

Human rights advocates and European critics have said the United States should
close the prison because they say detainees are being unlawfully held.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); NAVIES (74%); APPROPRIATIONS (73%)
Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Shutdowns (Institutional)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (92%) Robert M (Sec) Gates

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (93%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Japan, a Historian Stands By Proof of Wartime Sex Slavery

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1286 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


IT was about 15 years ago, recalled Yoshiaki Yoshimi, a mild-mannered historian,
when he grew fed up with the Japanese government's denials that the military had
set up and run brothels throughout Asia during World War II.

Instead of firing off a letter to a newspaper, though, Mr. Yoshimi went to the
Defense Agency's library and combed through official documents from the 1930s.
In just two days, he found a rare trove that uncovered the military's direct
role in managing the brothels, including documents that carried the personal
seals of high-ranking Imperial Army officers.

Faced with this smoking gun, a red-faced Japanese government immediately dropped
its long-standing claim that only private businessmen had operated the brothels.
A year later, in 1993, it acknowledged in a statement that the Japanese state
itself had been responsible. In time, all government-approved junior high school
textbooks carried passages on the history of Japan's military sex slaves, known
euphemistically as comfort women.

''Back then, I was optimistic that this would effectively settle the issue,''
Mr. Yoshimi said. ''But there was a fierce backlash.''

The backlash came from young nationalist politicians led by Shinzo Abe, an
obscure lawmaker at the time in the long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party, who
lobbied to rescind the 1993 admission of state responsibility. Their goal
finally seemed close at hand after Mr. Abe became prime minister last September.

Mr. Abe said he would adhere to the 1993 statement, but he also undercut it by
asserting that there was no evidence showing the military's role in forcing
women into sexual slavery. His comments incited outrage in Asia and the United
States, where the House of Representatives is considering a nonbinding
resolution that would call on Japan to admit unequivocally its history of sexual
slavery and to apologize for it.

To Mr. Yoshimi, Mr. Abe's denial sounded familiar. Until Mr. Yoshimi came along
15 years ago, the government had always maintained that there were no official
documents to prove the military's role in establishing the brothels. Mr. Abe was
now saying there were no official documents to prove that the military forcibly
procured the women -- thereby discounting other evidence, including the
testimony of former sex slaves.

''The fact is, if you can't use anything except official documents, history
itself is impossible to elucidate,'' said Mr. Yoshimi, a history professor at
Chuo University here.

The emphasis on official documents, according to Mr. Yoshimi and other
historians, has long been part of the government's strategy to control wartime
history. In the two weeks between Japan's surrender on Aug. 15, 1945, and the
arrival of American occupation forces, wartime leaders fearing postwar trials
incinerated so many potentially incriminating documents that the Tokyo sky was
said to be black with smoke. Even today, Japan refuses to release documents that
historians believe have survived and would shed light on Japan's wartime
history.

Although Mr. Yoshimi found official documents showing the military's role in
establishing brothels, he is not optimistic about unearthing documents about the
military's abduction of women.

''There are things that are never written in official documents,'' he said.
''That they were forcibly recruited -- that's the kind of thing that would have
never been written in the first place.''

John W. Dower, a historian of Japan at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, said Mr. Yoshimi's ''extremely impressive'' work has ''clarified the
historical record in ways that people like Prime Minister Abe and those who
support him refuse to acknowledge.''

MR. YOSHIMI grew up in Yamaguchi Prefecture in western Japan, in a household
with fresh memories of the war. He traces his interest in history to a junior
high school lecture on the nation's American-written, pacifist Constitution and
its guarantee of human rights. He was impressed that the Constitution ''even had
something to say about a kid like me in the countryside.''

After completing his studies at the University of Tokyo, Mr. Yoshimi
concentrated on Japan's postwar democratization. It was while searching for
documents related to Japan's wartime use of poison gas in the Defense Agency's
library that he first stumbled upon proof of the military's role in sexual
slavery.

Mr. Yoshimi copied the document but did not publicize his finding. At the time,
no former sex slave had gone public about her experiences, and awareness of
wartime sex crimes against women was low.

But in late 1991, former sex slaves in South Korea became the first to break
their silence. When the Japanese government responded with denials, Mr. Yoshimi
went back to the Defense Agency.

Of the half-dozen documents he discovered, the most damning was a notice written
on March 4, 1938, by the adjutant to the chiefs of staff of the North China Area
Army and Central China Expeditionary Force. Titled ''Concerning the Recruitment
of Women for Military Comfort Stations,'' the notice said that ''armies in the
field will control the recruiting of women,'' and that ''this task will be
performed in close cooperation with the military police or local police force of
the area.''

In another document from July 1938, Naosaburo Okabe, chief of staff of the North
China Area Army, wrote that rapes of local women by Japanese soldiers had
deepened anti-Japanese sentiments and that setting up ''facilities for sexual
comfort as quickly as possible is of great importance.'' Yet another, an April
1939 report by the headquarters of the 21st Army in Guangzhou, China, noted that
the 21st Army directly supervised 850 women.

Mr. Yoshimi went public by telling Asahi Shimbun, a national daily newspaper.
The attention led to years of harassment from the right wing, he said, including
nightly phone calls.

These documents had survived because they had been moved 25 miles west of
central Tokyo before the end of the war, Mr. Yoshimi said. The postwar American
occupation forces had then confiscated the documents, eventually returning them
to Japan in the 1950s.

DESPITE the government's efforts to hide the past, Mr. Yoshimi succeeded in
painting a detailed picture of Japan's wartime sexual slavery: a system of
military-run brothels that emerged in 1932 after Japan's invasion of Manchuria,
then grew with full-scale war against China in 1937 and expanded into most of
Asia in the 1940s.

Between 50,000 and 200,000 women from Japan, Korea, Taiwan, China, the
Philippines, Indonesia and elsewhere were tricked or coerced into sexual
slavery, Mr. Yoshimi said. Thousands from Korea and Taiwan, Japanese colonies at
the time, were dispatched aboard naval vessels to serve Japanese soldiers in
battlefields elsewhere in Asia. Unlike other militaries that have used wartime
brothels, the Japanese military was the ''main actor,'' Mr. Yoshimi said.

''The Japanese military itself newly built this system, took the initiative to
create this system, maintained it and expanded it, and violated human rights as
a result,'' he said. ''That's a critical difference.''

Mr. Yoshimi said he was unsurprised by the most recent moves to deny the wartime
sex slavery. He said they were simply the culmination of a long campaign by
nationalist politicians who have succeeded in casting doubt, in Japan, on what
is accepted as historical fact elsewhere.

In 1997, all seven government-approved junior high school textbooks contained
passages about the former sex slaves. Now, as a result of the nationalists'
campaign, only two out of eight do.

''Mr. Abe and his allies led that campaign,'' Mr. Yoshimi said, ''and now they
occupy the center of political power.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Yoshiaki Yoshimi

GRAPHIC: Photo: YOSHIAKI YOSHIMI (Photo by Ko Sasaki for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (91%); HISTORY (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); SLAVERY (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); ARMIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); LOBBYING (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); TEXTBOOKS (73%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (68%); SEX OFFENSES (67%);
SECONDARY SCHOOLS (55%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) World War II
(1939-45); History  ; Prostitution; Sex Crimes; Armament, Defense and Military
Forces

SHINZO ABE (79%) Norimitsu Onishi; Yoshiaki Yoshimi

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (73%)

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (95%); ASIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%);
CHINA (79%)

REGION: Japan; Manchuria (China); China; Far East, South and Southeast Asia and
Pacific Areas

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Some Bumps at Start of War Tribunals at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1043 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba, March 31


As the first of the war crimes cases under a new law began here a few days ago,
a military law specialist said it was a test run ''to show that this plane will
fly.''

It was a bumpy ride.

The military commissions being convened here are special war crimes tribunals to
try terrorists that do not offer the legal protections of civilian courts. One
justification for the looser rules is that they will deal with the worst of the
worst.

But the first man through the double doors of the heavily secured courtroom here
was no Osama bin Laden. He was David Hicks, a 31-year-old Australian whose
lawyer described him as a ninth-grade dropout and ''wannabe soldier'' who ran
away when the shooting started in Afghanistan.

From the start, Guantanamo, its detainees and the legal proceedings here have
provided enough grist to support the competing views of the detention center: a
necessary mechanism for dealing with a new kind of enemy, or the embodiment of
the war on terror gone awry.

Mr. Hicks's conviction with a guilty plea provides something for each side. He
admitted training with Al Qaeda, guarding a Taliban tank and scouting a closed
American embassy building. But there is no evidence he was considering a
terrorist attack or capable of carrying one out. Yet he was held five years and
four months before he got his day in court. And at the end of a very long day at
the tribunal Friday, his actual sentence was only nine months.

To the prosecutors and the extensive public relations apparatus assembled by the
military here, Mr. Hicks's case proved, as one spokeswoman regularly repeated,
that the military commission system offers a ''fair, legitimate and transparent
forum.''

In the somber, makeshift courtroom, the lead prosecutor of the Hicks case, Lt.
Col. Kevin Chenail of the Marines, tried to portray Mr. Hicks as public enemy
No. 1.

''Today in this courtroom, we are on the front lines of the global war on
terror,'' Colonel Chenail told a panel of military officers assembled from
around the globe Friday to hear arguments on the appropriate sentence. Mr. Hicks
pleaded guilty on Monday to providing material support to Al Qaeda. ''The enemy
is sitting at the defense table,'' Colonel Chenail added, gesturing to Mr.
Hicks. ''We are face to face with the enemy'' who was ''trying to kill
Americans,'' he said.

But to some in the courtroom, the proceedings proved only that the system was
rigged to show detainees that the only way out of Guantanamo was to give the
prosecutors what they wanted. Not only did Mr. Hicks plead guilty, but he also
signed a plea bargain in which he recanted his accusations about being abused in
detention and promised not to speak to reporters for a year.

In the courtroom, the military judge had Mr. Hicks acknowledge each of the
contentious provision of his deal. Mr. Hicks, the judge read, agreed that he had
''never been illegally treated'' while in American captivity, including
''through the entire period of your detention by the United States at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.'' Mr. Hicks agreed to that statement.

Mr. Hicks's lawyer, Maj. Michael Mori of the Marines, said he was speaking for
his client, who he said was too nervous to speak for himself. ''He wants to
apologize to Australia and to the United States,'' Major Mori said during the
proceedings, adding that Mr. Hicks wanted to thank members of the armed services
who, he said, had treated him professionally.

In the cadre of observers from advocacy and human rights groups here to monitor
the proceedings, the plea deal Mr. Hicks reached was fresh evidence of the
coercive power of this place. The plea bargain included a provision that will
get Mr. Hicks out of detention here and into an Australian prison to serve the
rest of his sentence within 60 days.

That provision as much as any served as a reminder of the international
crosscurrents that will swirl around many of the cases here. There had been
growing diplomatic pressure on the Bush administration to return Mr. Hicks to
Australia, where his case has drawn wide attention and where Prime Minister John
Howard, one of President Bush's most stalwart supporters, is facing a tough
re-election fight.

Ben Wizner, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union who is one of the
regular observers in the courtroom here, said the deal showed that the military
commission was intended to bring cases to the conclusion the government wants.
''A person here, in order to have any hope of going home,'' he said, ''has to
play by whatever rules the government sets.''

Jennifer Daskal, an observer for Human Rights Watch, said after the sentencing
that the unusual rule silencing Mr. Hicks for a year showed that the
government's primary goal was ''the protection against the disclosure of
abuse.''

Both sides agreed that the nine-month sentence was unexpectedly short. But there
was no common interpretation of what that meant.

Military officers quickly began to refer to Mr. Hicks as the ''convicted war
criminal'' in the not-so-subtle battle of competing words here.

Away from the scrubby patch of land that is the naval station and detention camp
here, a prosecutor who bargained a case with a potential life sentence down to
an additional nine months of imprisonment might take that as a loss.

But the chief military prosecutor, Col. Morris D. Davis of the Air Force, told
reporters that the deal and the days of surprising developments in the Hicks
case could be seen in a different light. It was not a loss for the prosecution,
Colonel Davis said, but a victory for a much maligned system that he said had
been unfairly criticized before it was given a chance to prove it could deliver
justice.

''There's a notion that this is a rigged system,'' he said when asked if he was
disappointed by the outcome. ''I think this shows that's not true.''

Other than a few muted words in court, Mr. Hicks was not heard from directly.
But as developments unfolded, David H. B. McLeod, an Australian lawyer working
with the defense, provided insight into Mr. Hicks's thoughts.

''He says that if he is the worst of the worst, and the person who should be put
before a military commission first,'' Mr. McLeod said, ''then the world really
hasn't got much to worry about.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Hicks's case was the first for the war crime tribunals in
Cuba. (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR
ON TERROR (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); GUILTY PLEAS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (78%); NAVIES (78%);
TALIBAN (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); RANKINGS
(70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (65%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Prisoners
of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (71%) William Glaberson; David Hicks

COUNTRY: CUBA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

California Seeks to Ban Investment in Iran

BYLINE: By JESSE McKINLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 1


It is the kind of political movement that fits handily on a bumper sticker:
Divest Iran.

Over the past year, one state, Missouri, has opted to do just that, while
several others, including New Jersey, have also begun to write or to consider
legislation to divest.

But the nascent movement took on decidedly more weight last week with the
preliminary success of a bill in the California Legislature. The measure would
force two of the nation's largest pension funds -- devoted to the state's public
employees and its teachers, with combined holdings of nearly $400 billion -- to
remove their money from any foreign company doing business in Iran. American
companies are already barred from such dealings.

The author, Assemblyman Joel Anderson, a Republican from San Diego County, said
the bill was meant to protect the $24 billion he estimates the two funds
currently have invested in international companies with ties to Iran. Mr.
Anderson said his concern was Iran's potential economic instability, not its
current standoff with the West.

''They've got a president that is talking one day about having nuclear bombs and
saying he's not the next day, and taking hostages,'' he said on Friday,
referring to the Iranian capture of 15 British sailors and marines. ''I'm not
saying that we should take a foreign policy stance; I'm saying it's not a good
place to invest our money.''

Mr. Anderson's language was notably more heated when he introduced the bill in
January, raising the specter of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and calling money
''the mother's milk of terrorism.'' Last week, Mr. Anderson said he had toned
down the terrorism angle in part because of legal concerns regarding divestment
bills, which came into vogue in the 1980s as part of a movement to force
pensions and money out of South African interests in protest of apartheid. More
recently, divestment has been used to voice displeasure with tobacco companies
and the atrocities in the Darfur region of Sudan.

States are not the only entities trying to put pressure on Iran. On March 24,
the United Nations Security Council imposed new, more stringent sanctions in an
effort to stop the country's uranium enrichment program and to try to force it
to rejoin negotiations. In Congress, Representative Tom Lantos, a Democrat from
the San Francisco Bay Area, introduced legislation last month to impose
additional economic sanctions on Iran. Mr. Lantos cited denials of the Holocaust
by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran and his comments that Israel should be
''wiped off the map.''

Last year, California joined a roster of states that have opted out of
investment in Sudan with a bill similar to the Iran bill, passed by a
pension-related committee in the State Assembly on Wednesday.

Assemblyman Alberto Torrico, a Bay Area Democrat who cast the sole committee
vote against the bill, said he thought it would find wide support in the
Legislature despite his concerns about the plan's feasibility and vagueness.
''Our pension funds are invested in thousands of companies,'' Mr. Torrico said.
''I don't know how you're going to do it.''

Officials at the funds agree that determining which companies might have
financial dealings with Iran is a big and often complicated job.

''That's always been the struggle,'' said Brad Pacheco, a spokesman for the
California Public Employees Retirement System, who said the fund had asked the
federal government for help in determining which companies were ''terror free.''
''We don't necessarily have the resources or the expertise.''

Mr. Pacheco said the public employees' fund, known as Calpers, had no position
on the bill yet. But officials with the California State Teachers Retirement
System, with holdings of $159 billion, have already suggested they will oppose
it.

Some divestment bills have also been challenged in court. In February, a federal
judge struck down an Illinois law that called for Sudanese divestment, saying it
interfered with the federal government's ability to conduct foreign policy.

William A. Reinsch, president of the National Foreign Trade Council, with
offices in New York and Washington, which filed suit against the Illinois law,
said divestment bills -- while morally laudable -- could sabotage diplomatic
efforts to isolate Iran.

''The companies that would be divested would be European and Asian companies,''
Mr. Reinsch said. ''It sticks a stick in the eye of the very people and the very
countries we are trying to get to cooperate with us.''

He added that while California's pension funds were powerful -- the public
employees fund has holdings of $230 billion -- their economic influence was
still smaller than that of other potential players in multilateral international
sanctions.

''I love Calpers, but I don't think the pressure their divestment would supply
is anywhere near what we could get if we could get the European Union, China and
Russia to all act in concert,'' Mr. Reinsch said.

But Mr. Anderson said he was more concerned with the bottom line than foreign
policy.

''If we get world peace out of it, I'm for world peace, and if we get human
rights out of it, we get human rights,'' he said. ''But I just want to be able
to look at our taxpayers and say I wasn't asleep at the switch.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (90%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%);
DIVESTITURES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); PENSION FUNDS (75%); PUBLIC
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS (75%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); WRITERS (72%); HOSTAGE
TAKING (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); PERSONAL FINANCE (70%); PENSION &
RETIREMENT PLANS (70%); CIVIL SERVICES (70%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (69%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (68%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (66%); FOREIGN POLICY
(65%); ARMED FORCES (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(52%); TOBACCO INDUSTRY (50%) Foreign Investments; Law and Legislation; Pensions
and Retirement Plans; Law and Legislation; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (58%); TOM LANTOS (58%) Jesse Mckinley

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SAN
DIEGO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW JERSEY, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); SUDAN (93%)

REGION: Iran; California; United States

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

North Koreans Arm Ethiopians As U.S. Assents

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1682 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


Three months after the United States successfully pressed the United Nations to
impose strict sanctions on North Korea because of the country's nuclear test,
Bush administration officials allowed Ethiopia to complete a secret arms
purchase from the North, in what appears to be a violation of the restrictions,
according to senior American officials.

The United States allowed the arms delivery to go through in January in part
because Ethiopia was in the midst of a military offensive against Islamic
militias inside Somalia, a campaign that aided the American policy of combating
religious extremists in the Horn of Africa.

American officials said that they were still encouraging Ethiopia to wean itself
from its longstanding reliance on North Korea for cheap Soviet-era military
equipment to supply its armed forces and that Ethiopian officials appeared
receptive. But the arms deal is an example of the compromises that result from
the clash of two foreign policy absolutes: the Bush administration's commitment
to fighting Islamic radicalism and its effort to starve the North Korean
government of money it could use to build up its nuclear weapons program.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, as the administration has made counterterrorism its
top foreign policy concern, the White House has sometimes shown a willingness to
tolerate misconduct by allies that it might otherwise criticize, like human
rights violations in Central Asia and antidemocratic crackdowns in a number of
Arab nations.

It is also not the first time that the Bush administration has made an exception
for allies in their dealings with North Korea. In 2002, Spain intercepted a ship
carrying Scud missiles from North Korea to Yemen. At the time, Yemen was working
with the United States to hunt members of Al Qaeda operating within its borders,
and after its government protested, the United States asked that the freighter
be released. Yemen said at the time that it was the last shipment from an
earlier missile purchase and would not be repeated.

American officials from a number of agencies described details of the Ethiopian
episode on the condition of anonymity because they were discussing internal Bush
administration deliberations.

Several officials said they first learned that Ethiopia planned to receive a
delivery of military cargo from North Korea when the country's government
alerted the American Embassy in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia's capital, after the
adoption on Oct. 14 of the United Nations Security Council measure imposing
sanctions.

''The Ethiopians came back to us and said, 'Look, we know we need to transition
to different customers, but we just can't do that overnight,' '' said one
American official, who added that the issue had been handled properly. ''They
pledged to work with us at the most senior levels.''

American intelligence agencies reported in late January that an Ethiopian cargo
ship that was probably carrying tank parts and other military equipment had left
a North Korean port.

The value of the shipment is unclear, but Ethiopia purchased $20 million worth
of arms from North Korea in 2001, according to American estimates, a pattern
that officials said had continued. The United States gives Ethiopia millions of
dollars of foreign aid and some nonlethal military equipment.

After a brief debate in Washington, the decision was made not to block the arms
deal and to press Ethiopia not to make future purchases.

John R. Bolton, who helped to push the resolution imposing sanctions on North
Korea through the Security Council in October, before stepping down as United
Nations ambassador, said that the Ethiopians had long known that Washington was
concerned about their arms purchases from North Korea and that the Bush
administration should not have tolerated the January shipment.

''To make it clear to everyone how strongly we feel on this issue we should have
gone to the Ethiopians and said they should send it back,'' said Mr. Bolton, who
added that he had been unaware of the deal before being contacted for this
article. ''I know they have been helpful in Somalia, but there is a nuclear
weapons program in North Korea that is unhelpful for everybody worldwide.

''Never underestimate the strength of 'clientitis' at the State Department,''
said Mr. Bolton, using Washington jargon for a situation in which State
Department officials are deemed to be overly sympathetic to the countries they
conduct diplomacy with.

Sean McCormack, the State Department spokesman, declined to comment on the
specifics of the arms shipment but said the United States was ''deeply committed
to upholding and enforcing U.N. Security Council resolutions.'' Repeated efforts
to contact the Ethiopian Embassy were unsuccessful.

In other cases, the United States has been strict in enforcing the Security
Council resolution. For instance, late last year, American intelligence agencies
tracked a North Korean freighter suspected of carrying illicit weapons and
pressed several nations to refuse to allow the ship to dock. Myanmar, formerly
Burma, allowed it to anchor and insisted that there was no violation.

North Korea conducted its first nuclear test on Oct. 9, and the Security Council
resolution, adopted less than a week later, was hailed by President Bush as
''swift and tough,'' and a ''clear message to the leader of North Korea
regarding his weapons programs.''

Among the biggest sticking points during the negotiations over the resolution
were Chinese and Russian objections to language requiring inspections of ships
leaving North Korea. The United States repeatedly pressed China and Russia to
agree to the inspections, saying they were essential to enforcing the
resolution's embargo on North Korea's sale of dangerous weapons, like ballistic
missiles. In addition to the ban on the purchase of weapons from North Korea,
the resolution also called for a ban on the sale of luxury goods to it and the
freezing of its financial assets in banks worldwide.

The measure had special relevance for several African states that have long
purchased low-cost military equipment from North Korea. Ethiopia has an arsenal
of T-55 tanks that it acquired years ago from the Soviet Union and Eastern
European nations. For years, it has turned to North Korea for tank parts and
other equipment to keep its military running.

The Ethiopians bought the equipment at a bargain price; the North Koreans
received some badly needed cash. In 2005, the Bush administration told Ethiopia
and other African nations that it wanted them to phase out their purchases from
North Korea. But the Security Council resolution put an international imprimatur
on the earlier American request, and the administration sought to reinforce the
message.

''They really are one of the larger conventional arms purchasers from North
Korea, and we're pressing them hard and saying, 'Let's get you out of that
business,' '' said the American official.

Another American official, who is involved in Africa policy, said: ''These are
cash on the barrel transactions. The Ethiopians know that they can get the best
deal in Pyongyang,'' a reference to North Korea's capital.

In late January, the Central Intelligence Agency reported that an
Ethiopian-flagged vessel had left a North Korean port and that its cargo
probably included ''tank parts,'' among other military equipment.

American officials said that the ship, the Tekeze, a modern vessel bought from a
company in Montenegro and named after an Ethiopian river, unloaded its cargo in
Djibouti, a former French colony where the United States has based Special
Operations troops and other military forces. From there, the cargo was
transported overland to Ethiopia.

The Security Council resolution's list of prohibited items included spare parts.
Because the cargo was never inspected, some administration officials say the
United States cannot say for certain that the shipment violated the resolution.

It is not clear if the United States ever reported the arms shipment to the
Security Council. But because the intelligence reports indicated that the cargo
was likely to have included tank parts, some Pentagon officials described the
shipment as an unambiguous Security Council violation.

American officials said the Ethiopians acknowledged that the ship was en route
and said that they needed the equipment to sustain their Soviet-era military.
Ethiopia has a longstanding border dispute with Eritrea, but of more concern to
Washington, Ethiopia was also focused on neighboring Somalia, where Islamic
forces that had taken over Mogadishu, Somalia's capital, six months earlier and
were attacking Baidoa, the seat of a relatively powerless transitional
government that was formed with the support of the United Nations.

The timing of the shipment was extremely awkward, as the Ethiopian military was
preoccupied with Somalia and also quietly cooperating with the United States.
Ethiopia began an offensive in Somalia to drive back the Islamic forces and
install the transitional government in Mogadishu late last year. The United
States was providing it with detailed intelligence about the locations of the
Islamic forces and was positioning Navy ships off Somalia's coast to capture
fighters trying to escape the battlefield by sea.

On Jan. 7, American AC-130 gunships launched two strikes on terrorist targets
from an airstrip inside Ethiopia, though it did not appear that the casualties
included any of the few top operatives of Al Qaeda American officials suspected
were hiding in Somalia.

After some internal debate, the Bush administration decided not to make an issue
of the cargo ship.

American officials insist that they are keeping up the pressure on Ethiopia.
While Ethiopia has not provided an ironclad assurance that it will accept no
more arms shipments from North Korea, it has told the United States that it will
look for other weapons suppliers.

''There was a lot going on at that particular moment in time,'' said the senior
American official. ''They seem to have the readiness to do the right thing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ethiopian tanks in Somalia. Ethiopia bought much of its
military equipment from the former Soviet Union and relies on North Korean
parts. (Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. 14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (93%); MILITARY WEAPONS (92%); RELIGION (91%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); ARMS TRADE (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (78%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); AL-QAEDA (75%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (73%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%); MISCONDUCT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (71%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%) Arms Sales Abroad; United States
International Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions; Atomic Weapons;
Terrorism; Islam; Armament, Defense and Military Forces; Foreign Aid

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: Michael R Gordon; Mark Mazzetti; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (96%);
ETHIOPIA (94%); YEMEN (93%); SOMALIA (93%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); AFRICA (79%);
ASIA (79%); EASTERN AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Ethiopia; North Korea; Somalia; Ethiopia

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Discrimination In Your Backyard

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 4; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 363 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Plea to a Group Home: Another Backyard, Please'' (April 1):

The incidence of autism is now 1 in 150. Given this unfortunate fact, all
communities will just have to get over the Nimby-fication of their thinking.
Where do you expect all these children, once they reach adulthood, to be housed?
On the moon, perhaps, where there is no fear that they will affect your property
values?

To exclude a whole class of persons from the community based on their disability
-- their difference -- is the very worst sort of discrimination. It is
distressing, indeed, that it is always the most vulnerable and helpless of our
society who are in line for the very worst of treatment from their fellow
citizens and ''neighbors.''

My family was hounded out of an apartment in the Fleetwood section of Mount
Vernon after we disclosed that our son is autistic. What has he to look forward
to, in his future, given that the discrimination -- at least in his case -- has
already started?MaryAnn McCarra-FitzpatrickMount VernonTo the Editor:

A crucial fact went unmentioned in your article about Nimby opposition to a
group home for the developmentally disabled. It is illegal under both federal
and state law to discriminate against people on the basis of disability. I am
surprised and disappointed that The Times could cover this story without
pointing out that city officials in Mount Vernon have expressed opposition based
on a violation of human rights law.

The news should be not that Sharon James thinks that a group home will drive
down property values on her block. The news is that 17 years after the Americans
With Disabilities Act was signed, Mount Vernon residents still think that people
with developmental disabilities shouldn't live in their neighborhood.

To the people who live in group homes, they are home, not a business. As such,
they have as much right to live in a residential district as anybody else. The
Mount Vernon city officials who are going on record as opposing this group home
are continuing the tradition of the 1987 Yonkers legislators who refused to
allow racially integrated housing to be built in segregated areas.Linda
OstreicherNew York

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AUTISM (90%); DISABLED PERSONS (90%); RESIDENTIAL CARE (89%);
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); MENTAL RETARDATION
(78%); MENTAL RETARDATION FACILITIES (78%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (78%); REAL
ESTATE VALUATIONS (78%); US AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (75%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (65%);
CITIES (64%); CITY GOVERNMENT (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Mental Retardation  ;
Discrimination; Autism

PERSON: Maryann Mccarra-Fitzpatrick; Linda Ostreicher

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Mount Vernon (NY)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 14, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 615 words


INTERNATIONAL A3-8  Rebel Group in Iraq Says It Led Parliament Attack An
umbrella insurgent group that includes Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia claimed
responsibility for the suicide bombing on Thursday in the Parliament building in
Baghdad. The attack killed one legislator and wounded at least 22 other people.
A5  Decree Hurts Russia's Markets Under a new decree in Russia, immigrants have
been banned from working as vendors at any of Russia's 5,200 markets, which
account for a fifth of all retail trade in the country.  A3  Zimbabwe Groups
Tally Attacks Human rights groups in Zimbabwe have begun to document in numbers
and names an extraordinary government campaign of abductions and beatings aimed
at critics of President Robert G. Mugabe.

A8  Terror Tribunal Held in Ethiopia Amir Mohamed Meshal, an American terrorist
suspect jailed in Ethiopia, appeared in front of a military tribunal, but
Ethiopian officials did not disclose the outcome.  A7  Panel on Waste in U.S.
Food Aid The United States government's food aid programs are riddled with
wasteful practices and hit by rising logistical costs that have halved the
amount of food delivered to the hungry in Africa, Asia and Latin America over
the past five years, according to a report. A7   NATIONAL A9-13  Contradictory
Information In Newly Released E-Mails A Justice Department e-mail from the
former chief of staff to Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales appears to be at
odds with repeated statements by department officials claiming that no
successors had been selected before the dismissals.   A1  Rove Defends Deleted
E-Mails Karl Rove, the chief political strategist for President Bush, did not
intentionally delete e-mail messages to avoid creating a paper trail detailing
his work, his lawyer said.   A10   Latino Museum Opens in Texas San Antonio has
swung into fiesta mode to welcome the nation's largest Latino museum, the Museo
Alameda, a historic collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution.   A9
Lottery for Work Visas Immigration authorities, swamped by petitions for work
visas from highly educated or skilled foreigners, have conducted a lottery for
the first time to determine which ones will be considered, federal officials
announced.   A9   Duke Prosecutor Fights Charge Facing criticism for pressing
charges against three former Duke lacrosse players whom he now agrees were
wrongly accused, the Durham County, N.C., district attorney was in court arguing
for dismissal of the most serious ethics charge against him.   A13   NEW
YORK/REGION B1-6  Medical Questions Remain For Corzine After Crash Gov. Jon S.
Corzine of New Jersey was in intensive care at a Camden hospital, relying on a
ventilator to help him breathe, as his children and colleagues wrestled with a
litany of medical and political uncertainties after a devastating traffic
accident in which Mr. Corzine was by all accounts not wearing a seat belt.  A1
Celebrity Lawyer Under Fire Raoul Felder, a celebrity divorce lawyer who is
chairman of a New York State commission that oversees judges, has been given a
unanimous vote of no confidence by the other nine members of the commission for
co-writing a book that they say is racially and ethnically inflammatory.  B1
Beliefs   B6  BUSINESS DAY C1-9  CA Accuses Founder of Fraud CA, a software
company, said in a report that its founder and former chairman, Charles B. Wang,
oversaw accounting fraud at the company for more than a decade.   C1  Business
Digest C2  EDITORIAL A14-15  Editorials: Courts and greens; whose job is it,
anyway?; Maryland takes the lead; beware of lapsing ethicists.  Columns: Maureen
Dowd, Robert Wright.  Bridge B14 Crossword B14 TV Listings B17 Weather A12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FOOD
ASSISTANCE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); FOOD CHARITIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAWYERS
(89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(79%); AL-QAEDA (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(78%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); ETHICS (70%);
ELECTRONIC MAIL (70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%); MILITARY COURTS (69%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (69%); DISMISSALS (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(67%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (66%); PETITIONS (61%); INTENSIVE CARE UNITS (60%);
LACROSSE (50%); MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY EQUIPMENT (50%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (78%); JON CORZINE (78%); KARL ROVE (58%); GEORGE W
BUSH (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%); SAN ANTONIO, TX, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ETHIOPIA (93%); IRAQ (92%); ZIMBABWE (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); AFRICA (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

North Africa: Under Attack, and Relying on Repression

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Islam and Democracy; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1246 words

DATELINE: PARIS


ISLAMIST bombs punched more holes in North Africa's secular social veneer last
week, this time in Algeria, where two blasts killed 33 people and wounded
hundreds more. It was a depressing blow for a country still healing from the
wounds of a brutal Islamist-led civil war.

That atrocity-spattered conflict, which cost Algeria as many as 200,000 lives,
according to frequently cited estimates, was triggered in 1992 when the
country's military stopped elections that an Islamist party was poised to win.
Outraged Islamists and their young, impoverished, uneducated supporters took up
arms. Some are still fighting, as Wednesday's bombings made painfully clear.

But something else lingers from the war: a debate over whether the military
rescued Algeria from the establishment of an Iranian-like theocracy or whether
the repression only hardened an impulse that would have dissipated in
democracy's tempering bath.

The debate can be heard all across North Africa, where secular governments of
varying authoritarian degrees face a surge in conservative religiosity that
supports an extreme form of political Islam.

Every country on the continent's northern rim, from Egypt to Morocco, has
outlawed extreme Islamist parties that would be likely to win large
parliamentary blocs -- if not majorities -- were they allowed to participate in
free and fair national elections. (Libya bans political parties altogether.)

Each of those countries (again with the exception of Libya, where the small
society is tightly controlled) has suffered terrorist attacks from local groups
that have emerged from the repressed extremists.

What to do?

Clearly, the rise of conservative Islam won't be turned aside by simply banning
the veil, as Tunisia tried unsuccessfully to do.

Allowing carefully monitored, government-friendly Islamist parties into the
political system hasn't solved the problem either: neither the Movement for the
Society of Peace and the Islamic Renaissance Movement in Algeria, nor the
Justice and Development Party in Morocco, have successfully diffused the power
of the underground movements.

The governments counsel patience, arguing that fuller democracy will come as
their economies improve and their societies mature. Meanwhile, as the threat has
progressed, the leaders of Algeria and Tunisia have used constitutional
amendments to tighten their grip. Morocco has swept thousands of Islamists into
its jails.

''We opened up too early and too wide,'' a wartime prime minister, Ahmed
Ouyahia, said in 2004. He was speaking of the period that led to the aborted
1992 elections.

He and others in North Africa's elite circles of power argue that, given the
conservative religiosity sweeping the Muslim world, it is simply too dangerous
to allow essentially non-democratic movements to participate in fully democratic
elections because they can't be trusted to respect democratic principles if they
come to power.

The leaders of those movements don't instill much confidence: last summer, Ali
Benhadjar, a former Islamist leader with a long russet beard who went to war in
1992 after being denied a seat in Parliament, explained that an Islamist-led
government would not suspend the democratic process, but that all decisions
would rely on Islamic law. He cited Iran as a democratic model.

Meanwhile, the circumscribed democracy that exists throughout the region doesn't
only squeeze out Islamists; it prevents more liberal elements of civil society
from participating in politics as well. That leaves most people without a
political voice, caught between a distant, elitist and often corrupt government
and a militant opposition rooted in fundamentalist Islam. Despite the periodic
violence, the Islamist movement appears to be gaining ground.

''In the absence of debate, people turn to the simplest ideas,'' Khadija Cherif,
the head of the Tunisian Association for Women's Rights, said in an interview in
Tunis in January after government forces clashed with an Islamist terrorist
cell, killing more than two dozen people.

She argued that the repression of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali had left no
political space for progressive moderates like herself who might otherwise help
slow the drift among Tunisian youth toward fundamentalist political Islam.

These countries can't keep the volatile segment of their populations shut out of
the political process forever. In Algeria, as in many Arab countries, nearly
three-quarters of the population is younger than 30 and half of those under the
age of 25 are unemployed.

The Islamist movement easily influences those people. The Internet and Arabic
satellite TV stations from the Middle East have filled the void left by bland
state-run media outlets at home, helping spread fundamentalism and a militant
political message.

Economic development alone isn't the answer, however. Many of the most active
militants come from well-to-do families. Tunisia, for example, has a big,
home-owning, mortgage-holding middle class but hasn't escaped radicalism. In
contrast to the Western-friendly face presented at North Africa's tourist
hotels, Al Qaeda finds many admirers in its capital's narrow streets.

What would happen if these governments let down their guard?

John Entelis, a political scientist at Fordham University in New York, argues
that the demands of working within a pluralistic system -- or the
responsibilities of governing if an Islamist party came to power -- would force
those parties to change.

Look at Turkey's Justice and Development Party, he says, which was once banned
but now governs responsibly -- in a NATO-member country. Having an Islamist
party in power has not spared Turkey from terrorist attacks, but neither has it
turned the country into a theocratic state. It has, however, satisfied a
democratic impulse and given Turkey the most popular government it has had in
the three-quarters of a century since Ataturk secularized the state.

''Give these guys a chance,'' Mr. Entelis says of Algeria's outlawed Islamic
Salvation Front, whose imminent victory in the 1992 elections preceded the civil
war. ''If there hadn't been a coup, 200,000 people would still be alive and we
would have found out once and for all if these guys are true to their word.''

Instead, the military response and subsequent repression undermined the
moderates and emboldened the militants in the movement, he says. The result is
the persistent Islamist terrorism that is facing Algeria today and that is
morphing into a global threat, with logistic support from Europe to the north
and recruitment extending southward into the African Sahel.

Other experts -- not to mention the governments in power -- disagree. William
Zartman, a North Africa expert at Johns Hopkins University specializing in
conflict resolution, says Algeria and Morocco are doing the right thing by
excluding extremists yet allowing moderate Islamic parties to operate under
tight government control.

''We don't know that F.I.S.'s moderate wing would have been able to hold out
against the radical wing, which had turned violent even before the 1992
elections,'' Mr. Zartman says, referring to the French acronym for the Islamic
Salvation Front. He cited the moderate government of Alexander Kerensky in
Russia after the fall of Czar Nicholas II, which was soon swept aside by the
radicals who imposed Communist rule.

''Movements like this have a way of riding in on soft coattails and then cutting
them off,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mourning -- Bombings that killed 33 people in Algiers last week
threw a spotlight on the rising activities of Islamic terrorists in northern
Africa. (Photo by Zohra Bensemra/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); POLITICS (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CIVIL
WAR (77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(61%) Freedom and Human Rights; Bombs and Explosives; Islam; Politics and
Government; Terrorism

PERSON: Craig S Smith

CITY: ALGIERS, ALGERIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (97%); NORTHERN AFRICA (96%); AFRICA (96%); MOROCCO (93%);
LIBYA (92%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Algeria; Algeria

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pushing Co-ops To Explain Why You Can't Buy

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1040 words


Hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers live in the rough equivalent of private
clubs -- co-op apartment houses with rules that govern everything from admission
to elevator-landing decor. In certain circles, the co-op-application-process
horror story is as much a dinner-party cliche as the renovation-nightmare saga,
the nursery-school-rejection narrative and indignation over excess packaging of
food from Fresh Direct.

Now nearly two-thirds of the members of the City Council are co-sponsoring a
measure to shed a little light on the shadowy process by which co-op boards
decide which apartment buyers to accept and which to reject. To the uninitiated,
the council members' aim may seem modest. What they want is for co-op boards to
be required to give their reasons for rejecting an applicant, and to do it in
writing within five days of rejection.

But the proposal -- in a bill that its prime sponsor, Hiram Monserrate, contends
is taking too long to get a Council hearing -- is stirring up opposition from
groups like the Real Estate Board of New York and the Council of New York
Cooperatives and Condominiums, which in recent days began sending out an
''action alert'' urging co-op boards to contact council members and, if
necessary, talk them out of backing the bill.

The bill's supporters, including civil rights groups and the Black, Latino and
Asian Caucus of the Council, say it would help deter discrimination based on
race and other criteria in violation of fair housing laws. Making co-op boards
reveal their reasons would put boards on their best behavior, they say, and give
rejected applicants a basis for an informed judgment on whether they had
received fair treatment.

''Everyone knows that secrecy hinders severely the enforcement of fair housing
laws in the co-op context,'' said Craig Gurian, a lawyer specializing in civil
rights who helped draft the bill. ''We can't pretend that we're a progressive
city and then say we believe in vigorous enforcement except if it's in our own
backyard.''

The bill's opponents, who include Council Speaker Christine C. Quinn, say
federal, state and city laws already prohibit discrimination and offer redress.
They say the bill, the Fair and Prompt Co-op Disclosure Law, would let loose a
flood of lawsuits, delay co-op sales, discourage residents from serving on co-op
boards for fear of liability and impose an administrative burden, especially on
smaller co-ops.

''The only one who is going to come out feeling good is the lawyers,'' said Marc
Luxemburg, president of the co-op and condominium council, which, with the real
estate board, recently issued a guide on how to do co-op admissions fairly in
response to the threat of legislation. ''Anytime you try to give a reason,
you're going to get sued. You say the guy was obnoxious at the meeting, he comes
in and says 'I'm going to sue you.' Every time you turn somebody down, you've
got a lawsuit on your hands.''

Some council members say that they agree in principle with the idea of requiring
boards to give reasons, but that Mr. Monserrate's bill is not the best way to
make it happen.

''While I appreciate the spirit of what it seeks to do, I'm not convinced that
it's actually going to increase the rights of buyers,'' said Councilman Daniel
R. Garodnick of Manhattan.

Currently, co-ops -- apartment houses whose residents purchase shares in the
cooperative corporations that own the buildings -- are free to decide who can
move into their buildings and are not required to give reasons. Co-op groups say
most rejections are based on applicants' finances. Like any homeowner or
landlord, boards cannot legally discriminate on the basis of race, religion,
family status and 11 other protected categories; people who suspect that they
have been discriminated against can complain to the city's Commission on Human
Rights.

''Look, a lot of these things are quite delicate,'' said Richard Siegler, a
lawyer who represents co-op boards and condos. ''Does somebody have the
financial wherewithal to do it? Maybe someone has been turned down because he is
a cheater at the golf club. This is something that is not discrimination, and
it's just very difficult to put in formal language or even in every case to give
a reason. It has been this way for a long time.''

Mr. Monserrate, of Queens, said he was moved to introduce a version of the bill
in 2004 after real estate agents in Manhattan and Queens told him they suspected
a pattern of co-op board rejections involving applicants from minority groups.
Mr. Gurian also suggested that legislation be drafted. The bill received a
committee hearing in September 2005 but went no further in that session, so Mr.
Monserrate introduced it again last year.

Mr. Gurian, a former legal director and chief counsel at the city's Commission
on Human Rights who now operates a largely one-man organization he calls the
Anti-Discrimination Center of Metro New York, said he had found from his own
experience as a lawyer that the absence of stated reasons given for rejecting
co-op applicants made it hard to assess whether a client suspecting
discrimination had a valid claim.

Under the bill, a co-op board would have to describe its reasons in detail and
reveal the source of any negative information it had used. It would also have to
say how many applications it received and rejected in the previous three years.
If it failed to turn over the information, or do it on time, it could be fined
thousands of dollars.

In February, the Black, Latino and Asian Caucus wrote to Speaker Quinn urging
her to work with other Council members to make the bill law in early 2007.

On Thursday, Mr. Monserrate said: ''The bottom line is at this point the bill
has been there 15 to 16 months. It was introduced in the prior session and
heard. We should have had a hearing by now and should have voted it out.''

Sandra Mullin, the Council speaker's communications director, said the Housing
and Buildings Committee, which would handle the bill, has had a ''full plate''
in recent months. But she also said, ''While it's certainly important to root
out any discrimination in the condo and co-op process, this bill does not
effectively meet that goal and may have unintended consequences.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hiram Monserrate, prime sponsor of a bill requiring co-ops to
tell applicants why they were rejected. (Photo by Uli Seit for The New York
Times)(pg. B4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MULTIFAMILY
REAL ESTATE (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); RESIDENTIAL
CO-OWNERSHIP (90%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (89%);
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (89%); REAL PROPERTY LAW (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH & WELFARE
LAW (86%); CIVIL RIGHTS (86%); DISCRIMINATION (86%); CITIES (75%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (72%); POLITICS (71%); LITIGATION (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%); FOOD PACKAGING (56%) Housing; Law and
Legislation; City Councils; Cooperatives; Housing

ORGANIZATION: Real Estate Board of New York; Council of New York Cooperatives
and Condominiums

PERSON: Janny Scott; Hiram (Councilman) Monserrate

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City; New York City

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2007 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Young Tourists Pick Somalia, and a 3-Nation Ordeal Begins

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1231 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM


WITH a blend of naivete and a love of travel, Saifa Benaouda flew into Somalia
last December from Dubai, where she and her boyfriend had gone for an extended
vacation. Barely 17, Ms. Benaouda, a feisty and independent high-school student,
did not mention the Somalia trip to her mother, the leader of a moderate Muslim
organization here and herself a bit of a rebel when she was younger.

''We were only going to be there two weeks, and I thought I'd tell her after
about my adventure,'' Ms. Benaouda said in an interview. Their timing, in a
world obsessed with terrorism, could not have been worse or, in the eyes of the
authorities, more suspicious.

They arrived in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, just as Muslims from various
countries, some trained by Al Qaeda, were streaming into Somalia in response to
a call from Islamist forces that controlled much of the country last year. The
Islamists were briefly battling with Ethiopian troops who had intervened to take
back Somalia for a weak Western-backed interim government.

Ms. Benaouda (pronounced ben-OW-da), a Muslim, disavows any political or
religious motive for her venture into Somalia, and says her boyfriend is also
not political. She contends that they learned of the fighting only after they
got to Mogadishu and found a country she did not like and more adventure than
she wanted.

With fighting raging nearby, they rapidly found themselves fleeing south toward
Kenya, along with hundreds of other people. On the way, she said, an American
woman -- the wife of Daniel Maldonado, who is currently on trial in Houston on
terrorism-related charges -- died in her lap. Ms. Benaouda took over care of the
woman's three small children, ages 7 months to 9 years old, surviving by eating
rice and drinking muddy floodwater and hiding in the bush when military
helicopters buzzed overhead.

At the Kenyan border, she said in the interview, she was detained by soldiers,
including three who had American flag patches on their uniforms. She ended up in
Ethiopia, where she was held for several weeks and interrogated, she said, by
Westerners.

AFTER criticism from human rights organizations, led by Cageprisoners and
Reprieve, which were instrumental in Ms. Benaouda's eventual release, the
Ethiopian government acknowledged recently that it was holding 41 men and women
it suspected of fighting with the Islamists. American officials have been
allowed to interrogate the suspects, American officials have said, including
Amir Mohamed Meshal, from New Jersey, who is expected to be released soon from
prison there.

Ms. Benaouda said she got the travel bug from her Moroccan father, who died
eight years ago. When the family traveled -- she is the youngest of four
children -- they avoided tourist spots. Her Finnish-Swedish mother especially
sought more exotic places. ''When we went to Morocco, we didn't go to
Casablanca, we went to the mountains,'' she said.

Last year, Ms. Benaouda and her boyfriend, Munir Awad, a 25-year-old Swedish
citizen of Lebanese origin, decided they wanted to visit a Muslim country during
Ms. Benaouda's winter school break.

They chose Dubai but were quickly disappointed: too many Asians, too many
modern, tall buildings, too much shopping. ''We wanted something more
authentic,'' she said. They met a man from Stockholm who was going to Somalia,
and they decided to go, too.

When they arrived, their baggage was missing. They were told they had to stay
inside to be safe. She said they were treated badly because of their lighter
skin. Then the fighting broke out, and they fled toward Kenya.

Along the way, she and her boyfriend became separated, and she joined up with a
group of women and children, including the American woman, who apparently had
malaria. ''She was hallucinating,'' Ms. Benaouda recalled. ''She was saying
goodbye to her kids, telling them she loved them.''

After the woman died, the people in the convoy wrapped her body in a mat, and
put it on the roof of the car. The children had fallen asleep, and when they
awoke Ms. Benaouda told them that their mother had gone in another car.

Ms. Benaouda said she learned only recently, from Cageprisoners, that Mr.
Maldonado had been interrogated by the F.B.I. in Kenya this year, and then sent
to Houston to face trial. (The children were ultimately sent to their
grandparents in the United States.)

After nearly three weeks on the run, Ms. Benaouda said, her group reached the
Kenyan border, where they were surrounded by soldiers -- including the three
with the American flag patches -- pointing rifles at them. ''We thought they
were going to shoot us,'' she recalled. ''We began screaming.''

Ms. Benaouda, who had begun to suspect, correctly as it turned out, that she was
pregnant, was glad to meet someone who spoke English.

She did not tell them she was pregnant, though, only that she was Swedish. She
and her companions were handcuffed and blindfolded and flown to Nairobi, Kenya,
where they were put in jail, she said. Then she and the others, including Mr.
Meshal, were deported to Mogadishu, by then under the control of Ethiopian
troops. After a few days there, they were sent to Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian
capital.

But her ordeal did not end there. She was interrogated again, she said, for as
long as six hours on one day, mostly by two women, one of whom spoke English
with what she said was an American accent. They demanded her e-mail address and
password. She told them they were rude, but gave it to them. They showed her the
names and photographs of some men and asked if she knew any of them. She did
not. They demanded that she name any extremists she knew in Sweden.

THEY said her boyfriend had recruited jihadists in Denmark in 2004.

''I told them they were stupid,'' she said. ''I told them they were full of
bull.'' Her boyfriend was not yet a Muslim in 2004 and had never been to
Denmark, she said she told them.

Her challenging manner earned her the nickname Crazy Inge from the other
prisoners, she said. Ms. Benaouda said she spoke out because she had been
brought up in Sweden, where women speak their minds.

''She's crazy, but I love her,'' said her mother, Helena, who sat in on the
interview but allowed her daughter to speak freely. Mrs. Benaouda, who started a
Web site dedicated to her daughter's release (www.releasemychild.se),  said her
only conditions were that her daughter not be photographed or described
physically.

Ms. Benaouda gave her only other interviews to the Swedish newspaper Svenska
Dagbladet and Cageprisoners  (www.cageprisoners.com),  which is based in
Britain.

After several weeks, during which Ms. Benaouda kept a diary on pieces of toilet
paper, the Ethiopians told her she was free to go. But she had learned that her
boyfriend -- whom she called her husband -- was there, too, and refused to leave
without him. Finally, the Ethiopians said if she did not go to Sweden, they
would send her to Mogadishu. She agreed to go home and arrived there in late
March. Her boyfriend is still being held in Ethiopia.

While there is no telling whether there are similar adventures in store for Ms.
Benaouda as she exercises her wanderlust, her immediate future promises to be
uneventful. Her passport was taken by the American soldiers, and her mother said
she had no intention of signing the parental consent form that a minor needed to
get another one.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 26, 2007



CORRECTION: The Saturday Profile, about Saifa Benaouda, a Swedish Muslim who
went to Somalia last December as the country was becoming a magnet for Islamic
extremists, referred incorrectly to Daniel Maldonado, an American Muslim convert
in Somalia arrested on the Kenya border and deported to the United States in
February on terrorism-related charges. Mr. Maldonado pleaded guilty in Houston
federal court last Thursday to receiving training from a foreign terrorist
organization. He is not ''currently on trial.''

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Felipe Morales/Scanpix)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CHILDREN (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); AL-QAEDA (76%); INTERROGATION
OF SUSPECTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS
(67%); POLITICS (66%); TOURISM (64%); HELICOPTERS (50%) Islam; Politics and
Government  ; Travel and Vacations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: Raymond Bonner; Saifa Benaouda

CITY: MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (88%); STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN (79%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (92%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (99%); ETHIOPIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (92%); KENYA (92%); MOROCCO (79%); FINLAND (79%); SWEDEN (79%)

REGION: Somalia; Sweden; Mogadishu (Somalia); Ethiopia

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bangladesh Democracy

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 83 words


To the Editor:

Thank you for ''Bangladesh in the Generals' Grip''(editorial, April 15). You
reported that more than 150 senior politicians have been detained on corruption
charges. The detained do not have access to due process, a clear violation of
human rights.

The people of Bangladesh are predominantly secular and do not like Islamic
extremists, but a long-term ban on political process and freedom of speech may
lead them to turn toward terrorism.  Abdullah Zahid Jamaica, Queens, April 16,
2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (88%); CORRUPTION (87%);
POLITICS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (83%); TERRORISM (83%); RELIGION (83%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: BANGLADESH (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Raids Killed Taliban; Afghans Say Civilians Died

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 30


United States Special Forces said they killed more than 130 Taliban in two
recent days of heavy fighting in a valley in western Afghanistan, but hundreds
of angry villagers protested in nearby Shindand on Monday, saying dozens of
civilians had been killed when the Americans called in airstrikes.

The protesters sacked and burned government buildings, said Noor Khan Nekzad, a
spokesman for the provincial police. He said none of the demonstrators were
injured, but news reports said a number of protesters were hurt as the police
and the army moved in to subdue the crowd.

The American military said that the fighting against the Taliban occurred Friday
and Sunday in the Zerkoh Valley, near the Iranian border about 30 miles south of
the city of Herat, and that the Special Forces called in airstrikes on at least
two occasions. An American soldier was killed in the fighting on Friday, the
military said, but there were no other reported casualties on the coalition
side.

Forty-nine Taliban fighters, including two leaders of the group, were killed in
the first bombardment on Friday, and 87 militants were killed in bombing during
a second battle on Sunday that raged for 14 hours, the military said in a
statement from the United States-led coalition headquarters at the Bagram air
base.

But the local residents said that civilians were killed in the bombardment and
that some drowned in the river as they fled, according to a local member of
Parliament, Maulavi Gul Ahmad. News agencies reported that demonstrators said
women and children were among the dead.

Mr. Ahmad condemned the bombing and said that the fighting angered local
residents because the Americans raided their houses at night.

''They should not do that,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''The number that
they claim -- that 130 Taliban were killed -- is totally wrong. There are no
Taliban there.''

Raiding houses touches a nerve in Afghanistan, especially in conservative tribal
areas, because the local custom dictates that men who are not family members
cannot enter the parts of homes where the women stay. Such raids were upsetting
local sensibilities so much several years ago that the American forces made an
agreement with the Afghan government that they would not raid houses without the
presence of Afghan elders or the police. The Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission says that the agreement is still in effect, but that American troops
do not always adhere to it.

But an Afghan military official, who asked not to be identified, presented a
different version of events from that of Mr. Ahmad. He said that the Special
Forces had run into trouble on Friday, when they were surrounded by insurgents,
and that they requested support from the Afghan National Army.

Afghan Army and police officials denied any involvement in the fighting.

The province of Herat, where the fighting occurred, is usually quiet, but the
Zerkoh Valley is populated by ethnic Pashtuns and shares a border with provinces
where there are many insurgents.   A Vow to Cooperate

ANKARA, Turkey, April 30 (Reuters) -- The president of Pakistan, Gen. Pervez
Musharraf, and President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan vowed Monday to work
together to fight terrorism and improve bilateral ties after a war of words over
the Taliban insurgency.

For the past year, the United States has pressed Mr. Karzai and General
Musharraf to cooperate, but relations have remained strained.

In a joint statement after talks held in Turkey, the leaders said they agreed to
deny sanctuary, training and financing to terrorists. In an interview with NTV
of Turkey, General Musharraf said no details had been discussed yet.

Afghanistan has said the Taliban are being run from Pakistan, which Islamabad
denies. Pakistan maintains that the roots of the insurgency lie in Afghanistan
and in problems with Mr. Karzai's government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (93%); TALIBAN (91%); BOMBINGS (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); ARMIES (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); POLICE FORCES
(76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); MILITARY BASES (75%); INTERVIEWS (73%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (72%); RIOTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); CHILDREN (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (64%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Demonstrations and Riots

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: Abdul Waheed Wafa

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Herat Province (Afghanistan); Zerkoh Valley (Afghanistan)
; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judges Charge 2 Top Sudanese With Atrocities In Darfur Area

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 2


Judges at the International Criminal Court in The Hague have issued arrest
warrants for two citizens of Sudan, the first to be charged with grave
atrocities in Darfur, the court said Wednesday.

The judges went a step further than expected, because the prosecutor had asked
for the pair only to be summoned to testify.

The two men are Ahmad Muhammad Harun, a former security official who the
prosecutor says played a role in planning atrocities, and Ali Muhammad Ali
Abd-al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, who is accused of being a former
leader of the janjaweed militia in Darfur, in the far west of Sudan. Mr. Harun
is now a government minister.

It is now up to Sudan to arrest the men, and their arrival at the court is far
from certain. The government quickly responded that the court had no
jurisdiction. Sudan's president has repeatedly insisted that any necessary
trials can be handled at home.

The two men are believed to be only midlevel agents in the government's campaign
against rebels in Darfur. More than 200,000 people have died in Darfur and more
than two million have been displaced, according to the United Nations.

The arrest warrants are the international court's most concrete steps linked to
Darfur, and they follow a 20-month investigation. In issuing the warrants, the
judges said there were reasonable grounds to conclude that the two suspects were
''criminally responsible'' for torture, mass rape and the forced displacement of
entire villages in western Darfur in 2003 and 2004.

Even if the warrants are not carried out, they may have some effect, lawyers
said. For one thing, they are likely to complicate the two men's travel outside
Sudan.

Mr. Harun, though charged with planning a murderous campaign, recently appeared
at a human rights conference in Egypt in his new capacity as Sudan's minister
for humanitarian affairs. He also oversees Darfur's large refugee camps, where
international aid agencies have complained that he is hindering their access to
the needy.

Mr. Kushayb, who the Khartoum government said was under arrest pending its own
investigations, has been seen traveling under police protection in the Darfur
region, The Associated Press reported.

Several steps are now open to the court. It can ask the United Nations Security
Council, which asked the court in 2005 to investigate crimes in Darfur, to order
Sudan to make the arrests. The Council can resort to other measures, including
sanctions.

But similar orders that the Council has issued to Serbia have not led to the
detention of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, both Bosnian Serbs charged with
genocide by a United Nations criminal court.

The International Criminal Court, which is independent of the United Nations but
is accepted by 104 countries, has a broad mandate to investigate and try those
most responsible for war crimes or crimes against humanity. But it has no police
or military personnel to enforce its summonses or arrest warrants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (91%); ARRESTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%);
LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS (89%); JURISDICTION
(79%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); TORTURE
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%);
REFUGEES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (67%); REFUGEE & RELIEF
CAMPS (66%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)
International Criminal Court of Justice

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Ahmad (Deputy Prime Min) Harun; Ali Kushayb

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); EGYPT (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Talking Again of Middle East Peace

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 596 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Give the Arab Peace Initiative a Chance'' (Op-Ed, May 11):

Prime Minister Fuad Siniora of Lebanon claims that ''the July war proved that
militarism and revenge are not the answer to instability; compromise and
diplomacy are.''

His exhortation is more properly addressed to Hezbollah -- and to Hamas and
Fatah, for that matter -- rather than to the United States, let alone Israel.
Mr. Siniora graphically depicts the damage inflicted upon Lebanon in that war,
but does not acknowledge that Hezbollah is a part of his government or that
Hezbollah's militia provoked that war through acts of ''militarism and
revenge.''

Mr. Siniora also claims that ''the people of the Middle East aspire simply to
live in freedom and dignity, without constant threats of violence, occupation
and war.'' Other than Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, one would be hard
pressed to point out any concrete actions undertaken in the recent past that
would lend credence to his statement.  Michael E. Sievers  Midlothian, Va., May
11, 2007  To the Editor:

The glaring omission of any reference to Hezbollah in Prime Minister Fuad
Siniora's article is quite reflective of the Lebanese government's position
toward the group: pretend it doesn't exist.

If the prime minister truly cared about the people of Lebanon, he would disarm
Hezbollah, the group whose actions triggered this mess in the first place.
Justin Rosenblum  Brooklyn, May 11, 2007  To the Editor:

The most striking thing about the reports by human rights organizations
documenting Israel's bombardment of Lebanon last summer is how consistent the
findings are. The preponderance of evidence shows that Israel's targeting of
Lebanon's civilian population was a flagrant violation of international law.

The same goes for Israel's occupation of Palestinian land, its illegal
settlements in the occupied territories, its detentions of Palestinian civilians
and its house demolitions.

Prime Minister Fuad Siniora's call for the United States to support the Arab
Peace Initiative should be heeded, but we should remember that any enduring
resolution will depend on a reasonable settlement for Palestine. Unfortunately,
the United States government has historically refused to accept this reality,
and everyone in the Middle East has paid the price.   Linda Mamoun  Boulder,
Colo., May 11, 2007  To the Editor:

Prime Minister Fuad Siniora of Lebanon proposes a renewed diplomatic effort
between Israel and the Arab League. I disagree with some details of the initial
proposal, but I am awed by the fact that the leader of a country recently
ravaged by war has the clarity of thought to call for diplomacy rather than
retaliation.

In the United States, our leaders still tell us that Al Qaeda is evil and must
be quashed. I assume Al Qaeda's leaders say the same of us. Nowhere is the
clarity of thought to allow that members of the enemy are people who feel so
wronged that they believe their only remedy is violence.

Where can we find leaders who understand that diplomacy works better?  Lee
Newberg  Albany, May 11, 2007  To the Editor:

Prime Minister Fuad Siniora of Lebanon says that the only realistic path to
peace must ensure the right of return of the Palestinian people. In the next
sentence, he says that the Arab states are not seeking to wipe Israel off the
map.

The right of return would do just that. The Arab nations have tried
unsuccessfully since 1948 to destroy Israel militarily. They now seek to do it
by population transfer. This is progress?  Adam M. Shaw  Baltimore, May 11, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); HAMAS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); EVIDENCE (72%); AL FATAH
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (59%) International Relations

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (59%); HAMAS (57%) Arab
League

PERSON: FOUAD SINIORA (91%) Michael Sievers; Justin Rosenblum; Linda Mamoun; Lee
Newberg; Adam M Shaw; Fuad (Prime Min) Siniora

STATE: COLORADO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); LEBANON (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
MIDDLE EAST (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Israel; Lebanon

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Death-Squad Scandal Circles Closer to Colombia's President

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Jenny Carolina Gonzalez contributed reporting from
Medellin.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: CALI, Colombia, May 15


President Alvaro Uribe, the Bush administration's closest ally in Latin America,
faces an intensifying scandal after a jailed former commander of paramilitary
death squads testified Tuesday that Mr. Uribe's defense minister had tried to
plot with the outlawed private militias to upset the rule of a former president.

Speaking at a closed court hearing in Medellin, Salvatore Mancuso, the former
paramilitary warlord, said Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos had met with
paramilitary leaders in the mid-1990s to discuss efforts to destabilize the
president at the time, Ernesto Samper, according to judicial officials.

Mr. Mancuso also said that Vice President Francisco Santos had met with
paramilitary leaders in 1997 to discuss taking their operations to the capital,
Bogota.

A spokesman for the Defense Ministry said the minister would not comment. The
spokesman said a meeting did take place in which Mr. Santos, the defense
minister, discussed an effort to reach a peace plan between two guerrilla groups
and the paramilitaries.

The vice president, who was traveling outside the country, was not immediately
available for comment.

Mr. Uribe went on national television on Tuesday night, but did not address the
allegations.

These revelations followed the disclosure this week of an illegal domestic
spying program by the national police force and additional arrests of
high-ranking political allies of Mr. Uribe on charges of ties to the
paramilitaries.

The scandals also come as Mr. Uribe tries to win Congressional support in
Washington for a trade agreement and the disbursement of American
counterinsurgency and antinarcotics aid. Mr. Uribe, though popular in Colombia,
faces growing scrutiny in the United States Congress.

''This is going to hurt,'' said Michael Shifter, vice president for policy for
the Inter-American Dialogue in Washington. ''As much as Colombia's government
tries to make the case that the system is working, what dominates perception is
that there's a lot of rot.''

Mr. Uribe tried to contain the newest scandal by forcing 12 generals in the
national police to resign Monday over illegal wiretaps of political opponents,
government officials and journalists.

Among those whose phones were tapped was Carlos Gaviria, an opposition leader
who ran for president against Mr. Uribe last year. ''This cannot happen under a
democratic government,'' Mr. Gaviria said.

The purge of the generals came after the newsmagazine Semana published
transcripts of cellphone calls from imprisoned paramilitary leaders in which
they orchestrated murders and cocaine deals. It was not clear whether these
intercepted phone calls were part of the police surveillance program.

Mr. Santos, the defense minister, said neither he nor Mr. Uribe knew of the
police wiretapping operation. Still, the report has hurt the credibility of Mr.
Uribe's government, already suffering from a perception of being soft on the
paramilitaries.

Mr. Uribe was elected to a second term last year after being credited with
making the country's large cities safer and presiding over a growing economy.
But the scandal over the paramilitary ties now threatens a growing number of
legislators, business executives, military leaders and American corporations
over their collaboration with the paramilitary death squads, which are
classified as terrorist organizations by the United States State Department.

The paramilitaries, which are largely demobilized but regrouping in some areas,
committed some of the worst atrocities in a long internal war. Prosecutors
ordered the arrest on Monday of five legislators for entering into a secret pact
with the paramilitaries in 2001, bringing to 14 the total number of legislators
implicated in such ties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Testifying in a closed hearing, Salvatore Mancuso, above,
center, a jailed former paramilitary warlord in Colombia, told of plotting in
the 1990s between the paramilitaries and the current defense minister and vice
president. The revelations threaten the government of President Alvaro Uribe,
left, who is trying to improve trade ties with the United States. (Pool photo by
Luis Benavides)
 (Photo by Wilfredo Lee/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (92%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (91%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SCANDALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WIRETAPPING (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (88%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); ETHICS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); TRANSCRIPTS (73%); TRADE
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); ESPIONAGE (71%); JOURNALISM (71%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (71%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (71%); DRUG POLICY
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); WRITERS (60%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (60%);
MURDER (58%); COCAINE (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) United States
International Relations; Ethics; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Freedom
and Human Rights

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (93%); JUAN MANUEL SANTOS (79%) Simon Romero; Alvaro (Pres)
Uribe; Salvatore Mancuso; Juan Manuel (Min) Santos; Ernesto Samper; Francisco
(Vice Pres) Santos; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (90%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); COLOMBIA (97%); LATIN AMERICA (92%)

REGION: Colombia; Colombia

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1018 words


INTERNATIONAL A3-14  Wolfowitz and World Bank Agree on His Resignation Paul D.
Wolfowitz announced his resignation as president of the World Bank, ending weeks
of furor over charges of favoritism. As part of a negotiated settlement, the
bank's board accepted his assertion that his actions were honorably intended,
despite a committee recommendation that he be forced to resign for violating his
contract. A1   U.S. and Iran to Meet on Iraq The United States and Iran
announced plans to hold face-to-face talks this month about Iraqi security, the
State Department said. In Mosul, Iraq, the police made mass arrests after a wave
of bombings, according to a police spokesman.

A10   No Fight for British Premier The governing Labor Party in Britain
confirmed that Gordon Brown, the chancellor of the Exchequer, had emerged as the
sole candidate to assume the party leadership and thus succeed Prime Minister
Tony Blair when he steps down in June.  A6   Sarkozy Names Prime Minister
President Nicolas Sarkozy of France named Francois Fillon, left, to be his prime
minister in a move to carry out his ambitious reform program. A14   Israeli
Force Attacks Hamas Israel moved a small number of tanks and troops over the
Gaza border and hit Hamas with eight airstrikes, killing at least seven
Palestinians. Five other Palestinians died in factional fighting despite a new
cease-fire.  A12   Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel paid an unannounced
visit to the border town of Sderot to show solidarity with its residents after
days of rocket fire from the nearby Gaza Strip. A12   Belarus Kept Off U.N.
Council Belarus, one of the world's most repressive states, was blocked from
gaining membership on the United Nations Human Rights Council after being
outvoted in favor of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a late entry.  A6   NATIONAL A16-23
Agreement Is Reached On Immigration Bill Senate negotiators from both parties
announced that they had reached agreement on a comprehensive immigration bill
that would offer legal status to most of the nation's 12 million illegal
immigrants while toughening border security.  A1   Senate to Vote on Gonzales
Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales's standing in Congress weakened further as
Senate Democrats arranged to hold a no-confidence vote on him and the top
Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee predicted that the furor over Mr.
Gonzales's stewardship would end with his resignation.   A16   Obama Disputes
Claims on War Senator Barack Obama directly challenged former President Bill
Clinton's assertions that Mr. Obama and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton hold the
same essential positions on the Iraq war.   A22   Dispute Over Bush Nominee
Senate Democrats urged President Bush to withdraw his nomination of a top
lobbyist from the National Association of Manufacturers to lead the Consumer
Product Safety Commission, saying the candidate was unqualified and the
appointment posed conflicts of interest.   A23   Universities Housing Ashes For
a few thousand dollars, some universities are giving alumni and faculty the
opportunity to have their ashes maintained on campus in perpetuity.   A16
Steering Lost Whales to Sea Anxious to save two injured wayward whales, a team
of marine rescuers played recorded humpback songs hoping to lure the whales from
the Sacramento River in California back to sea.  A18   SCIENCE/HEALTH  Soldier's
Vaccine Harmed Son A 2-year-old boy nearly died from a viral infection he got
from the smallpox vaccination his father received before shipping out to Iraq,
according to a government report and the doctors who treated him.   A18   NEW
YORK/REGION B1-7  For Survivors of Bronx Fire, Sense of Normalcy Returns Ten
weeks after six members of the Magassa family -- including five children -- were
killed when a fast-moving fire consumed their narrow brick house in the Bronx,
most of the family has resettled into a new home. If sadness hangs over the
apartment, it is invisible.  A1  Agreement on River Plan Gov. Edward G. Rendell
of Pennsylvania announced that he and Gov. Jon S. Corzine of New Jersey, left,
had agreed on a plan to deepen the Delaware River shipping channel in a $300
million effort to rejuvenate the once-thriving maritime industry in Philadelphia
and South Jersey. The agreement ends a contentious stalemate that lasted more
than 16 months.  B5  Mythic Creatures in Manhattan The exhibition ''Mythic
Creatures: Dragons, Unicorns & Mermaids'' is set to open at the American Museum
of Natural History in Manhattan. The show, a melding of science and legend,
investigates the cultural roots of imaginary beasts from Asia, Europe and the
Americas like the sea monster, the griffin and the Cyclops. B1  OBITUARIES B8
Giorgio Cavaglieri An architect who took his fascination with how buildings and
cities change over time from his native Italy to New York, where he helped start
and define the city's preservation movement, he was 95. B8  Denis G. Kuhn An
architect who oversaw many major restoration and reuse projects in New York
City, including the transformation of the Alexander Hamilton Custom House into
the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian and the conversion of
the old Police Department headquarters in Little Italy into elegant apartments,
he was 65.  B8  BUSINESS DAY C1-9  Disclosing Pension Costs Texas lawmakers are
close to rejecting a requirement that state governments disclose the cost of
health care they have promised to retired employees -- a rule intended to
encourage politicians to deal with the huge obligations they have imposed on
future taxpayers.   C1   China's Exports Scrutinized Weeks after tainted Chinese
pet food ingredients killed and sickened thousands of dogs and cats in the
United States, China is facing growing international pressure to prove that its
food exports are safe to eat.   C1   Business Digest C2  EDITORIAL A24-25
Editorials: Rose Garden charade; rudeness, realism and Russia; private equity
goes prime time; appointed hobblers of government.  Columns: Paul Krugman, David
Brooks.  Crossword: E20 TV Listings: E26 Public Lives: B2 Weather  C10

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RESIGNATIONS (91%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (91%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS
(90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HAMAS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); POLITICS (78%); LITIGATION (77%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (77%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); LOBBYING (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); BORDER CONTROL (75%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); TERRITORIAL
& NATIONAL BORDERS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); BUSINESS &
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (72%); IRAQ WAR (71%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (70%);
POLICE FORCES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); CONSUMER LAW (65%); CONSUMER WATCHDOGS
(63%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (56%); PRODUCT SAFETY (50%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); BILL CLINTON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (79%);
ALBERTO GONZALES (76%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); EHUD OLMERT
(58%); TONY BLAIR (53%); GORDON BROWN (53%); FRANCOIS FILLON (52%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(93%); ISRAEL (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); BELARUS (92%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slaves of Long Island

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 529 words


A small act of kindness by workers at a doughnut shop early last Sunday has
opened a window into a horrifying story of exploitation and cruelty. The
accusations highlight the serious need for New York State to crack down on the
trafficking of people for sex and labor, and arose, coincidentally, just as a
deal was being reached in Albany on a bill to do that.

According to federal prosecutors, a wealthy couple in Muttontown kept two
Indonesian women in virtual slavery for years, paying them a pittance for long
hours of domestic labor punctuated with sickening abuses. The couple, Varsha
Mahender Sabhnani and Mahender Murlidhar Sabhnani, who run a multimillion-dollar
perfume business from their home, are said to have given the women little food
and forced them to sleep on mats on the floor and to hide when visitors came.
Mrs. Sabhnani, according to court papers, often beat one of the women with a
stick, scalded her, cut her ears with a knife and burned her with cigarettes and
scalding water. In one instance, prosecutors said, she forced her victim to
choke down hot chili peppers.

The story came to light on Mother's Day, when one of the women showed up at a
Dunkin' Donuts in Syosset, bruised and disheveled, wearing only pants and a
towel. Employees invited her in and offered her a jacket and coffee, then called
911 after seeing her injuries. The couple have been charged with violating a
federal law against slavery.

The Sabhnanis are entitled to the presumption of innocence about what their
lawyers say is merely ''an assault allegation.'' But the accusations against
them should awaken people to a wider problem that law enforcement officials and
human-rights advocacy groups have been warning about for years. New York City
and its suburbs are full of desperate immigrants who suffer greatly at the hands
of abusive employers. Many factors help to wrap these crimes in silence,
especially the immigrants' ignorance and shame, and their fear of arrest and
deportation.

Although there is a federal law against human trafficking for sex and labor, the
Justice Department is usually forced to spend its limited resources in breaking
up larger operations, like prostitution rings, and not individual cases of
exploited nannies or maids. For its part, New York State has long needed an
aggressive anti-trafficking law, one that contains tough penalties, helps
victims to escape their tormenters and offers an array of social services once
they do. A good bill sponsored last year by Assemblyman Jeffrey Dinowitz, a
Bronx Democrat, was badly weakened in committee, and the session ended without a
chance to improve it and hammer out a final bill with the Senate.

The news is better this year. Gov. Eliot Spitzer and the Legislature reached a
deal last week on an anti-trafficking bill that would turn such forms of modern
slavery, particularly prostitution, into felonies and offer victims emergency
housing and health care and other services from the state. Their action comes
too late for the Indonesian women, identified in court papers as ''Samirah'' and
''Nona.'' But for others who are out among us, suffering mutely, the hope for
justice has improved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); BURN INJURIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ALIEN
SMUGGLING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); IMMIGRATION (85%); PROSTITUTION
(84%); RETAIL BAKERIES (78%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (78%); LEGISLATION (78%);
FOREIGN LABOR (78%); FELONIES (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (77%); SEX TRAFFICKING
(77%); ILLEGAL PROSTITUTION (77%); WOMEN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); CONTUSIONS (75%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
LAWYERS (69%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (67%); DEPORTATION (62%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (59%); PERFUMES & COLOGNES (54%) Domestic Service; Prostitution; Law
and Legislation; Editorials; Labor; Domestic Service; Foreign Labor; Slave Labor
; Prostitution

COMPANY: DUNKIN' BRANDS GROUP INC (68%)

TICKER: DNKN (NASDAQ) (68%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS722515 SNACK & NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BARS (68%); SIC5812 EATING
PLACES (68%)

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (77%) Varsha Mahender Sabhnani; Mahender Murlidhar
Sabhnani; Eliot (Gov) Spitzer

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); ALBANY, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: New York State; Muttontown (NY); Syosset (NY)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slaves of New York

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 503 words


New York City and its wealthy suburbs are full of desperate immigrants who
suffer greatly at the hands of abusive employers. Many factors help to wrap
these crimes in silence, especially the immigrants' ignorance and shame, and
their fear of arrest and deportation.

It is thus cause for considerable cheer that New York State's leaders last week
agreed on a long-awaited measure that would crack down on the trafficking of
people for sex and labor while offering help to the victims. Any doubts that we
badly need such a law were dispelled by a horrifying story of exploitation and
cruelty that surfaced last week in Long Island.

According to federal prosecutors, a couple in Muttontown, a wealthy enclave near
Oyster Bay, kept two Indonesian women in virtual slavery for years, paying them
a pittance for long hours of domestic labor punctuated with sickening abuses.
The couple, Varsha Mahender Sabhnani and Mahender Murlidhar Sabhnani, who run a
multimillion-dollar perfume business from their home, are said to have given the
women little food and forced them to sleep on mats on the floor and to hide when
visitors came. According to court papers, Mrs. Sabhnani often beat one of the
women with a stick and burned her with cigarettes and scalding water.

The story came to light early on Mother's Day, when one of the women showed up
at a Dunkin' Donuts, bruised and disheveled, wearing only pants and a towel.
Employees invited her in and offered her a jacket and coffee, then called 911
after seeing her injuries. The couple have been charged with violating a federal
law against slavery.

The Sabhnanis are entitled to the presumption of innocence about what their
lawyers say is merely ''an assault allegation.'' But the accusations against
them should jolt people awake to a wider problem that law enforcement officials
and human-rights advocacy groups have been warning about for years. Although
there is a federal law against human trafficking for sex and labor, the Justice
Department is usually forced to spend its limited resources in breaking up
larger operations, like prostitution rings, and not individual cases of
exploited nannies or maids.

For its part, New York has long needed an aggressive anti-trafficking law that
contains tough penalties, helps victims to escape their tormenters and offers an
array of social services once they do. A good bill sponsored last year by
Assemblyman Jeffrey Dinowitz, a Bronx Democrat, was badly weakened in committee,
and the session ended without a chance to improve it and hammer out a final bill
with the Senate.

The news is better this year. Gov. Eliot Spitzer and the Legislature reached a
deal last week on an anti-trafficking bill that would turn such forms of modern
slavery, particularly prostitution, into felonies and offer victims emergency
housing and health care and other services from the state. Their action comes
too late for the Indonesian women. But for others who are out among us,
suffering mutely, the hope for justice has improved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ALIEN
SMUGGLING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WOMEN (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); CONTUSIONS (78%); BURN INJURIES
(78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (77%); ILLEGAL PROSTITUTION (77%); FELONIES (77%); SEX
TRAFFICKING (76%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (76%); LEGISLATION (76%); LAWYERS (74%);
DEPORTATION (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (70%);
PROSTITUTION (65%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); PERFUMES & COLOGNES (53%)
Labor; Law and Legislation; Editorials; Prostitution; Slave Labor

COMPANY: DUNKIN' BRANDS GROUP INC (66%)

TICKER: DNKN (NASDAQ) (66%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS722515 SNACK & NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BARS (66%); SIC5812 EATING
PLACES (66%)

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (59%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: New York State

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 27, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Giuliani Calls for Increasing American Support for Fatah

BYLINE: By MARC SANTORA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: VIRGINIA BEACH, June 26


Rudolph W. Giuliani addressed Israeli-Palestinian discord on Tuesday, saying it
was pointless for the United States to negotiate with Hamas, the Islamic group
that has seized control of the Gaza Strip, and that Washington should work with
Egypt and Jordan to bolster Fatah and its control over the West Bank.

As he advocated active American engagement, Mr. Giuliani urged caution and
broadly criticized the Clinton administration's approach in the 1990s, trying to
broker peace with Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader.

''Let's not become like starry romantics like we were with Arafat, where he was
leading us down the primrose path and we were helping him get the Nobel Peace
Prize,'' Mr. Giuliani said in a speech here at Regent University, which Pat
Robertson, the evangelist, founded.

Setting out a position that largely tracked Bush administration policy and the
positions of Egypt, Israel and Jordan, Mr. Giuliani suggested that the best
course was to bolster Fatah, which Mr. Arafat controlled until he died and is
now run by Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president

''Let's see if we can't get Jordan and Egypt to help us try and create something
with Abbas in the West Bank,'' Mr. Giuliani said.

Long a supporter of Israel, he expanded on his remarks later  in a speech in
Maryland to a Jewish organization. At Regent, Mr. Giuliani did not mention
abortion or other divisive issues, focusing instead on leadership and national
security. As a Republican who supports abortion rights, he has been trying to
win over social conservatives, especially evangelical Christians, by emphasizing
other issues, including keeping the nation safe.

He affirmed his commitment to keep American soldiers in Iraq, emphasized the
danger Iran poses and, for the first time, distanced himself from certain
interrogation methods that the Bush administration backs. He said he did not
think that waterboarding, in which a detainee or prisoner is strapped with his
feet above his head, gagged and made to think he is drowning, was necessary.

First used in the Spanish Inquisition, the method is widely considered torture
by human rights groups. The procedure had been on a list of approved ''enhanced
interrogation techniques'' used by the United States on terror suspects,
although the Central Intelligence Agency has left it off a proposal for an
updated set of rules on permissible techniques. Mr. Giuliani, who did not
directly answer the question when it came up at a recent Republican debate, told
reporters at a news conference that information could be gathered without going
to such extremes.

''I think you can do it without something like waterboarding,'' he said after
being pressed. He was quick to say he thought that interrogation needed to be
aggressive, but likened what he meant to more traditional means of obtaining
information.

''I think putting people under some degree of pressure is done all the time,''
Mr. Giuliani said. ''Police departments do it. I did it to get information from
the Mafia,'' a reference to his work as a federal prosecutor before he was
elected mayor of New York.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rudolph W. Giuliani speaking yesterday in Virginia Beach.
(Photograph by Steve Helber/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); RELIGION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); HAMAS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (85%); TERRORISM (78%);
CONSERVATISM (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
NOBEL PRIZES (76%); AWARDS & PRIZES (74%); PEACE PROCESS (73%); POLITICAL
DEBATES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); TORTURE (67%); ABORTION (64%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (64%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (64%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%)

PERSON: RUDY GIULIANI (93%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (73%)

CITY: VIRGINIA BEACH, VA, USA (90%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (90%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); JORDAN
(94%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (94%); IRAQ (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2007 Sunday
                                 Early Edition

Sri Lanka Army Kills 30 Rebels In Jungle Battle In the East

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 348 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka, June 9


Sri Lankan troops killed 30 rebels in a fierce jungle battle in the restive
east, and three insurgents killed themselves with cyanide capsules, the military
said, as Japan's peace envoy voiced concern over human rights abuses.

The military said one soldier had been killed and 17 wounded in the battle in
Thoppigala, an area of the eastern jungle where the two sides have fought
artillery and mortar bomb duels for weeks amid a new chapter in a two-decade
civil war.

The rebel Tamil Tigers said they had no immediate details of any casualties from
the latest fighting.

''We estimate troops killed 30 Tigers, plus three Tigers committed suicide in
front of our troops,'' a spokesman for the Media Center for National Security
said, asking not to be named in line with policy. He said troops had overrun
four rebel bases.

The Japanese envoy, Yasushi Akashi, said Saturday that he was worried by human
rights violations attributed to the Sri Lankan state and the Tamil Tigers, as
the police returned hundreds of deported Tamils to the capital.

Britain and the United States have suspended some aid, citing concerns over
rights abuses, but Mr. Akashi said that Japan -- Sri Lanka's chief financial
donor -- would continue with its multimillion-dollar aid programs.

During his five-day stay in Sri Lanka, the police banished hundreds of Tamils to
the war-torn north, citing security concerns, nine mutilated bodies were found
north of Colombo, and the Tigers and military fought deadly battles. On
Saturday, dozens of the Tamils that had been ejected from the capital were
transported back to Colombo, following a Supreme Court order blocking any
further evictions.

Rights groups have reported hundreds of abductions and disappearances by each
side. President Mahinda Rajapaksa has argued that many of those reports are
false and intended to discredit his government.

The Japanese envoy held out hope for peace.

''My meeting with the president of the country as well as other leaders has
convinced me that the commitment for peace is still there,'' Mr. Akashi said at
a news conference.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (91%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); CYANIDES (73%); SUICIDE
(73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); APPEALS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); JAPAN (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 591 words


INTERNATIONAL 3-14

Migrants Reshape Economies

Virtually every aspect of global migration can be seen in the tiny Cape Verde
off West Africa, a microcosm of the forces remaking societies across the globe
where the number of people who have left approaches the number who remain. 1

Competing Reviews on Iraq

The Bush administration has commissioned assessments of the war in Iraq that
could dilute the eventual conclusions of the progress report Gen. David H.
Patraeus must give to Congress by Sept. 15 about the impact of the current troop
increase. 1

Iran in Fierce Crackdown

Iran is in the throes of one of its most ferocious crackdowns on dissent in
years, with the government focusing on labor leaders, universities, the press,
women's rights advocates, a former nuclear negotiator and Iranian-Americans. 1

No Fatah Talks With Hamas

A top leader of Hamas, which last week routed its rival, Fatah, from Gaza,
called for talks to re-form a power-sharing Palestinian government. Fatah
leaders, looking forward to a Monday regional summit meeting that excludes
Hamas, rebuffed the offer. 10

Sri Lankan Killings Unsolved

Nearly a year after the massacre of 17 aid workers in Sri Lanka, the most basic
questions about the killings remain unresolved. Sri Lanka's government is facing
condemnation from human rights monitors who say the investigation has been
wanting because of the possibility that its security forces were involved. 4

Chirac Won't Testify in Scandal

Having lost the immunity that protected him from prosecution while in office,
Jacques Chirac, the former French president, has refused to testify in a
political scandal that sought to discredit Nicolas Sarkozy, the current
president. 6

NATIONAL 16-22

Roots of Bush's Stance

A divide over immigration in Midland, Tex., the city where President Bush spent
much of his childhood, helps to shed light on a broader rift, as Mr. Bush and
like-minded Republicans set on providing citizenship for millions of illegal
immigrants engage in a contentious fight with the rest of their party. 1

Risks of Golf Course Homes

With golf communities sprouting nationwide -- 70 percent of new courses include
housing -- errant golf shots have become an increasingly prominent problem. 1

Challenge to Clerical Celibacy

Voice of the Faithful, the lay group formed in response to the sexual abuse
scandal in the Roman Catholic Church, is calling for the Vatican to review the
requirement that priests be celibate, saying the policy may have played a role
in the scandal. 16

Political Impact of ''Sicko''

The film ''Sicko,'' Michael Moore's cinematic indictment of the American health
care system, is predicted to have broad political impact by crystallizing the
frustration that is a pre-existing condition for many health care consumers. 21

Missing Woman's Body Found

A body believed to be that of a pregnant woman who vanished from her home has
been found. A police officer thought to be the father of the unborn child was
arrested on two counts of murder. 19

Hilton to Speak With Larry King

After deals with ABC and NBC fell through, Paris Hilton is set to give her first
post-jail interview to Larry King on CNN. 22

NEW YORK/REGION 25-29

A Bloomberg Candidacy

New Yorkers may have become accustomed to the eccentricities of the billionaire
information mogul who took an unorthodox path to public service. But, as Mayor
Michael R. Bloomberg takes a prominent part on the national stage, even he has
questioned whether the rest of the country is ready for him . 19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HAMAS (90%); POLITICAL SCANDALS
(89%); SCANDALS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (85%); GOLF
(85%); RELIGION (84%); HEALTH CARE (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MISSING PERSONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (74%); WOMEN (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); IRAQ WAR (72%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH
(69%); POLITICS (69%); INDICTMENTS (65%); SEX SCANDALS (64%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (64%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (56%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (50%); JACQUES CHIRAC (50%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SRI LANKA (93%); CAPE VERDE (92%);
WESTERN AFRICA (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA (91%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); FRANCE (70%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2007 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Abraham Klausner, 92; Aided Holocaust Survivors

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 661 words


Rabbi Abraham J. Klausner, the first Jewish chaplain in the United States Army
to arrive at the Dachau concentration camp after its liberation in 1945 and a
strong voice for thousands of Holocaust survivors who remained in displaced
persons camps for years after the war, died on Thursday at his home in Santa Fe,
N.M. He was 92.

The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, his son Jeremy said.

Rabbi Klausner was the leader of Temple Emanu-El in Yonkers, a Reform
congregation, from 1954 until his retirement in 1989. He wrote several books,
including one that posed something of a challenge to Jews concerned about the
future of the Jewish family: a guide to interfaith weddings.

But Rabbi Marvin Hier, the founder of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a human
rights organization in Los Angeles that fights anti-Semitism, said Rabbi
Klausner was ''the father figure'' for the more than 30,000 emaciated survivors
found at Dachau, 10 miles northwest of Munich, after it was liberated on April
29, 1945, and later for thousands more left in camps as the Allies tried to
determine where they should go.

''They were still pawns in the international gamesmanship as to who was going to
take them,'' Rabbi Hier said. ''In the critical years when no one wanted them,
when there was no State of Israel, Rabbi Klausner was the only address they
had.''

When Earl G. Harrison, the dean of the University of Pennsylvania Law School,
was dispatched by President Harry S. Truman to assess conditions in postwar
Germany, Rabbi Klausner met him in Munich and persuaded him to visit several of
the so-called D.P. camps.

In a scathing report to Truman criticizing Army supervision of the camps, Mr.
Harrison wrote, ''As matters now stand, we appear to be treating the Jews as the
Nazis treated them, except that we do not exterminate them.''

Under orders from Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, and with Mr. Harrison as the
American representative to the Intergovernmental Commission on Refugees,
conditions in the camps were improved.

Abraham Judah Klausner was born in Memphis on April 27, 1915, one of five
children of Rabbi Joseph Klausner and Tillie Binstalk Klausner. He graduated
from the University of Denver in 1938 and from Hebrew Union College in 1941.

In addition to his son Jeremy, Rabbi Klausner is survived by his wife of 41
years, the former Judith Steinberg; two other sons, Amos and Michael; a
daughter, Robin Cooper; and two grandchildren.

In 1986, Rabbi Klausner wrote ''Weddings: A Complete Guide to All Religious and
Interfaith Marriage Services'' (Alpha Publishing Company). The book provided
texts of Protestant, Roman Catholic, Jewish, Russian Orthodox and Muslim wedding
services, and suggestions for combining texts of different faiths.

For Rabbi Klausner, refusing to marry interfaith couples was a mistake. ''It's a
very traumatic experience to have a clergyman reject your judgment,'' he told
The New York Times in 1989. ''I don't think this is the role of religion, which
should heal and help.''

Rabbi Klausner's other books include ''A Child's Prayer Book'' (Emanuel Press,
1979) and his memoir, ''A Letter to My Children: From the Edge of the
Holocaust'' (Holocaust Center of Northern California, 2002).

It was in May 1945, three weeks after Dachau had been liberated, that Lieutenant
Klausner (he would later be promoted to captain) arrived at the camp with the
116th Evacuation Hospital.

''He was a rabbi in an American uniform,'' Rabbi Hier said. ''He was horrified
by the fact that the survivors were still living as virtual prisoners. When they
didn't have adequate bedding or enough food, he got it for them; he got kosher
provisions for those who wanted it.''

Rabbi Klausner wrote letters of protest about conditions in the camp and sent
them up the chain of command. He listed every survivor at Dachau and made sure
the list was posted at other camps.

''He brought hundreds and hundreds of families together,'' Rabbi Hier said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Religion

PERSON: Abraham Klausner

CORRECTION-DATE: July 28, 2007



CORRECTION: An obituary on June 30 about Rabbi Abraham J. Klausner, who aided
Holocaust survivors, erroneously attributed a distinction to him. It was Rabbi
Eli Bohnen -- not Rabbi Klausner -- who was the first Jewish chaplain in the
United States Army to arrive at the Dachau concentration camp after its
liberation in 1945. (Within a few days of Rabbi Bohnen's arrival, his unit moved
on in pursuit of German troops, and Rabbi Klausner replaced him.)

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rabbi Abraham J. Klausner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obits)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); ARMIES
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); CHILDREN (89%); RELIGION
(89%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (89%); MARRIAGE (88%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(78%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); GRANDCHILDREN
(76%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (76%); MEN (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (73%); REFUGEES (72%); PUBLISHING (70%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); LAW SCHOOLS (64%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (64%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (60%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF ARMY (84%); SIMON WIESENTHAL CENTER (56%);
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA (54%)

CITY: SANTA FE, NM, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW MEXICO, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (87%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

After the Hanging of Saddam Hussein

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 477 words



To the Editor:

Re ''U.S. Questioned Iraq on the Rush to Hang Hussein'' (front page, Jan. 1):

Excuse me if I am skeptical of the claim that American officials in Iraq
questioned the rush to hang Saddam Hussein.

Like so much this administration has done to discredit the principles and values
of our country, this claim rings hollow.

The very words used in the article to describe our goals in the intervention --
''legal workarounds'' and ''legal mechanisms'' -- reflect this administration's
contempt for what most of us consider the principles of justice.

We can't indefinitely try to have it both ways: acting like a brutal dictator of
the world while professing our virtue.

James E. Coleman Jr.
Durham, N.C., Jan. 1, 2007

The writer is a professor at Duke Law School.

To the Editor:

It is interesting and revealing that after orchestrating the show trial that
culminated in the execution of Saddam Hussein, the Bush administration now seeks
to distance itself from the disgraceful, lawless proceedings leading up to the
execution and to disavow responsibility for the ugly, vindictive spectacle in
the death chamber (''U.S. Questioned Iraq on the Rush to Hang Hussein,'' front
page, Jan. 1).

The repulsive videotape of Saddam Hussein's death, however, clearly represents
the Bush-Maliki concept of justice in action.

John S. Koppel
Bethesda, Md., Jan. 1, 2007

To the Editor:

Re ''Feared and Pitiless; Fearful and Pitiable'' (Week in Review, Dec. 31):

It is a pity that the noose around Saddam Hussein's neck will be an albatross
around the United States' neck for a long time to come.

The execution was done hurriedly in a country still under occupation, and the
trial that led to it had many missteps, as acknowledged by several international
authorities around the world.

It is another milestone in the dismal handling of the whole Iraq war by George
W. Bush and his administration.

Sevgin Oktay
Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Dec. 31, 2006

To the Editor:

Re ''What Did Hussein's Execution Accomplish?'' (letters, Jan. 1):

I read through the 11 letters, most of which opposed the execution (asserting
that the trial was unfair or opposing capital punishment).

None, not even the few that conceded Saddam Hussein's guilt, mention one
overwhelming reason for executing him.

Let's say the alternative was to give him a life sentence. Soon, a fragile Iraqi
government might succumb to pressure and ''commute'' his sentence, even free
him.

Then, he reorganizes his Tikrit gangsters and Baath Party and stages a comeback.
Or his followers could achieve a jailbreak. Far-fetched? Napoleon did it.

No, a living Saddam Hussein was too dangerous. I also think that the Iraqi court
trial was fair; the evidence showed that Saddam Hussein was a mass murderer, and
the verdict is a victory for human rights law.

Anton J. Mikofsky
New York, Jan. 2, 2007

The writer is a lawyer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (75%); LAWYERS
(74%); WRITERS (73%); SENTENCING (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%);
GENOCIDE (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (61%); TERRORISM (59%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(59%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; Capital Punishment; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: DUKE UNIVERSITY (83%) Duke University

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%) James E Jr Coleman; John S
Koppel; Sevgin Oktay; Anton J Mikofsky; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: DURHAM, NC, USA (71%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Padilla Wiretaps, Murky View of 'Jihad' Case

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2584 words


In 1997, as the government listened in on their phone call, Adham Hassoun, a
computer programmer in Broward County, Fla., proposed a road trip to Jose
Padilla, a low-wage worker there. The excursion to Tampa would be his treat, Mr.
Hassoun said, and a chance to meet ''some nice, uh, brothers.''

Mr. Padilla, 36, a Brooklyn-born Puerto Rican who had converted to Islam a few
years earlier, knew Mr. Hassoun, an outspoken Palestinian, from his mosque.
Still, according to a transcript of the conversation obtained by The New York
Times, Mr. Padilla equivocated as Mr. Hassoun exhorted.

''We take the whole family and have a blast,'' Mr. Hassoun said. ''We go to, uh,
our Busch Gardens, you know  You won't regret it. Money-back guarantee.''

Mr. Padilla, laughing, suggested that they not discuss the matter over the
phone.

''Why?'' Mr. Hassoun said. ''We're going to Busch Gardens. What's the big
deal!''

That conversation took place five years before Mr. Padilla, a United States
citizen accused of plotting a ''dirty bomb'' attack against this country, was
declared an enemy combatant. Given that Mr. Padilla and Mr. Hassoun are now
criminal defendants in a terrorism conspiracy case in Miami, it sounds
suspicious, as if Mr. Hassoun were proposing something more sinister than a
weekend at the amusement park. He well may have been -- but maybe, too, he was
sincere or joking about a Muslim retreat.

Deciphering such chatter in order to construct a convincing narrative of
conspiracy is a challenge. Yet, prosecutors say, the government will rely
largely on wiretapped conversations when it puts Mr. Padilla, Mr. Hassoun, and a
third defendant, Kifah Jayyousi, on trial as a ''North American support cell''
that sent money, goods and recruits abroad to assist ''global jihad.''

Tens of thousands of conversations were recorded. Some 230 phone calls form the
core of the government's case, including 21 that make reference to Mr. Padilla,
prosecutors said. But Mr. Padilla's voice is heard on only seven calls. And on
those seven, which The Times obtained from a participant in the case, Mr.
Padilla does not discuss violent plots.

But this is not the version of Mr. Padilla -- Al Qaeda associate and would-be
bomber -- that John Ashcroft, then the attorney general, unveiled in 2002 when
he interrupted a trip to Moscow to trumpet Mr. Padilla's capture. In the four
and a half years since then, as the government tested the limits of its power to
deal with terrorism outside the traditional law enforcement system, Mr. Padilla
is the only accused terrorist to have gone from enemy combatant to criminal
defendant.

His criminal trial, scheduled to begin late this month, will feature none of the
initial claims about violent plotting with Al Qaeda that the government cited as
justification for detaining Mr. Padilla without formal charges for three and a
half years. Those claims came from the government's overseas interrogations of
terrorism suspects, like Abu Zubaydah, which, the government said, Mr. Padilla
corroborated, in part, during his own questioning in a military brig in South
Carolina.

But, constrained by strict federal rules of evidence that would prohibit or
limit the use of information obtained during such interrogations, the government
will make a far more circumscribed case against Mr. Padilla in court,
effectively demoting him from Al Qaeda's dirty bomber to foot soldier in a
somewhat nebulous conspiracy.

The initial dirty bomb accusation did not disappear. It quietly resurfaced in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The government filed the dirty bomb charges against Mr.
Padilla's supposed accomplice, an Ethiopian-born detainee, at about the same
time it indicted Mr. Padilla on relatively lesser offenses in criminal court.

A Change in Strategy

  The change in Mr. Padilla's status, from enemy combatant to criminal
defendant, was abrupt. It came late in 2005 as the Supreme Court was weighing
whether to take up the legality of his military detention and the Bush
administration, by filing criminal charges, pre-empted its review. In a way, Mr.
Padilla's prosecution was a legal maneuver that kept the issue of his detention
without charges out of the Supreme Court. After apprehending him at O'Hare
International Airport in Chicago in May 2002, the Bush administration made a
choice: to detain Mr. Padilla militarily, in order to thwart further plotting,
rather than to follow him in order to gather evidence that might serve a
criminal prosecution.

Now that Mr. Padilla has ended up a criminal defendant after all, the
prosecution's case does not fully reflect the Bush administration's view of who
he is or what he did.

Senior government officials have said publicly that Mr. Padilla provided
self-incriminating information during interrogations, admitting, they said, to
undergoing basic terrorist training, to accepting an assignment to blow up
apartment buildings in the United States, and to attending a farewell dinner
with Khaled Sheikh Mohammed, the suspected master planner of the Sept. 11
attacks, before he flew to Chicago in 2002.

But any confessions by Mr. Padilla while he was detained without charges and
denied access to counsel -- whether or not he was mistreated, as his lawyers
claim -- would not be admissible in court.

And it is unlikely that information obtained during the harsh questioning of Al
Qaeda detainees would be admissible, either -- and, further, the government is
disinclined to expose sensitive intelligence or invite further scrutiny of
secret jails overseas.

Probably as a consequence, the current criminal case zeroes in on what the
government sees as an earlier stage of Mr. Padilla's involvement with terrorism.
It focuses primarily on the other defendants' support during the 1990s for
Muslim struggles overseas, especially in Bosnia, Kosovo and Chechnya. Mr.
Padilla, who was appended to their pre-existing case, in which he had been an
unnamed co-conspirator, is depicted as their recruit.

Although prosecutors have declined to discuss the government's strategy, their
filings and statements in court provide a picture of the case they are expected
to present at trial.

The most tangible allegation against Mr. Padilla is that in 2000 he filled out,
under an alias, an Arab-language application to attend a terrorist training
camp. That application is expected to be offered into evidence alongside the
wiretapped conversations, but Mr. Padilla's lawyers say they will contest its
admissibility, challenging the government's assertion that the ''mujahideen data
form'' belonged to their client.

Robert Chesney, a specialist in national security law at Wake Forest University,
called the prosecution a pragmatic one, analogous to ''going after Al Capone on
tax evasion.''

But Deborah Pearlstein, a lawyer with Human Rights First who has consulted with
Mr. Padilla's defense, said that his will never be an ordinary, pragmatic
prosecution. ''If Jose Padilla were from Day 1 just charged and tried, then
maybe,'' she said. ''But this is a case that comes after three and a half years
of the most gross deprivation of human rights that we've seen in this country
for a long time.''

Further, Ms. Pearlstein noted, the government has reserved the option, should
the prosecution fail, of returning Mr. Padilla to the military brig. This, she
said, ''casts a shadow'' over the current prosecution.

The Bush administration's military case against Binyam Mohamed, 28, the
Ethiopian detainee at Guantanamo, put the current proceedings in a different
light, too.

In December 2005, Mr. Mohamed was referred to the military commission in
Guantanamo on accusations that he conspired with Mr. Padilla on the dirty bomb
plot. It was little noticed at the time.

But accusations against Mr. Padilla that are nowhere to be found in the
indictment against him filled the pages of Mr. Mohamed's charging sheet, with
Mr. Padilla repeatedly identified by name. The sheet referred to the two men
meeting in Pakistan after Sept. 11, 2001, studying how to build an improvised
dirty bomb, discussing the feasibility of a dirty bomb attack with Al Qaeda
officials and agreeing to undertake the mission to blow up buildings.

Mr. Mohamed's lawyer, Clive Stafford Smith, said that these charges were based
on a forced confession by Mr. Mohamed, who, he said, was tortured overseas into
admitting to a story that was fed to him. ''Binyam was told all along that his
job was to be a witness against Padilla, Abu Zubaydah and Khaled Sheikh
Mohammed,'' Mr. Stafford Smith said, adding that his client ''has no conscience
knowledge that he ever met'' Mr. Padilla.

The charges against Mr. Mohamed and other Guantanamo detainees who were headed
for prosecution there have been suspended temporarily as a result of the
Military Commissions Act passed by Congress in October. Those charges are likely
to be reinstated, a Pentagon official said yesterday.

That Mr. Mohamed faced dirty bomb charges and Mr. Padilla does not speaks to the
central difference between being a terrorism suspect in Guantanamo and a
criminal defendant charged with terrorism offenses in the United States.

In Guantanamo, the military commission system that deals with foreign-born
terrorism suspects is expected to allow, with some exceptions, the use of
information obtained through coercion.

''Federal court rules are restrictive,'' Professor Chesney of Wake Forest
University School of Law said. ''The very essence of why they're trying to have
that separate military system was to create rules to use information that is
deemed by the intelligence community to be trustworthy but wouldn't make it
under the federal rules of evidence.''

David Cole, a professor of law at Georgetown University and author of books on
terrorism and civil liberties, sees the difference between the two systems more
critically: ''What this says clearly is that they feel that they can get away
with using tainted evidence in the military commission system that they can't
use in the criminal court system.''

The Wiretapping Case

  The criminal case against Mr. Padilla has its roots in the prosecution of
Sheikh Omer Abdel Rahman, the blind Egyptian cleric who was convicted in 1995 of
conspiring to blow up the United Nations and other New York landmarks.

In the early 1990s, Sheikh Rahman's telephone was tapped, and Mr. Hassoun and
Dr. Jayyousi, a Jordanian-born American citizen who holds a doctorate in civil
engineering, came to the government's attention through phone calls to or from
his line. Then the government, under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,
began to eavesdrop on them, which eventually pulled Mr. Padilla into their net,
too.

The government presents the three defendants as ''joined at the hip,'' as one
prosecutor put it in a hearing last summer. But Judge Marcia G. Cooke of Federal
District Court, noting that Mr. Padilla was appended to a case well under way,
asked the government, ''If they are so joined at the hip, why is Mr. Padilla so
late to the dance?''

Dr. Jayyousi, a former school system administrator in both Detroit and
Washington, D.C., never met Mr. Padilla, his lawyer, William Swor, said.

It is Mr. Hassoun, the government said, who recruited Mr. Padilla. But both Mr.
Hassoun's and Mr. Padilla's lawyers deny that Mr. Padilla was recruited.

Seven Taped Phone Calls

  Mr. Padilla's lawyers and relatives say that he left South Florida for Egypt
in September 1998 on a spiritual journey. A former juvenile offender, he
converted to Islam as part of an effort to straighten out his life, they say.
His mosque in Fort Lauderdale sponsored his travel, he told friends, relatives
and F.B.I. agents who interviewed him in 2002. Mr. Hassoun belonged to that
mosque, and the telephone transcripts seem to indicate that Mr. Hassoun helped,
at the least, with Mr. Padilla's travel plans.

The seven taped phone calls that bear Mr. Padilla's voice involve conversations
with Mr. Hassoun from 1997 to 2000.

On those calls, Mr. Padilla, unlike some of the other defendants, does not
employ what the government says is coded language. According to the government,
other defendants refer to their jihad-related plans as ''getting some fresh
air,'' ''participating in tourism,'' ''opening up a market,'' ''playing
football,'' and so on. This leads to silly-sounding exchanges where ''the
brothers'' discuss going on ''picnics'' in order ''to smell fresh air and to eat
cheese'' or using $3,500 to buy ''zucchini.''

In contrast, Mr. Padilla's seven conversations with Mr. Hassoun range from
straightforward -- Mr. Hassoun tells Mr. Padilla that his grandmother has died;
Mr. Padilla tells Mr. Hassoun that he has found himself an 18-year-old Egyptian
bride who is willing to wear a veil -- to vaguely suggestive or just odd.

In one phone call, the two men talked about a dream. It appeared to be the dream
that Mr. Padilla, according to his relatives, cites as having played a crucial
role in inspiring him to convert to Islam: the vision of a man in a turban,
surrounded by the swirling dust of a desert.

Mr. Hassoun brought it up and told Mr. Padilla that he himself had experienced
the same vision. ''What do you mean you saw the same dream?'' Mr. Padilla asked.

''I saw the dream of the uh  person with the turban,'' Mr. Hassoun said.

Mr. Hassoun explained how, in his dream, the turban was wrongly wrapped and so
he thought the man might be a spy, in which case, he was prepared ''to split his
body apart.'' But then, he said, he understood that ''the brother  was a good
one.''

''Yeah?'' Mr. Padilla said.

In three of the seven conversations, Mr. Padilla made statements that the
government has identified as ''overt acts'' in furtherance of the accused
conspiracy.

In the first, Mr. Hassoun asked, ''You're ready, right?'' and Mr. Padilla said,
''God willing, brother, it's going to happen soon.'' That was the summer of
1997, a year before Mr. Padilla left South Florida for Egypt.

In the second, Mr. Padilla told Mr. Hassoun, during a 1999 conversation from
Egypt, that he had asked his ex-wife in the United States to arrange for him to
receive an army jacket, a book bag and a sleeping bag, supplies that he had
requested because ''there was a rumor here that the door was open somewhere.''
In the third, Mr. Padilla told Mr. Hassoun in April 2000, that he would need a
recommendation to ''connect me with the good brothers, with the right faith'' if
he were to travel to Yemen.

Prosecutors say Mr. Padilla is mentioned, although by his Muslim name Ibrahim or
by another alias, on 21 additional tapes. One of them refers to Ibrahim as being
''in the area of Usama,'' which the government takes to mean that he was near
Osama bin Laden. But Mr. Padilla's lawyers contest that interpretation.

''That is just nonsensical, Your Honor, that these men who for years, according
to the government, have been talking in code all of a sudden are going to throw
Osama bin Laden's name around,'' Michael Caruso, a federal public defender, said
in court.

Mr. Padilla has pleaded not guilty. But before his case goes before a jury, his
fitness to stand trial will be evaluated. On the basis of Mr. Padilla's lawyers'
assertion that he is mentally damaged as a result of his prolonged isolation and
his interrogation in the brig, Judge Cooke has ordered a psychiatric evaluation
by a Bureau of Prisons doctor to be completed this week.

Friday in The Times: The only person on the American mainland still held asan
enemy combatant.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jose Padilla, top, and Adham Hassoun, who was photographed in
1999, are co-defendants in a terrorism conspiracy case. (Photo by John L.
White/South Florida Sun-Sentinel)
 (Photo by Alan Diaz/Associated Press)(pg. A21)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WIRETAPPING (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); BOMBINGS
(88%); CONSPIRACY (87%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); TRAVEL
HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (73%); RELIGION (71%); TRANSCRIPTS (70%); AMUSEMENT &
THEME PARKS (69%); DIRTY BOMBS (66%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (65%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(64%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Bombs
and Explosives; Terrorism; Terrorism

COMPANY: BUSCH GARDENS WILLIAMSBURG (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

INDUSTRY: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (56%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS
(56%)

PERSON: Deborah Sontag; Jose Padilla; Adham A Hassoun; Kifah Jayyousi; John
Ashcroft; Abu Zubaydah

CITY: TAMPA, FL, USA (90%); MIAMI, FL, USA (78%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

9/11 Associate Is Sentenced In Germany to 15 Years

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, Jan. 8


A German court on Monday sentenced a friend of the Sept. 11 hijackers to 15
years in prison for being an accessory in the murders of 246 people aboard the
commercial planes used in the terrorist attacks.

The sentencing of the man, a Moroccan named Mounir el-Motassadeq, is a
potentially decisive milestone in a complex and politically delicate case that
has wended its way through the German courts for five years.

In 2005, the court, in Hamburg, found Mr. Motassadeq, 32, guilty of belonging to
a terrorist organization -- a lesser crime -- and sentenced him to seven years
in jail. But last November, an appeals court overturned that ruling, saying he
had played a direct role in plotting the hijackings.

''It was a violent crime that was carried out,'' the presiding judge of the
Hamburg court, Carsten Beckmann, said Monday, explaining the sentence, which was
the stiffest possible under the criminal guidelines.

In one way, the 15-year prison term brings the case full circle: after his first
trial, in 2003, Mr. Motassadeq was found guilty of 3,066 counts of accessory to
murder and sentenced to the same jail term by the Hamburg court. But that
verdict was overturned on appeal and he was put on trial a second time.

Mr. Motassadeq, who came to Germany in 1993 to study engineering and fell in
with a radical Islamic group in Hamburg that included two of the hijackers,
Mohamed Atta and Marwan al-Shehhi, is one of only two people to be convicted in
the 9/11 attacks. The other -- Zacarias Moussaoui, a French citizen of Moroccan
descent -- is serving a life sentence in Colorado.

German prosecutors struggled to build a case against Mr. Motassadeq, in part
because of what they said was a lack of cooperation from the United States in
sharing evidence obtained from other terrorism suspects. On Monday, however, the
court handed them a clear victory.

Mr. Motassadeq's lawyer, Udo Jacob, said he planned to appeal, either to the
European Court of Human Rights or by demanding a third trial in Hamburg based on
new evidence. He has already filed an appeal with the Federal Constitutional
Court, the highest German court.

''This ruling was not a surprise,'' he said in an interview. ''The court had no
choice but to give him a tough punishment.''

Witnesses in the courtroom said Mr. Motassadeq reacted impassively as the judge
read the sentence. But earlier, when given a chance to address the court, Mr.
Motassadeq turned to the son of one of the victims, Dominic J. Puopolo, and
delivered an emotional statement.

''I understand your suffering,'' Mr. Motassadeq said, according to The
Associated Press. ''The same thing is being done to me, my kids, my parents, my
family; my future is ruined.''

Mr. Puopolo, a 40-year-old computer consultant from Miami Beach, Fla., whose
mother was on one of the planes flown into the World Trade Center, replied that
Mr. Motassadeq would be free one day.

''You have a chance to rebuild your life and be back with your family,'' said
Mr. Puopolo, who represented the victims as co-plaintiffs. ''Your life is not
over, but my mom's is.''

In a telephone interview later, Mr. Puopolo said the confrontation caught him
off guard. More than that, though, he said the outburst showed Mr. Motassadeq's
desperation in the waning moments of his trial. During most of his court
appearances, Mr. Motassadeq, a slight man with a long beard, had projected a
tranquil, even occasionally cheerful, demeanor.

''This is the end of the road for him,'' Mr. Puopolo said. ''It's real justice
for the 9/11 families, and for my family.''

Mr. Motassadeq's links to the hijackers were never in dispute. He was a friend
of Mr. Atta and Mr. Shehhi while they lived in Hamburg, and had wired money to
Mr. Shehhi. He also admitted to attending a terrorist training camp in
Afghanistan sponsored by Osama bin Laden.

But Mr. Motassadeq denied knowing about the impending attacks and said he had
helped the hijackers unwittingly. In 2005, the Hamburg court accepted his
contention that he played no direct role.

The appeals court, however, ruled that the evidence showed that Mr. Motassadeq
was aware of the plot to hijack and crash commercial airlines, even if he did
not know the targets of the attacks.

Because there was no proof that he knew about the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon, he was charged in his second trial with accessory to murder in the
deaths of those on the planes, rather than in the deaths of everyone killed.

Mr. Jacob says he can present new evidence from another Moroccan, Abdelghani
Mzoudi, who was acquitted of complicity in the 9/11 attacks by a Hamburg court
in 2004. Mr. Mzoudi, who was deported from Germany, has offered to testify on
behalf of Mr. Motassadeq.

For that to happen, however, the court would have to rule that the evidence is
vital enough to warrant yet another trial.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The court said that Mounir el-Motassadeq had played a direct
role in plotting the terrorist hijackings in 2001. (Pool photo by Fabian Bimmer)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HIJACKING (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (90%); VERDICTS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPEALS (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); APPEALS COURTS (78%); JUDGES (78%); CRIMINAL ACCESSORIES
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); VIOLENT
CRIME (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); AIRLINES (72%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); INTERVIEWS (60%); MURDER (58%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (50%); RELIGION (50%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking;
World Trade Center (NYC); Sentences (Criminal)

PERSON: Mounir El- Motassadeq; Mark Landler

CITY: HAMBURG, GERMANY (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); FRANKFURT AM MAIN,
GERMANY (78%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (74%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%)

REGION: Germany; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Refuses Case Challenging Group's Designation as Terrorists

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


The Supreme Court refused on Monday to intervene in the federal prosecution of
seven Iranian refugees for providing financial support to an opposition group in
Iran that the State Department has designated as a terrorist organization.

The seven defendants, who are now all United States citizens, argue that they
are constitutionally entitled to challenge the validity of that designation as
part of their defense. The law under which they were charged, enacted in 1996,
gives limited appeal rights to a group that is officially labeled a terrorist
organization, but specifically precludes individual defendants, charged with
supporting such an organization, from challenging the designation at their
trial.

Under the statute, providing financial or other material support to a foreign
terrorist organization is a crime that carries a prison sentence of up to 10
years. The seven defendants were indicted in Los Angeles in March 2001 for
soliciting money for an organization usually known as the People's Mojahedin of
Iran, which the State Department designated as a foreign terrorist organization
in 1997.

That designation has been heatedly disputed, both in federal court and in
Congress. After a ruling by the federal appeals court here in 1999 found the
designation improper, the State Department reissued it and was permitted by the
appeals court to make the new designation retroactive to 1997, which is when the
defendants began their fund-raising activities.

A brief submitted to the Supreme Court on the defendants' behalf by a group of
members of Congress described the People's Mojahedin as ''a legitimate political
opposition group that Americans should be able to freely and openly support.''

The brief, filed on behalf of the Iran Human Rights and Democracy Caucus of the
House of Representatives, described the organization as ''the primary opposition
group in Iran'' and as ''a legitimate political resistance movement that seeks a
transition from the current theocratic regime to a secular democracy.''

Noting that President Bush has described the current government in Iran as part
of the ''axis of evil,'' the brief said the People's Mojahedin was not the type
of organization Congress had in mind when it gave the executive branch broad
authority to designate foreign terrorist organizations and to bar all types of
contributions to them.

The justices on Monday made no comment in turning down the case, Rahmani v.
United States, No. 06-241. The prosecution has received relatively little
publicity as it has made a slow way through the federal courts. But a trial, if
one finally takes place, could shine a spotlight on the sweeping authority that
Congress handed the secretary of state in the 1996 statute, the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act.

Originally, a terrorist designation was to last for two years, renewable at the
discretion of the secretary of state. A 2004 law, the Intelligence Reform and
Terrorism Prevention Act, gave the secretary added power by making an initial
designation permanent. In another change, the USA Patriot Act increased the
maximum sentence to 15 years from 10.

The defendants in the case before the court on Monday were originally successful
in persuading the Federal District Court in Los Angeles to dismiss their
indictment. But a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit, after considering the case for more than two years,
reinstated the indictment in October 2005.

The appeals court said that while ''no doubt Congress was well aware that some
might claim that 'one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter,' ''
Congress nonetheless chose to give the president and the State Department the
authority to designate a group as a terrorist organization ''and to keep such
policymaking authority out of the hands of United States attorneys and juries.''

Consequently, the court said, ''it does not matter whether the designation is
correct or not.'' The crime occurs, it explained, when someone gives support to
such an organization, whether or not properly designated as a terrorist group.

An 11-judge panel of the appeals court then considered whether to rehear the
case and split 6 to 5 in deciding to let the original decision stand. Judge Alex
Kozinski, writing for the five dissenters, said the case ''perfectly illustrates
the patent unconstitutionality of the terrorist organization designation
process.'' Judge Kozinski added that Roya Rahmani, the lead defendant, ''is
being prosecuted -- and will surely be sent to prison for up to 10 years -- for
giving money to an organization that no one other than some obscure mandarin in
the bowels of the State Department had determined to be a terrorist
organization.''

In their appeal to the Supreme Court, the defendants argued that the ''sweeping
implications'' of the appeals court's decision would permit the government ''to
criminalize activities that would otherwise be First Amendment-protected'' and
to bar judicial review of its determination.

Urging the justices not to hear the case, the government said the issue was not
one of free speech but rather of the ''broad authority'' that the court has long
recognized for the regulation of ''financial interactions between United States
nationals and foreign entities.''

In another case on Monday, the justices turned down an airline passenger's
challenge to the airport screening policy adopted in an unpublished directive by
the Transportation Security Agency.

The passenger, John Gilmore, was not permitted to board domestic flights from
San Francisco and Oakland, Calif., because he refused to show identification. He
argued that a secret directive actually gave passengers the choice of submitting
to an intensive screening as an alternative to providing identification. The
government lacked a basis for refusing to make the full policy public, he
argued.

Responding to Mr. Gilmore's lawsuit, the government did not concede that it had
such a policy. Nonetheless, the Ninth Circuit granted the government's request
to dismiss the case, holding that whatever identification policy existed did not
violate any constitutional rights, including the right to travel and the right
against unreasonable search and seizure. The case was Gilmore v. Gonzales, No.
06-211.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); TERRORISM (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); SUPREME
COURTS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); POLITICS (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
JAIL SENTENCING (73%); SENTENCING (73%); FUNDRAISING (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%);
CAMPAIGN FINANCE (72%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); RELIGION (62%)
Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts; Airlines and Airplanes; Identification
Devices; Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism; Immigration and Refugees;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: MUJAHEDIN-E KHALQ ORGANIZATION (83%); US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION (59%) Supreme Court (US); People's Mujahedeen of Iran; State
Department; Transportation Security Administration

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Linda Greenhouse

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

REGION: Iran; Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: China: Muslim Terror Raid Finds 'International' Ties

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 155 words


The police found links to international terrorist groups in a raid on a
suspected terrorist camp in the far western Xinjiang Uighur autonomous region
last week, the Foreign Ministry said. The police said the secret camp, near the
borders with Pakistan and Afghanistan, was run by the Chinese Uighur Muslim
separatist group known as the East Turkestan Islamic Movement. They said 18
suspects were killed and 17 others arrested. ''There is a large amount of
evidence that shows, including evidence we got from this raid, that the E.T.I.M.
is associated with international terrorist forces,'' said the ministry's
spokesman, Liu Jianchao. He also said that it ''planned, organized and carried
out a series of violent terrorist activities in China.'' He gave no details.
China has said before that the group has links to Al Qaeda. Rights groups accuse
Beijing of using claims of terrorism as an excuse to crack down on Uighur
identity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%); RELIGION (71%); ETHNICITY (64%) Terrorism; Uighurs (Chinese Ethnic
Group); Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); POLICE FOUNDATION (91%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Orgn)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (71%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); XINJIANG, CHINA (88%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); PAKISTAN (93%); ASIA (92%); TIBET (92%)

REGION: China; Xinjiang (China); Pakistan; Afghanistan; Beijing (China)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Raid Killed Somali Allies Of Al Qaeda, U.S. Says

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia, Jan. 11


A top American official in the Horn of Africa said Thursday that none of the
suspected members of Al Qaeda believed to be hiding in Somalia died in the
American airstrike this week, but added that Somalis with close ties to the
terrorist group were killed.

Somali officials said Wednesday that Fazul Abdullah Mohammed, a main suspect in
the bombings of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, had been
killed in the American attack.

United States officials immediately distanced themselves from the Somali claim,
saying that they were not even sure Mr. Fazul was among the terrorism suspects
hiding in southern Somalia with Islamist fighters. They did say then that Abu
Taha al-Sudani, a top aide to Mr. Fazul, and Aden Hashi Ayrow, a Somali
terrorism suspect, might have been killed.

But on Thursday, the American official, based in Kenya, speaking on condition of
anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media, said
American special forces and Ethiopian troops -- who are in the country to battle
the Islamists and support Somalia's transitional government -- were still
pursuing Al Qaeda suspects in southern Somalia.

American and Somali officials have acknowledged that a small team of American
Special Operations forces are in Somalia hunting suspected Qaeda fighters and
providing military advice to Ethiopian and Somali forces on the ground.

The American forces entered Somalia with Ethiopian forces late last month when
Ethiopians launched their attack against the Islamic movement, one official said
on condition of anonymity.

Mr. Fazul, one of the F.B.I.'s most wanted terrorism suspects, has evaded
capture for eight years. The Somali president's chief of staff said Wednesday
that he had been killed in an American airstrike in southern Somalia.

The American official in the region said 8 to 10 individuals had been killed in
the attack, most of whom were Somalis with close ties to Al Qaeda.

Meanwhile, Somali and Ethiopian forces skirmished with Islamic militiamen near
Ras Kamboni in Somalia's southernmost tip early Thursday, part of mop-up
operations that Mr. Meles said his troops were carrying out against the fighters
that were driven from Somalia's capital weeks ago.

The Ethiopian Information Ministry said Thursday that its military was also
launching helicopter and troop attacks around Dobley, about four miles from the
Kenyan border.

A rights group in Fanole, in the south, said Thursday that thousands of Somalis
fleeing the fighting were now stranded on the Kenyan border, which has been
largely closed.

''Thousands are in a bad condition and they do not have food and water,'' said
Ali Bashi, chairman of the Fanole Human Rights Center. ''They are stranded at
the border after Kenya closed it and they cannot go back to their houses for two
reasons: the ongoing airstrikes and lack of transportation.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mogadishu was quiet yesterday, but Somali and Ethiopian forces
pursued Islamist militias in the far south. A small team of U.S. Special
Operations forces is hunting Qaeda fighters and advising the main forces there.
(Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); RELIGION (64%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Abdallah Mohammed Fazul

CITY: MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (90%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); KENYA (94%); ETHIOPIA (94%); AFRICA
(92%); EASTERN AFRICA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: Somalia

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sweden's Lightning Rod in a Storm Over Assimilation

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL; Ivar Ekman contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM


NYAMKO SABUNI would stand out anyway, being tiny, dark-skinned and obviously
foreign in a place where those things are still anomalies. But as the recently
appointed minister for integration and gender equality, she tends to draw more
attention for her unusually blunt pronouncements about the place of immigrants
in Swedish society.

As an opposition politician, Ms. Sabuni proposed banning the veil for girls
under the age of 15. She proposed that schoolgirls undergo compulsory medical
examinations to check for evidence of genital mutilation. She denounced what she
called the ''honor culture'' of some immigrant groups, proposed outlawing
arranged marriages and called for an end to state financing of religious
schools.

Even as furious immigrant and minority groups demand that she be removed from
her post, Ms. Sabuni, 37, insists that she is not as extreme as people make her
out to be. Given that Sweden is governed by a coalition in which parliamentary
votes cannot always be counted on, it is unlikely, anyway, that most of her
ideas could plausibly translate into actual law. Nonetheless, she stands by her
basic premise: that immigrants must try harder to fit in to their adopted
country.

''A lot of people misread their rights,'' she said recently. ''They think that
freedom of religion means that they can do anything in the name of religion, or
that human rights means that they can act however they want against others.''
Not true, she said. ''If they want to live here, have kids, have grandchildren,
they must make an effort to adapt to the society where they live.''

Ms. Sabuni comes across as a dervish, all business and kinetic energy. Barely
taller than five feet, she strode to lunch in a private dining room in Sweden's
handsome main government office building. She was interviewed in English and
answered back in rapid, precisely enunciated Swedish, explaining in perfect
English that ''I would prefer to speak in a language that I speak fluently.''

The daughter of a frequently jailed opposition politician in Congo, then Zaire,
who fled to Sweden as a political refugee, Ms. Sabuni has a past so singular for
Sweden that she arguably represents a minority of one. The story of how she
arrived here with her parents and five of her siblings at the age of 12, learned
Swedish, thrived in school and in college and ultimately got elected to
Parliament and elevated to the cabinet is almost American in its can-do
trajectory.

IF there is such a thing as a Swedish dream, Ms. Sabuni embodies it. Never, she
says, has she let herself feel like a victim or felt anything but accepted. Even
putting aside her native French and Swahili for Swedish proved fairly easy, she
insists.

She holds firm to that view even though, before entering Parliament, she was
regularly turned away from the jobs for which she applied, she said, getting
work only through contacts or by being recruited. But she refuses to dwell on
it. ''You can end up in a negative spiral where you attribute everything that
goes wrong to discrimination,'' she said.

Ms. Sabuni has certainly been helped in her career by the Scandinavian-style
feminism of her husband, Carl Bergquist, whom she began dating when she was 24
and he was 47. His regular hours at a travel agency allow him to devote himself
to the housework and their children, 5-year-old twins, leaving Ms. Sabuni free
to train her disciplined mind on her work.

The path of a migrant to Sweden is not so easy and clear as it was when the
Sabunis arrived in 1981, their relocation arranged by Amnesty International.
About 12 percent of the population of nine million is now foreign-born; Muslims
account for some 450,000.

Swedes are far less likely to welcome new arrivals now. Newcomers, who often
live in rundown immigrant neighborhoods, are less likely to learn Swedish and
more likely to go to all-immigrant schools and to remain unemployed and poor.

Sweden's experience has been mirrored across Europe, where governments with
histories of tolerance are struggling to find a way to absorb growing immigrant
populations, particularly Muslims. Some countries, like Denmark, have passed
tough anti-immigrant laws; others, like Britain, are rethinking the
live-and-let-live policies they now believe have failed.

Luciano Astudillo, a member of Parliament and the spokesman for immigration
issues for the opposition Social Democrats here, said Sweden must move quickly
to address its problems. Even though he believes that Ms. Sabuni's fiery
statements while in the opposition were delivered more for political consumption
than as serious propositions, Mr. Astudillo said that she had proved nothing but
divisive.

''She has used very simplistic and general language when talking about
problems,'' he said. ''She has often been the person who stressed the divisions
instead of finding what brings us together.''

But Ms. Sabuni, who grew up nonreligious although her mother is Muslim and her
father Christian, says that on the contrary, she is eager to start a coherent
dialogue. Muslims in particular have marginalized themselves by conveying an
impression of intolerance and aversion to change, she said.

''Practicing Muslims who live by the word of the Koran and the Koranic books --
of course they limit their own opportunities,'' she said. ''A lot of people who
live like me, or practicing Muslims who respect that religion is a private
matter, have had it easier than those who think religion should be part of a
larger society.

Ms. Subuni said many say, '' 'I need to pray five times a day because my
religion says so.' '' But she added: ''Which employer will accept that? Or, 'My
child shouldn't take part in music class, because my religion questions this.'
O.K., then we have a problem.''

AS the minister for gender equality, she is particularly troubled at evidence
that young Muslim girls are wearing the veil. ''I would like to know what is
happening in our society that makes families want to put a veil'' on our
children, she said. ''Maybe we don't need a law. Maybe we need something else so
that people don't feel so insecure that they need to manifest their religion by
using their children.''

Such talk infuriates Sweden's Muslim groups, who say that Ms. Sabuni is unfairly
singling them out while avoiding pressing issues like unemployment. And, they
say, she has essentially betrayed her past.

''I'm happy that she's a foreigner, and I'm happy about the color of her skin,
but I think maybe she has lost the connection to the immigrant communities,''
said Helena Benaouda, chairwoman of the Muslim Council of Sweden, the country's
largest Muslim group. ''Maybe she has thought too much about herself and her
political career, and she should try to remember that she's not representing
just herself.''

But Ms. Sabuni said that she was indeed sympathetic and that she fully
understood that both sides -- Sweden, and its immigrants -- had to change. ''We
have a society that has failed to adapt to new times,'' she said. ''We don't
offer people their rights, but we are also unclear about their obligations. So
people end up in a kind of no man's land, where they are neither Swedes, nor
Turks nor Congolese.''

She said she would identify herself as ''Afro-Swedish, maybe.'' But, she added,
''I feel cosmopolitan. As long as I have my parents, my siblings, my family with
me, I think I could fit in almost anywhere.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: NYAMKO SABUNI

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Dean Cox for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); WOMEN (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); REFUGEES (89%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); POLITICS (76%); CHILDREN (74%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (74%);
RELIGION (74%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (74%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (74%); GRANDCHILDREN
(71%); MARRIAGE (55%) Immigration and Refugees; Women; Politics and Government;
Blacks

Sarah Lyall; Nyamko Sabuni

CITY: STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN (79%)

COUNTRY: SWEDEN (94%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); UNITED
STATES (79%)

REGION: Sweden; Congo (Formerly Zaire); Sweden

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Germans Push Europe on Holocaust

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 288 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Jan. 13


Germany wants to use its European Union presidency to push through legislation
that would make denying the Holocaust punishable by stiff prison sentences in
all 27 of the union's member states.

Germany's justice minister, Brigitte Zypries, said Thursday night that Germany's
commitment to combating racism and xenophobia -- and keeping the memory of the
Holocaust alive -- was both an enduring historical obligation and a present-day
political necessity.

''We have always said that it can't be the case that it should still be
acceptable in Europe to say the Holocaust never existed and that six million
Jews were never killed,'' she said. Under the German proposal, she said, those
who deny the Nazi slaughter of Jews during World War II could face up to three
years in prison if convicted.

Ms. Zypries said the proposal, which will be debated by the bloc's justice
ministers in the next six months, would also seek to criminalize racist
declarations that are an incitement to violence against a person or group. The
aim, she said, was to harmonize national legal systems in their approach to
combating racism and xenophobia.

Unifying the handling of hate crimes in countries with vastly different legal
cultures could prove difficult, legal analysts said. European leaders have been
unanimous in condemning those who deny the Holocaust, and they sharply
criticized the Iranian government for sponsoring a recent conference that sought
to cast doubt on it.

But the question of whether to criminalize such acts has divided Europe. Germany
sees a European Union law on denial as a moral imperative, but other countries,
like Britain, Italy and Denmark, have resisted common rules as infringing on
free speech and civil liberties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); HOLOCAUST (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
EUROPEAN UNION (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (86%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION LAW (78%); EU
PRESIDENCY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); WORLD WAR II (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(59%) Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Law and Legislation; Freedom of
Speech and Expression; Discrimination; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%) European Union

PERSON: BRIGITTE ZYPRIES (72%)

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); GERMANY (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%);
DENMARK (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Europe

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Revises Its Rules On Prosecution of Terrorists

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; THREATS AND RESPONSES; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


The Pentagon on Thursday unveiled its new courtroom rules for prosecuting
prisoners held as terrorists, allowing military tribunals to consider hearsay
evidence and testimony obtained through coercion, but not torture.

Pentagon officials said, however, that the new policy more closely resembled
courts-martial governed by the Uniform Code of Military Justice than the
previous procedures used to prosecute terrorist suspects.

Under legislation signed into law last year, the government is poised to restart
tribunals that the Supreme Court halted last summer. Pentagon officials said
military prosecutors had determined there was sufficient evidence to bring war
crimes charges against 60 to 80 of the 395 prisoners detained at the military
prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The Pentagon detailed the new procedures in a 238-page manual released Thursday.

The new procedures follow the guidelines Congress set down in the Military
Commissions Act late last year.

Representative Ike Skelton, the Missouri Democrat who became chairman of the
House Armed Services Committee this month when control of the House changed
hands, pledged to scrutinize the new procedures so that they did not ''run
afoul'' of the Constitution.

The new manual explicitly forbids military prosecutors from using evidence
obtained through torture. At the same time, it makes a distinction between
torture and coercion, allowing testimony that came as the result of coercive
techniques used by military and intelligence officials until late 2005, when
Congress passed a law banning cruel and inhumane treatment of prisoners.

In order for coerced testimony to be used in military commissions, a military
judge would have to determine that it was both reliable and relevant to the
case. The matter is particularly important because the Pentagon is planning for
the trials of 14 ''high value'' detainees, who until they were moved to
Guantanamo Bay in September were kept elsewhere in secret prisons run by the
Central Intelligence Agency.

The prisoners detained at those sites, including Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the
accused mastermind of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, are believed to
have been subjected to particularly harsh interrogation methods like ''water
boarding,'' which induces a feeling of drowning.

Daniel J. Dell'Orto, the Pentagon's principal deputy general counsel, told
reporters on Thursday that the new procedures followed the guidelines of the
Military Commissions Act and ensured that detainees receive, as called for by
international law, ''all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as
indispensable by civilized people.''

Pentagon officials said that none of the most significant prisoners would be
among the first group to stand trial before the military commissions.

''Those cases are going to have to be developed carefully, and it's going to
take some time, because they are extraordinarily complex,'' said Brig. Gen.
Thomas L. Hemingway, a Pentagon official who helped draft the new guidelines.

The Bush administration established the military commissions in the months after
the Sept. 11 attacks to prosecute ''unlawful combatants'' captured during
counterterrorism operations around the globe, many of them in Afghanistan.

Last summer, the Supreme Court struck down the commissions as unconstitutional,
forcing the White House and Congress to develop new guidelines.

Human rights groups on Thursday criticized the new procedures for straying from
the military's traditional rules for courts-martial. Among other things, the
rules allow too much leeway for government lawyers to keep defendants from
viewing classified evidence, they said.

''Classified sources and methods are protected,'' said Jennifer Daskal, a lawyer
at Human Rights Watch. ''This creates the possibility that the defense will not
learn the ways in which the evidence was obtained, which could have been through
coercive techniques like water boarding and sleep deprivation.''

Mr. Dell'Orto said that while defendants would not be allowed to see classified
evidence, defense lawyers would be given an unclassified summary of the
material.

There are currently 395 detainees held at Guantanamo Bay, but it is likely that
only a fraction of those will be prosecuted before military commissions. Even if
prisoners are not charged, officials said, the United States still has the right
to detain them indefinitely or hand them over to their native governments.

''It doesn't mean that they are not unlawful combatants. It doesn't mean that
they shouldn't be detained,'' said Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman.

Besides Mr. Mohammed, according to the government, the former C.I.A. detainees
currently at Guantanamo Bay include senior members of Al Qaeda believed to be
responsible for the bombing of the United States destroyer Cole in 2000 in Yemen
and the 1998 attacks on American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.

The prosecutors for the trials of those men will be a mix of military and
civilian lawyers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 24, 2007



CORRECTION: An article on Friday about the Pentagon's new rules for military
commissions to try prisoners held at Guantanamo, Cuba, on terrorism charges,
misstated the reasons cited by the Supreme Court when it struck down the Bush
administration's original plans for the commissions. The court ruled last year
in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld that the initial procedures established for the
commissions were unconstitutional.

An article on Friday about the Pentagon's new rules for military commissions to
try prisoners held at Guantanamo, Cuba, on terrorism charges, misstated the
reasons cited by the Supreme Court when it struck down the Bush administration's
original plans for the commissions. And a correction in this space yesterday
repeated the error. The court ruled last year in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld that the
initial procedures established for the commissions were unauthorized by federal
statute and violated international law. It did not rule that the commissions
themselves were unconstitutional.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (94%); MILITARY COURTS (93%); TERRORISM (92%);
EVIDENCE (91%); LEGISLATION (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); HEARSAY (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); PRISONS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY
POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SUPREME
COURTS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); WAR
CRIMES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAWYERS (74%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%);
JUDGES (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%) Terrorism; United States Armament and
Defense; Torture; Law and Legislation; Terrorism

PERSON: IKE SKELTON (57%) Mark Mazzetti

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ambush Kills an American Teaching Democracy to Iraqis

BYLINE: By DAMIEN CAVE; Khalid al-Ansary, Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi and Ahmad Fadam
contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Jan. 18


An American woman killed here on Wednesday when gunmen fired on her convoy of
vehicles was ambushed just minutes after leaving the headquarters of a prominent
Sunni Arab political party, where she had been teaching a class on democracy,
party members said Thursday.

They said the woman -- Andrea Parhamovich, 28, of Perry, Ohio -- left the
party's fortified compound in western Baghdad around 4 p.m., heading east to her
group's offices outside the Green Zone, when she and her armed guards came under
attack from all sides.

Les Campbell, Middle East and North Africa director for the National Democratic
Institute, which hired Ms. Parhamovich about three months ago, said that during
the fierce firefight, guards tried to escape, fought back, then called for
reinforcements from other private security contractors.

The attackers -- perhaps as many as 30 men, according to witness accounts passed
on to Mr. Campbell -- used heavy weapons, possibly rocket-propelled grenades,
destroying the armored sedan that Ms. Parhamovich was in and killing three of
her armed guards: a Croatian, a Hungarian and an Iraqi. Two other security
contractors were wounded. The attackers then scattered back into the
neighborhood.

Saleem Abdullah, a senior member of the Sunni political group, the Iraqi Islamic
Party, said that Ms. Parhamovich's group might have been chosen as a target when
it arrived. ''It seems that someone, when they saw her in the area, set up an
ambush,'' he said. ''That's what we think.''

Mr. Campbell described Ms. Parhamovich as a driven young woman, inspired by
politics and a desire to help Iraqis connect with their newly elected
government.

He said she joined the National Democratic Institute, a nonprofit organization
based in Washington that has worked in Iraq since 2003, after working for a few
months with a similar group in Baghdad.

''She was an idealistic person who saw an opportunity in Iraq to help, to work
with people in Iraq who were interested in democracy and human rights, which is
what she cared about,'' he said.

Mr. Abdullah emphasized that Yarmouk, the largely Sunni area where the attack
occurred, had become increasingly dangerous. It lies west of the Tigris River
where clashes between Sunni insurgents and Shiite militias have been
concentrated in recent months.

He said that even before the attack on Wednesday he had asked the American
military for more protection.

The attacks also underscored why American and Iraqi leaders have turned toward a
new military effort to retake Baghdad, the capital.

Unrelenting violence has kept civil and political development at bay here and in
other areas of Iraq, creating an environment in which guns and ambushes have
trumped blueprints and dialogue.

On Thursday, a car bomb exploded in central Baghdad around 8 a.m., killing four
people and wounding 15. Two other car bombings in Shiite areas east of the
capital left six people dead, and mortar attacks across the city killed five.

An additional 26 bodies were found throughout Baghdad.

In southern Dora, once a mixed district of the capital that the American
military cited as a success story as recently as the summer, three bomb
explosions in quick succession at a wholesale vegetable market killed at least
10 people and wounded 30.

Witnesses said the blasts occurred within minutes of one another, one at the
market entrance, a second in the middle and a third near the far end. It was
difficult, many people said, to distinguish parts of destroyed bodies from
smashed vegetables.

''They all are ordinary workers who are poor,'' said Walid al-Musawi, who works
at the market. ''They are just people looking for their daily bread. This guy
who died, his name is Hosham. He has six children. This guy who sells sweets,
who died today, lost a brother a few days ago. And now he died, too.''

Several people at the market said they feared what an expanded American military
operation would do to their neighborhood. Last summer, when American and Iraqi
troops locked down parts of Dora for days, leaving only one entrance and exit,
residents complained that it was nearly impossible to get enough food or get to
work.

One resident said the new security plan, which would bring more than 20,000
additional troops to Iraq, most of them to Baghdad, ''is going to be a disaster
for all Iraqis whether they are rich or poor'' because it was likely to keep
people from work.

On Thursday, details also emerged about an American operation in Dora on
Christmas morning that appears to have gone awry. Witnesses and relatives of Ali
Murad Jafar, 76, the uncle of the Iraqi ambassador to Romania, said American
soldiers raided Mr. Murad's home before dawn and shot him in the jaw after
discovering him and his wife awake.

''There was no electricity at that time, and my parents were terrified -- they
thought they were under attack by insurgents,'' said Ayad Ali, Mr. Murad's son.

He said his father had been taken to a hospital in the Green Zone, then sent to
another hospital in Baghdad, where he later died.

The American military did not respond to repeated phone and e-mail messages
seeking comment on the incident.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The site where a car bomb exploded yesterday in central Baghdad,
killing four people and wounding 15. (Photo by Ali al-Saadi/Agence France-Presse
-- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); WOMEN (78%); POLITICS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); RELIGION (73%); INVESTIGATION & SECURITY SERVICES (70%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Bombs and Explosives

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (83%)
National Democratic Institute

PERSON: Andrea Parhamovich; Les Campbell; Damien Cave

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); CROATIA (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Deadly Suicide Bomber Attack at Hotel in Pakistan's Capital

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 26


A suicide bomber blew himself up outside a Marriott hotel here on Friday
afternoon, killing himself and a security guard, the police and security
officials said. At least five other people were wounded.

No one immediately claimed responsibility.

The attack took place in an upscale neighborhood of the Pakistani capital
considered to be a high-security zone.

Many foreign visitors stay at the Marriott, and important government and private
functions are often held there. The prime minister and many of his cabinet
ministers, members of Parliament and diplomats live nearby.

The United States Embassy issued an advisory to American citizens in the
country.

''The embassy strongly advises all Americans to avoid the area, exercise
caution, and limit unnecessary travel,'' the statement read.

Officials and witnesses said the suicide bomber had tried to enter the hotel
through an entrance near the parking area.

''There is an emergency gate which is used by the employees of the hotel,''
Brig. Javed Iqbal Cheema, a retired officer who runs the National Crisis
Management agency, said in an interview at the blast site.

He said the bomber appeared to have planned to force his way through the
emergency gate.

''The guard, as a matter of fact, resisted entry into the gate and did not allow
him to get inside,'' he said, adding that when the bomber saw that he could not
enter, he detonated his bomb there. The bomber and the guard were killed.

''We don't know where he parked his car, but primarily he was on foot and trying
to make forced entry into the hotel,'' Brigadier Cheema said.

Officials here said the bomber's remains would be examined by forensic
investigators. He is believed to have been in his mid-20s, according to initial
reports.

The blast shattered the glass of several vehicles parked in the nearby parking
lot.

The police cordoned off the area, and security forces were put on high alert in
the city. Three hotel staff members were wounded and hospitalized. No hotel
guests were injured, according to a statement issued by the office of the
District Magistrate in Islamabad.

Pakistani officials said it was too early to try to determine who might be
behind the attack. Pakistan has experienced sporadic violence carried out by
local militants and groups linked to Al Qaeda since President Pervez Musharraf
allied himself with the United States in 2001 in the effort to curb terrorism.

International hotel chains like Marriott and Sheraton and branches of foreign
companies like KFC and McDonald's have been targets.

''One should not speculate whether it's a reprisal or a continuation of what is
going on in this country and region,'' Brigadier Cheema said.

The same view was echoed by Tariq Azim Khan, the minister of state for
information and broadcasting. ''It would be premature to judge the motives of
the suicide bomber,'' he said.

Rights Activist Disappears

  ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 26 (AP) -- A prominent human rights activist who
campaigned for the release of dozens of people said to be held by Pakistani
intelligence agencies disappeared Friday, his family and the police said.

The activist, Khalid Khawaja, chief coordinator of Defense of Human Rights,
disappeared from a residential area of Islamabad while on his way to a mosque
for morning prayers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUICIDE BOMBINGS (95%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
HOTELS & MOTELS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HOTEL CHAINS (89%); PARKING SPACES &
FACILITIES (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SERVICE WORKERS (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MAGISTRATES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (76%);
INTERVIEWS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); FORENSICS (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); AL-QAEDA (60%) Suicides and
Suicide Attempts; Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism

COMPANY: MARRIOTT INTERNATIONAL INC (92%)

ORGANIZATION: Marriott International Inc

TICKER: MAR (NASDAQ) (92%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS721110 HOTELS (EXCEPT CASINO HOTELS) & MOTELS (92%); SIC7011
HOTELS & MOTELS (92%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (56%) Salman Masood

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Pakistan; Islamabad (Pakistan)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

African Union Picks Ghanaian as Its Leader, in Snub to Sudan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia, Jan. 29


The African Union on Monday chose President John Kufuor of Ghana to lead the
53-member bloc. Because of the worsening violence in Darfur, the group turned
aside, for the second year, Sudan's effort to win the post.

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, opened the meeting, asking
the African leaders to end the deadlock created by Sudan's refusal to allow
United Nations peacekeepers into Darfur, the violence-plagued region in western
Sudan.

The Nobel laureate Desmond Tutu also sharply criticized Sudan on Monday, and an
aid group said it was leaving Darfur for safety reasons.

Sudanese leaders were adamant that they deserved the rotating chairmanship, but
international organizations opposed it, accusing Sudan's government of taking
part in the conflict in Darfur. Rebel leaders in the region have said they would
stop considering the current African Union peacekeeping mission as an honest
broker there if Sudan were selected.

''By consensus vote, President Kufuor of Ghana has been elected to the
presidency of the African Union,'' Alpha Oumar Konare, the African Union's chief
executive, told reporters in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa.

Sudan tried to obtain the post at last year's meeting, for which it was the
host, but African leaders selected the Congo Republic's president in a
compromise deal in which he would hold it for a year and then hand it over to
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan.

But the deal hinged on Sudan demonstrating progress in bringing peace to Darfur.
Instead of calming down, Darfur's violence in recent months has spilled into
neighboring Chad and the Central African Republic.

''African heads of states will have to stick to their word,'' Ali Sadiq, the
Sudanese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said Sunday, insisting that Mr. Bashir
should have the post.

More than 200,000 people have been killed and 2.5 million displaced in Darfur
since rebels took up arms against the central government in 2003. Sudan's
government is accused of retaliating indiscriminately against civilians and
supporting paramilitary groups called janjaweed that are blamed for some of the
worst atrocities in the conflict. Sudan's government denies the accusations.

The Sudanese government signed a peace agreement with one Darfur rebel faction
in May, but violence has worsened in the region. Sudan and Chad also have been
trading accusations of supporting each others' rebel groups.

Mr. Bashir opposes a United Nations Security Council resolution that calls for
22,000 United Nations peacekeepers to replace or absorb an African force. The
African Union has 7,000 peacekeepers struggling to end the fighting.

Mr. Ban, on his first visit to Africa since taking over from Kofi Annan on Jan.
1, held talks with Mr. Bashir that were ''useful and constructive,'' according
to a United Nations statement.

''I expressed my deep concerns over the continuing violence and deteriorating
human rights situation in Darfur, which afflicts millions of people,'' Mr. Ban's
statement said. ''I urged President al-Bashir, as I urge all parties, to cease
hostilities, as an essential foundation for a successful peace process, and
humanitarian access.''

Mr. Bashir agreed ''to facilitate such access, and expressed willingness to
cooperate with international efforts toward that end,'' Mr. Ban said.French
Group to Leave Darfur

PARIS, Jan. 29 (Reuters) -- A French aid group said Monday that it would suspend
its activities in Darfur because the situation there had become too dangerous.

Doctors of the World, which has provided medical help in Darfur since 2004, said
it was suspending its activities for an undetermined period of time.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Kufuor, Ghana's president, at the African Union meeting in
Addis Ababa yesterday. (Photo by Marco Longari/Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%);
NOBEL PRIZES (77%); AWARDS & PRIZES (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (77%); RELIGION (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Foreign Aid

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (94%); UNITED NATIONS (91%) African Union; United
Nations

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (77%) Ban Ki-Moon (Sec Gen); Desmond M (Archbishop) Tutu;
Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir; John A (Pres) Kufuor

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (96%); GHANA (96%); ETHIOPIA (93%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Ghana; Sudan; Africa

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poster of Hussein at Guantanamo Draws Detainee Complaints

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 433 words


Military officials have removed a poster of Saddam Hussein from the American
detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, after complaints from a detainee that
it was intended to intimidate the prisoners there.

Lawyers for the detainee said the 7-by-3-foot poster, in a small recreation area
for prisoners, featured images of Mr. Hussein being sentenced to death and a
heading in Arabic that stated, ''Because Saddam chose not to cooperate and not
to tell the truth, because he thought by lying he would get released, for that
reason he was executed.''

The chief military spokesman in Guantanamo, Cmdr. Robert Durand, said the
lawyers' description of the statement on the poster was inaccurate, but he
declined to give its exact wording.

''A recent poster showed Saddam Hussein's capture, court appearances and
sentencing,'' Commander Durand said in an e-mail message. ''The intent of this
poster was to show that the Iraqi people are making progress and have delivered
justice.''

Commander Durand said that the poster had been removed and that the military
regretted that the ''language of this poster appeared insensitive.''

Lawyers for the detainee who complained, David Hicks, an Australian who was
captured in Afghanistan in 2001, said news articles about Mr. Hussein's
execution were also displayed in the recreation area. Other articles described
the accidental decapitation of a Hussein co-defendant in a subsequent hanging.

''I have no doubt that those were put up for a particular reason,'' said Joshua
L. Dratel, one of Mr. Hicks's lawyers. ''For psychological warfare and for
mental torture and intimidation.''

Commander Durand said the articles had not been intended to intimidate
prisoners. ''The news photos that appear in the stories are neither graphic nor
sensational,'' he said. ''A BBC news article describing Saddam Hussein's
execution, with a photo of him prior to his hanging, was included in the camp
news.''

Since the camp's opening, American military officials have displayed posters
they created in Arabic and other languages that conveyed news events. Lawyers
for the detainees said they focused on the arrests of terrorism suspects and the
deaths of Iraqi and Afghan insurgents. Military officials described the posters
as balanced.

In the past, military officials barred lawyers for the prisoners from describing
outside events to them or giving them news articles.

The articles on Mr. Hussein were displayed under a new policy in which the
American military posts a weekly collection of news reports in recreation areas
around the prison, Commander Durand said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); SENTENCING (89%); MILITARY BASES (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); TERRORISM (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (79%);
INFORMATION WARFARE (79%); IRAQ WAR (79%); ARMED FORCES (79%); PRISONS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%); NAVIES (74%);
PHOTOJOURNALISM (70%) Terrorism; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Posters; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) David Rohde; Saddam Hussein; David Hicks; Robert T
(Lt Cmdr) Durand

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); IRAQ (93%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iraq; Australia; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: European Union Endorses Report On C.I.A. Planes

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 51 words


The European Parliament approved a report accusing Britain, Germany, Italy and
10 other European nations of turning a blind eye to C.I.A. flights transporting
terror suspects, some to countries where they could face torture. The final
report said allegations of secret prisons in Europe could not be proved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); APPROVALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (87%); TERRORISM (86%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (91%); EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT (91%) European Union; Central Intelligence Agency

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
GERMANY (73%)

REGION: Great Britain; Germany  ; Italy

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 21, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

COURT ENDORSES CURBS ON APPEAL BY U.S. DETAINEES

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


A divided federal appeals court on Tuesday upheld a new law stripping federal
judges of authority to review foreign prisoners' challenges to their detention
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The decision set the stage for a third trip to the Supreme Court for the
detainees, who will once again ask the justices to consider a complex issue that
tests the balance of power among the White House, Congress and the courts in the
murky context of the fight against international terrorism.

It also prompted some senior Democratic lawmakers, who have fought the Bush
administration on the matter before and who now hold sway in Congress, to vow
enactment of a law more favorable to the prisoners.

The Supreme Court previously ruled twice that federal statutes empowered the
courts to consider Guantanamo prisoners' habeas corpus petitions challenging the
grounds for their detention. In response to those rulings, Congress twice
rewrote law to limit the detainees' avenues of appeal. The most recent rewriting
was at issue in Tuesday's 2-to-1 decision.

That law, the Military Commissions Act of 2006, was signed by President Bush
last October. Its enactment followed the Supreme Court's rejection of his
administration's earlier arguments that the right of habeas corpus -- the
fundamental right, centuries old, to ask a judge for release from unjust
imprisonment -- did not apply to foreigners being held outside the United States
as enemy combatants.

The new law explicitly eliminated the federal courts' jurisdiction over habeas
challenges by such prisoners. It instead set up military panels to review the
justification of detention in individual cases, with limited right of appeal to
the courts afterward.

In its ruling Tuesday, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit found that the new law did not violate the constitutional
provision that bars the government from suspending habeas corpus except in
''cases of rebellion or invasion.'' Two of the three appeals court judges,
citing Supreme Court and other historical precedent, held that the right of
habeas corpus did not extend to foreign citizens detained outside the United
States.

The majority decision was written by Judge A. Raymond Randolph, whose two
earlier opinions on habeas corpus and Guantanamo prisoners had also favored the
Bush administration. Those opinions were reversed by the Supreme Court, but on
statutory grounds rather than constitutional ones.

The dissenting judge on Tuesday, Judith W. Rogers, said the new law did violate
the constitutional provision restricting the suspension of habeas corpus.

Administration officials welcomed the decision as a vindication of its position
on the rights of detainees, after years of its halting efforts to create a legal
process that would withstand tests in court.

''The decision,'' said Erik Ablin, a Justice Department spokesman, ''reaffirms
the validity of the framework that Congress established in the Military
Commissions Act permitting Guantanamo detainees to challenge their detention
through combatant status review tribunals with the opportunity for judicial
review before the D.C. Circuit.''

Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, said at his daily news briefing, ''The
court decided the position that we put forward.'' He declined to say more.

Lawyers representing the detainees vowed to seek a new review by the Supreme
Court.

Shayana Kadidal, a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
represents many of the detainees, said, ''This decision empowers the president
to do whatever he wishes to prisoners without any legal limitation as long as he
does it offshore.''

Mr. Kadidal said the ruling encouraged ''a contempt for international human
rights law'' and ''such notorious practices as extraordinary rendition'':
sending terrorism suspects abroad for interrogation, where, rights advocates
say, they may face torture.

Democrats now in control of Congress said they would move quickly on legislation
they recently introduced that would unambiguously give federal courts the right
to consider detainees' habeas petitions.

''The Military Commissions Act is a dangerous and misguided law that undercuts
our freedoms and assaults our Constitution by removing vital checks and balances
designed to prevent government overreaching and lawlessness,'' said Senator
Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who heads the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Last week Mr. Leahy joined a group of other Senate Democrats, including
Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, Russell D. Feingold of Wisconsin and Robert
Menendez of New Jersey, in introducing the legislation restoring habeas rights
for the Guantanamo prisoners. Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, the
Judiciary Committee's ranking Republican, also endorsed that measure last week,
and said Tuesday that he believed the dissent from the new appeals court
decision would ultimately prevail in the Supreme Court.

But other Republican lawmakers, including Senators John Cornyn of Texas and
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, both of whom also serve on the committee,
applauded the ruling.

The decision, Lakhdar Boumediene v. George W. Bush, involved a consolidation of
the cases of 63 detainees, all from foreign countries, who had sought review in
two federal district courts. One judge had ruled that she had the authority to
consider the cases, while another had ruled that he did not, and granted the
administration's motion to dismiss the inmates' habeas petitions.

Writing for the appeals court, Judge Randolph first turned to the statutory
issue. He said arguments put forward by the detainees' lawyers that the new law
was not meant to apply to the prisoners at Guantanamo Bay ''are creative but not
cogent.'' Congress, he said, clearly meant to keep the federal courts from
considering the detainees' cases.

Turning to the question of whether Congress had acted within the Constitution,
he said there had been no earlier cases in which a court had granted a habeas
corpus petition for a foreign national held at an overseas military base. The
Constitution, he said, ''does not confer rights on aliens without property or
presence within the United States.''

The opinion was also signed by Judge David B. Sentelle.

In her dissent, Judge Rogers said: ''Prior to the enactment of the Military
Commissions Act, the Supreme Court acknowledged that the detainees held at
Guantanamo had a statutory right to habeas corpus. The M.C.A. purports to
withdraw that right but does so in a manner that offends the constitutional
constraint on suspension.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPEALS (91%); HABEAS CORPUS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); MILITARY COURTS
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); JURISDICTION (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); PETITIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
LITIGATION (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); NAVIES (67%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(64%) Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts; Law and Legislation; Habeas Corpus;
Prisoners of War; Suits and Litigation; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: JUDITH W ROGERS (79%); A RAYMOND RANDOLPH (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (77%)
Stephen Labaton; Judith W (Judge) Rogers; A Raymond (Judge) Randolph; George W
(Pres) Bush; Arlen (Sen) Specter

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Romania Finds No Proof of C.I.A. Prisons

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 188 words

DATELINE: BUCHAREST, Romania, Feb. 21


The Romanian government has found no proof that the Central Intelligence Agency
set up secret detention facilities in Romania or used Romanian airspace to fly
terrorism suspects across Europe, a parliamentary commission investigating the
flights said on Wednesday.

Last week, the European Parliament said European governments and secret services
had accepted and concealed secret American flights carrying detainees across the
Continent. Dick Marty, a Swiss senator who conducted an inquiry on the transfer
issue on behalf of the Council of Europe, said last year that Romania and
Poland, staunch allies of the United States, had run covert detention facilities
for the agency.

But Norica Nicolai, the head of Romania's senate commission, told reporters that
a yearlong inquiry had ''found no solid argument to make us believe that the
C.I.A. was running illegal transports of prisoners.''

Ms. Nicolai said the commission had studied 43 flights suspected of carrying
detainees and investigated several Romanian air bases deemed to be stopovers or
secret rendition centers in reports by nongovernmental organizations and news
media.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (88%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (69%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%);
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (58%); COUNCIL OF EUROPE (57%) Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA)

CITY: BUCHAREST, ROMANIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ROMANIA (99%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (92%)

REGION: Romania

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinian Killed in Israeli Sweep of West Bank City

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 26


Israeli troops searched for militants and weapons in the West Bank city of
Nablus for a third day Monday, going door to door and periodically clashing with
gunmen and stone-throwing youths.

One Palestinian man was killed and his son was wounded, Palestinians said, the
first fatality since Israel began the operation on Saturday through the warren
of homes and shops in the casbah area of central Nablus.

The Israeli troops, in dozens of jeeps and armored vehicles, have placed the
neighborhood under curfew and blocked off the surrounding streets with concrete
blocks while they conducted an open-ended search.

The Israeli operation has kept tens of thousands of residents confined to their
homes.

''The operation will carry on until we achieve our main mission,'' said Brig.
Gen. Yair Golan, the commander of forces in the city.

Over the past year, more attempted attacks against Israel have originated in
Nablus than in any other West Bank city, the general said.

The Israeli military said Monday that soldiers had surrounded a house after they
received reports that gunmen were inside.

When two men from the house were seen climbing onto the roof, the soldiers
fired, killing one and wounding the other, the military said.

Palestinian witnesses and hospital officials identified the dead man as Anan
al-Tibi, who was in his 40s, and said the man who was wounded was his son.

Palestinian medical workers said Israeli troops had stationed themselves outside
the city's three main hospitals and were checking ambulances when they arrive to
see if they contained suspected militants.

''The doctors keep asking the army to move back from the hospital entrance,''
said Ran Goldstein, a spokesman for Physicians for Human Rights/Israel, a group
that is monitoring events in Nablus. ''The soldiers might move 10 meters away,
but they keep coming back.''

Since Saturday, the Israelis say they have made several arrests and uncovered
two bomb-making laboratories. Nablus, the largest city in the West Bank, has
been a center for militants since the Palestinian uprising began more than six
years ago.

On Sunday, the Israeli military interrupted Palestinian radio and television
broadcasts to announce the names of seven wanted militants, and warned residents
in the area not to hide them.

On Monday, Israeli authorities also said that they had arrested two Palestinian
teenagers in connection with the stabbing death of a Jewish settler on Sunday
night near the West Bank settlement of Bat Ayin, several miles from Hebron, and
that the two confessed. The Israeli settler, Erez Levanon, frequently walked
into the woods near his home to pray and meditate, neighbors said.

Also on Monday, the Hamas political leader in exile, Khaled Meshal, arrived in
Moscow and praised Russia for its stance on the boycott in Western assistance to
the Palestinian government, which is led by Hamas.

''We value Russia's position toward lifting the blockade from which the
Palestinian people suffer,'' said Mr. Meshal, who is based in Syria, according
to Russia's RIA news agency.

Russia is part of the so-called quartet of Middle East mediators, which also
includes the United States, the European Union and the United Nations.

The group has demanded that the Palestinian government recognize Israel,
renounce violence and accept previous agreements.

However, unlike the United States and the European Union, which have labeled
Hamas a terrorist group and have refused to deal with it, Russia maintains ties
with the group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Israeli soldier stood guard early yesterday in Nablus, West
Bank, during the army's third day of weapons searches and curfews in the city.
(Photo by Emilio Morenatti/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (93%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); CITY LIFE (89%); HAMAS
(89%); HOSPITALS (87%); ARMIES (78%); HOMICIDE (77%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (76%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); CURFEW (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); BROADCASTING
INDUSTRY (60%) Palestinians

PERSON: Greg Myre; Yair (Brig Gen) Golan

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(92%)

REGION: Israel; Nablus (West Bank); West Bank; Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Muslims View Ruling as Another Defeat

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, Feb. 26


The ruling in The Hague on Monday that Serbia had failed to prevent genocide in
Bosnia greatly disappointed relatives of the mainly Muslim victims of the
conflict.

For them, as well as the members of the Bosnian government who are not Serbs,
the verdict marked the second setback in a year, as they worked to pin on the
Serbian government and its security forces the ultimate responsibility for
fueling plans by nationalists to seize most of Bosnia and integrate it into a
Greater Serbia. That war, from 1992 to 1995, cost 100,000 lives.

The first setback came in March 2006, at the death of Slobodan Milosevic,
Serbia's former president, just weeks before the trial's expected conclusion.
His death forestalled a decision on whether Mr. Milosevic was guilty of
committing war crimes and possibly genocide. The Milosevic trial pointed to the
substantial involvement of the Serbian state in helping to finance, equip and
plan the war in Bosnia.

The ruling on Monday at the International Court of Justice found a clear link
between Serbia and the Bosnian Serb military. According to the court, Serbia had
been in a position to stop the genocide of close to 8,000 Muslim men and boys at
Srebrenica, an enclave supposedly guarded by the United Nations in eastern
Bosnia.

But since the court stopped short of finding the state responsible for that
genocide, it gave Serbian politicians the chance to claim some kind of victory.

The Serbian prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, said the court had ''acquitted
Serbia of a serious charge that it had committed genocide.'' Still, he said it
was necessary to investigate war crimes to allow for reconciliation.

Krstan Simic, a senior politician in Bosnia's Serb republic, the entity carved
out by Serbian nationalists in the war, also welcomed the decision. ''I'm
pleased to say that arguments show that the judges of the International Court of
Justice were taking into account real facts,'' Mr. Simic told journalists.

President Boris Tadic of Serbia also noted that the court had not charged
genocide, but he urged his Parliament to pass a motion condemning the Srebrenica
massacre.

Legal analysts have said the threshold for proving genocide is high under the
1948 United Nations Convention on Genocide, making it necessary to prove that
the Serbian government intended to kill people based on their nationality,
ethnicity or religious belief, and not merely to support the Bosnian Serb
military.

But that standard was lost on much of Bosnia's Muslim leadership, as well as
relatives of those killed at the hands of Serbian forces. ''I am speechless,''
said Fadila Efendic, whose son and husband were killed in Srebrenica.

''We know that Serbia was directly involved,'' she told The Associated Press.
''We saw Serbian troops shell us and kill our sons and husbands. We saw them
commit genocide here.''

Haris Silajdzic, Bosnia's wartime prime minister, who is the Bosnian Muslim
member of the country's three-man presidency, was among the first Bosnian
politicians to criticize the verdict.

''It's clear that the judgment is incomplete,'' Mr. Silajdzic said. ''I regret
that Serbia and Montenegro were not found guilty of genocide in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, or even of complicity in genocide.''

The Croat member of the presidency, Zeljko Komsic, said he was shocked that the
court had been unable to find Serbia guilty of genocide.

''We must respect the court's ruling, but I know what I will teach my
children,'' he told reporters in Sarajevo.

A spokesman for the advocacy group Human Rights Watch called the verdict a
''mixed judgment.''

''We believe that there was plenty of evidence linking Serbia with serious
crimes,'' said Richard Dicker, the director of the group's international justice
program. ''In that context it was disappointing, but that disappointment should
not obscure other aspects of the significance of this judgment.''

He added: ''The court did not find direct involvement in the act of genocide by
Serbia, which is a very different issue from whether or not Serbia supported the
Bosnian Serbs. The decision should in no way take away from that fact.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Women from Srebrenica, Bosnia, reacted yesterday in Tuzla to the
ruling on genocide. The photos are of some of those killed or missing in Bosnia.
(Photo by Damir Sagolj/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); POLITICS (74%);
MEN (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); ACQUITTAL (72%); ARMED FORCES (67%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%) United Nations; International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Vojislav (Prime Min) Kostunica; Boris (Pres) Tadic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%);
NETHERLANDS (94%); SLOVENIA (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Bosnia and
Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Judge Finds Padilla Competent To Face Trial

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Feb. 28


A federal judge found Jose Padilla competent to stand trial on terrorism
conspiracy charges Wednesday, granting a significant victory to the government
in the high-profile criminal case of a United States citizen who was initially
designated an ''enemy combatant'' and held without charges.

After three and a half days of an intensely argued hearing, Judge Marcia G.
Cooke of Federal District Court rejected the defense lawyers' request that Mr.
Padilla be sent to a hospital for psychiatric treatment so that he could be
''healed'' from what they said was post-traumatic stress disorder caused during
his three years and eight months in military detention.

''This defendant clearly has the capacity to assist his attorneys,'' Judge Cooke
said, adding that Mr. Padilla's case was ''unique'' and that ''he understands
that.''

Judge Cooke, who allowed limited testimony from brig officials during the
competency hearing, said that her ruling should not be construed as a finding on
Mr. Padilla's claims of mistreatment during his detention and interrogations at
a military brig in South Carolina.

''Those claims are for another day,'' she said, referring to another pending
motion by Mr. Padilla that the charges against him be dismissed because of
''outrageous government conduct.''

The threshold for legal competency is low, requiring a criminal defendant to
have the capacity, on a basic level, both to understand the proceedings and to
communicate with his lawyers. Most incompetency claims in federal court are
denied, said Christopher Slobogin, an expert in law and psychiatry at the
University of Florida, and most defendants found incompetent are clearly
psychotic.

Mr. Padilla is not. Throughout the competency hearing, Mr. Padilla, wearing a
tan prison jumpsuit and wire-rimmed glasses, appeared alert. When the brig
officials testified Monday, he dropped his head and ''hunkered down,'' as one of
his lawyers described it, but at all others times he sat erectly and calmly,
without displaying the tics and grimaces that his lawyers described as
manifestations of his disorder.

Judge Cooke remarked on Mr. Padilla's attentiveness in court and noted that
''everyone discussed that Mr. Padilla is polite almost to a fault.''

His comportment, Mr. Padilla's lawyers argued, is not the problem. Rather, they
said, the trauma of his interrogations -- at least 87 videotaped interrogations
have been turned over to them, indicating a substantial amount of questioning --
had rendered him incapable to assist in his own defense. He refuses, they said,
to discuss the facts of his cases, insisting that he has already told them
everything when, they said, he has told them nothing.

Before she ruled this afternoon, Judge Cooke asked the government about that.
''If the defendant refuses to discuss vast sections of his case, is that in and
of itself not inability to assist counsel?'' she said.

But prosecutors maintained that Mr. Padilla was capable of consulting with his
lawyers and that any failure to do so was willful. John C. Shipley, an assistant
United States attorney, said that Mr. Padilla was a principal source of
information for his lawyers' accusations of mistreatment in military detention.

''It doesn't make sense that if the root of the defendant's hesitancy to talk''
was his treatment in the brig, Mr. Shipley said, that the brig would be the only
thing he discussed with his lawyers.

Mr. Padilla's lawyers said that they and their mental health experts only slowly
elicited information about his time in military detention, largely by asking him
yes and no questions.

The defense lawyers also said that Mr. Padilla opposed their efforts to have him
found incompetent to stand trial, which they said was further evidence of his
irrationality. He would rather spend his life in prison than spend a few months
in a psychiatric hospital, they said.

With a trial scheduled for mid-April, Mr. Padilla and two other defendants are
accused of participating in a ''North American support cell'' that provided
money, goods and recruits abroad to assist ''global jihad.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); JUDGES (91%); LITIGATION (90%); CONSPIRACY (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); MENTAL ILLNESS
(89%); POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (89%); PSYCHIATRY (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%);
VERDICTS (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (75%); PRISONS (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (70%)
Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Decisions and Verdicts; Mental Health and
Disorders  ; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Deborah Sontag; Jose (Abdullah Al-Muhajir) Padilla; Marcia G (Judge)
Cooke

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 2, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Australian Is Charged In Terror Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 320 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


The Bush administration filed charges Thursday against an Australian man
captured in Afghanistan after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and held since
without trial, the first terrorism suspect to face prosecution under a new
system of military tribunals.

The Australian, David Hicks, a 31-year-old former kangaroo skinner now held at
the Guantanamo Bay military prison, was charged with providing material support
for terrorism and could face life imprisonment if convicted. Court challenges
are certain before any trial.

Mr. Hicks's case could well become the one that opponents of the new military
tribunal system use to challenge the system at the Supreme Court level.

President Bush and Congress established the new legal system last fall.
Lawmakers set up the tribunals after the Supreme Court ruled that an older
version established by Mr. Bush was unconstitutional because it lacked
Congress's blessing and violated international agreements.

An estimated 385 detainees remain at the Guantanamo prison. None of the men held
there have gone to trial.

Mr. Hicks was among 10 detainees who had been charged with crimes under the law
that the court struck down. He was then charged with conspiracy, attempted
murder and aiding the enemy.

On Thursday, Susan Crawford, the head of the military commissions, formally
charged Mr. Hicks only with providing material support for terrorism.

The Pentagon announcement did not explain why the charge of attempted murder was
dropped. But a package of talking points written for officials to answer
questions on the announcement suggested that Ms. Crawford did not believe that
the evidence warranted it.

Mr. Hicks's Pentagon-appointed lawyer, Maj. Michael Mori of the Marines, said in
Australia that the charge of providing support for terrorism was a fabrication
that had not previously existed under the laws of war, and he said Australian
officials should not accept it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LAW OF WAR (78%); CONSPIRACY
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
NAVIES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); MURDER (58%)
United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Terrorism; United States
International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%) David Hicks; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AUSTRALIA (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Australia; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Afghan Policy Built on Pipe Dreams

BYLINE: By RORY STEWART.

Rory Stewart's latest book is the ''The Prince of the Marshes and Other
Occupational Hazards of a Year in Iraq.'' He runs the Turquoise Mountain
Foundation in Kabul and is a guest columnist this month.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 728 words


The international community's policy in Afghanistan is based on the claim that
Afghans are willing partners in the creation of a liberal democratic state.
Senator John McCain finished a recent speech on Afghanistan by saying,
''Billions of people around the world now embrace the ideals of political,
economic and social liberty, conceived in the West, as their own.''

In Afghanistan in January, Tony Blair thanked Afghans by saying ''we're all in
this together'' and placing them in ''the group of people who want to live in
peace and harmony with each other, whatever your race or your background or your
religion.''

Such language is inaccurate, misleading and dangerous.

Afghans, like Americans, do not want to be abducted and tortured. They want a
say in who governs them, and they want to feed their families. But reducing
their needs to broad concepts like ''human rights,'' ''democracy'' and
''development'' is unhelpful.

For many Afghans, sharia law is central. Others welcome freedom from torture,
but not free media or freedom of religion; majority rule, but not minority
rights; full employment, but not free-market reforms. ''Warlords'' retain
considerable power. Millions believe that alcohol should be forbidden and
apostates killed, that women should be allowed in public only in burqas. Many
Pusthu clearly prefer the Taliban to foreign troops.

Yet senior officials with long experience with Afghanistan often deny this
reality. They insist that Taliban fighters have next to no local support and are
purely Pakistani agents. The U.N. argues that ''warlords'' have little power and
that the tribal areas can rapidly be brought under central control. The British
defense secretary predicted last summer that British troops in Helmand Province
could return ''without a bullet fired.'' Afghan cabinet ministers insist that
narcotics growth and corruption can be ended and the economy can wean itself off
foreign aid in five years. None of this is true. And most of them half-know it.

It is not only politicians who misrepresent the facts. Nonprofit groups endorse
the fashionable jargon of state-building and civil society, partly to win
grants. Military officers are reluctant to admit their mission is impossible.
Journalists were initially surprisingly optimistic about transforming
Afghanistan. No one wants to seem to endorse a status quo dominated by the
Taliban and drugs. Humankind cannot bear very much reality, particularly in
Afghanistan.

Does it matter? Most people see our misrepresentations as an unappealing but
necessary part of international politics. The problem is that we act on the
basis of our own lies. British soldiers were killed because they were not
prepared for the Helmand insurgency. In the same province, the coalition
recommended a Western-friendly technocrat as governor; he was so isolated and
threatened he could barely leave his office. Hundreds of millions of dollars
invested in anticorruption efforts, and the police and the counternarcotics
ministry, has been wasted on Afghans with no interest in our missions. Other
programs are perceived as a threat to local culture and have bred anger and
resentment.

Still others have raised expectations we cannot fulfill, betraying our friends.
I experienced this in Iraq, where I encouraged two friends to start gender and
civil society programs; we were unable to protect them, and both were killed.
Even when we fail, instead of recognizing the errors of the initial assessment
and the mission, we blame problems in implementation and repeat false and
illogical claims in order to acquire more money and troops.

The time has come to be honest about the limits of our power and the Afghan
reality. This is not to counsel despair. There is no fighting in the streets of
Kabul, the Hazara in the center of the country are more secure and prosperous
than at almost any time in their history, and the economy grew last year by 18
percent. These are major achievements. With luck and the right kind of
international support, Afghanistan can become more humane, prosperous and
stable.

But progress will be slow. Real change can come only from within, and we have
less power in Afghanistan than we claim. We must speak truthfully about this
situation. Our lies betray Afghans and ultimately ourselves. And the cost in
lives, opportunities and reputation is unbearable.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); LIBERALISM
(90%); POLITICS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); ARMED FORCES (86%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RELIGION (74%); FREEDOM OF
RELIGION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); JOURNALISM (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (68%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (68%); CORRUPTION (67%);
GRANTS & GIFTS (50%) Politics and Government; United States International
Relations

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (73%); TONY BLAIR (56%) Rory Stewart

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Aid Workers With Guns

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEMONIER, Djibouti


The U.S. has built a little-known military base here that represents one of our
best strategies to fight terrorism in the coming years: The aim is to build
things rather than blow them up.

This base in Africa, established in 2003, sits at the entrance to the Red Sea in
the small Muslim country of Djibouti, next to Somalia. Security is as tight as
the sun is hot, with lots of bomb shelters, but the most apparent threats are
distinctly, well, African.

''We've got two hyenas out there,'' said Cmdr. Darryl Centanni of the Navy,
executive officer of Camp Lemonier, pointing to a jogging trail on which troops
were running through the semidesert. ''So the running gets pretty interesting.''

He added that a pack of wild dogs also speeds up joggers but that the dogs
mostly get food by catching fish in the sea. (I'm not sure I trust military
intelligence on that one.)

After 9/11, the focus of America's response to terrorism has been mostly on
using military force to destroy possible threats in places like Iraq and
intimidate just about everyone. The ethos was borrowed from the ancient Romans:
''Oderint, dum metuant'' -- ''Let them hate, so long as they fear.''

Yet all in all, that strategy has backfired catastrophically, particularly in
Iraq, and turned us into Al Qaeda's best recruiter.

So that's why the softer touch in Centcom's strategy here is so welcome. It aims
to help bring stability to northeastern Africa and to address humanitarian needs
-- knowing that humanitarian involvement will make us safer as well.

''The U.S. started to realize that there's more to counterterrorism than
capture-kill kinetics,'' said Capt. Patrick Myers of the Navy, director of plans
and policy here. ''Our mission is 95 percent at least civil affairs.  It's
trying to get at the root causes of why people want to take on the U.S.''

One humanitarian mission for which the U.S. military is superbly prepared is
responding to natural disasters. While the U.S. has spent vast sums broadcasting
propaganda to the Muslim world, the two most successful efforts at winning good
will both involved the military. One was the dispatch of soldiers to help
Indonesia after the 2004 tsunami, and the other was the use of U.S. forces to
help Pakistan after the Kashmir earthquake.

The 1,800 troops here do serve a traditional military purpose, for the base was
used to support operations against terrorists in Somalia recently and is
available to reach Sudan, Yemen or other hot spots. But the forces here spend
much of their time drilling wells or building hospitals; they rushed to respond
when a building collapsed in Kenya and when a passenger ferry capsized in
Djibouti.

Rear Adm. James Hart, commander of the task force at Camp Lemonier, suggested
that if people in nearby countries feel they have opportunities to improve their
lives, then ''the chance of extremism being welcomed greatly, if not completely,
diminishes.''

The U.S. announced last month that it would form a new Africa Command, aimed
partly at blocking the rise of ungoverned spaces that nurture terrorism. The new
command offers tremendous humanitarian potential as well, for in some poor
countries the most useful ''aid workers'' are the ones in camouflage carrying
guns.

In the Central African Republic in September I visited a town with a lovely new
hospital built as a foreign aid project. But the hospital was an empty shell,
gutted by militias rampaging through the area. In places like that, there's no
point in building schools or clinics unless you also help with security.

Some of the most successful aid projects in Africa have been the dispatch of
armed peacekeepers to Mozambique and British troops to Sierra Leone. In both
places, troops brought what the besieged population most desperately needed --
order -- and laid the groundwork for recovery. We should be far more aggressive
about dispatching small numbers of troops to impose a no-fly zone over Darfur or
to destroy Sudanese militias that invade Chad and the Central African Republic.

We can also do far more to train armies in Africa. The deal we offer African
presidents should be along these lines: You run a country cleanly and tolerate
dissent, and we'll help ensure that no brutal rebel force comes out of the
jungle to create chaos and overthrow you.

Helping fragile countries with security is just as important as helping them
with education and medical care. So let's hope that this new base in Africa is
the start of a broad new policy that doesn't aim to make us hated or feared, but
respected.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY BASES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); DISASTER RELIEF (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (86%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); RELIGION (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); MAMMALS (75%); NATURAL
DISASTERS (72%); EXECUTIVES (69%); WALKING & JOGGING (69%); INDIAN OCEAN TSUNAMI
(68%); TSUNAMIS (64%) United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Islam; Terrorism; Military
Bases and Installations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%); US NAVY (57%)

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

CITY: TAMPA, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (92%); RED SEA (92%); KASHMIR (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFRICA (94%); DJIBOUTI (94%); SOMALIA (94%); IRAQ
(92%); ASIA (79%); YEMEN (79%); SUDAN (79%); INDONESIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Africa; Djibouti; Somalia; Africa

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Report to Fault Wide Use Of Special Subpoenas by F.B.I.

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and ERIC LIPTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


The Justice Department's inspector general has prepared a scathing report
criticizing how the F.B.I. uses a form of administrative subpoena to obtain
thousands of telephone, business and financial records without prior judicial
approval.

The report, expected to be issued on Friday, says that the bureau lacks
sufficient controls to make sure the subpoenas, which do not require a judge's
prior approval, are properly issued and that it does not follow even some of the
rules it does have.

Under the USA Patriot Act, the bureau each year has issued more than 20,000 of
the national security letters, as the demands for information are known. The
report is said to conclude that the program lacks effective management,
monitoring and reporting procedures, officials who have been briefed on its
contents said.

Details of the report emerged on Thursday as Attorney General Alberto R.
Gonzales and other officials struggled to tamp down a Congressional uproar over
another issue, the ousters of eight United States attorneys.

Mr. Gonzales told Democratic and Republican senators that the Justice Department
would drop its opposition to a change in a one-year-old rule for replacing
federal prosecutors, senators and Justice Department officials said.

Mr. Gonzales offered the concession at a private meeting on Capitol Hill with
members of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Mr. Gonzales also agreed to let the
panel question Justice Department officials involved in the removals,
Congressional aides said. The officials would testify voluntarily without
subpoena.

Mr. Gonzales's willingness to give in to Senate demands appeared to underscore
how the Justice Department had been put on the defensive by the criticism over
the prosecutors' ousters.

The use of national security letters since the September 2001 attacks has been a
hotly debated domestic intelligence issue. They were once used only in espionage
and terrorism cases, and then only against people suspected as agents of a
foreign power.

With the passage of the Patriot Act, their use was greatly expanded and was
allowed against Americans who were subjects of any investigation. The law also
allowed other agencies like the Homeland Security Department to issue the
letters.

The letters have proved contentious in part because unlike search warrants, they
are issued without prior judicial approval and require only the approval of the
agent in charge of a local F.B.I. office. A Supreme Court ruling in 2004 forced
revisions of the Patriot Act to permit greater judicial review, without
requiring advance authorization.

As problems for the Justice Department appeared to be piling up, criticism of
Mr. Gonzales seemed to grow more biting as Republicans senators complained about
Mr. Gonzales, some because of a letter in USA Today in which he said he had lost
confidence in the ousted prosecutors and regarded the question an ''overblown
personnel matter.''

Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, senior Republican on the judiciary panel,
said in a telephone interview that those comments were ''extraordinarily
insensitive'' and that the prosecutors were ''professionals who are going to
have a cloud over them which could last a lifetime.''

''I have been trying to hold down the rhetoric and try to deal with this on a
factual and analytical basis, and his letter was volcanic,'' Mr. Specter said.
''We don't need that,'' he added.

Earlier at the Judiciary Committee business meeting, Mr. Specter also had harsh
words for Mr. Gonzales, saying, ''One day, there will be a new attorney general,
maybe sooner rather than later.''

Mr. Specter said later his remark did not indicate that Mr. Gonzales had any
intention of stepping down.

Other Republican senators expressed strong criticism of the removals and
handling by Mr. Gonzales's aides. Senator John Ensign, Republican of Nevada, was
quoted by The Las Vegas Review-Journal as saying the prosecutors' removals had
''been completely mishandled.''

The United States attorney in Nevada, Daniel G. Bogden, was one of the eight
dismissed without explanation until he was told by a senior Justice Department
officials that he was being replaced to make room for other appointees. Mr.
Ensign said the department fired Mr. Bogden over his objections. Mr. Ensign said
last month that he was told that the change was for ''performance reasons,'' but
said he was surprised when a Justice Department official testified at a House
hearing on Tuesday that Mr. Bogden's performance had no serious lapses.

Even staunch Republican defenders of the department expressed criticism. One
ally was Senator Jon Kyl of Arizona, where Paul K. Charlton was among those
dismissed.

''Some people's reputations are going to suffer needlessly,'' Mr. Kyl said.
''Hopefully, we can get to the point where we say, 'These people did a great
job.'''

The withdrawal of objections to changing the rules for the prosecutors appears
to assure passage of a measure to restore rules changed last March, when the
attorney general was given authority to appoint replacement United States
attorneys indefinitely, several senators said.

''The administration has withdrawn its objections to my legislation,'' the
sponsor of the bill, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said. She
was one of the senators who met with Mr. Gonzales. Others were Mr. Specter,
Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the
chairman of the Judiciary Committee.

Ms. Feinstein said: ''My concerns have been that the firing of people with
strong performance reviews all at one time, a number of whom were involved in
corruption cases, sends an adverse signal to the rest of the U.S. attorneys, as
well as to the general public. They may be hired by the president, but they
serve the people and they should not be subjected to political pressure.''

The bill would let the attorney general appoint a temporary replacement for 120
days. If the Senate confirms no one after that time, the appointment of an
interim United States attorney would be left to a federal district judge.

Brian Roehrkasse, a Justice Department spokesman, said Thursday night: ''The
department stands by the decision to remove the U.S. attorneys. As we have
acknowledged in hindsight, we should have provided the U.S. attorneys with
specific reasons that led to their dismissal that would have help to avoid the
rampant misinformation and wild speculation that currently exits.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 12, 2007



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Friday
about a report by the Justice Department's inspector general critical of the
F.B.I.'s use of administrative subpoenas misspelled the surname of the Justice
Department's spokesman, who defended the removal of eight United States
attorneys, another problem for the department. He is Brian Roehrkasse, not
Roehrkass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUBPOENAS (94%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (93%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LAWYERS
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); APPROVALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); SEARCH
WARRANTS (77%); ESPIONAGE (75%); LEGISLATION (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (72%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (72%); INTERVIEWS (61%);
JUDICIAL REVIEW (58%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and Legislation;
United States Attorneys; Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; Appointments
and Executive Changes; Terrorism; Privacy; Surveillance of Citizens by
Government; Telephones and Telecommunications; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(94%) Justice Department; Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%); ARLEN SPECTER (55%) David Johnston; Eric Lipton;
Alberto R (Atty Gen) Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

One Bullet Away From What?

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD: WONDERING; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1445 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


INSIDE Washington, the frustration of doing business with Pakistan's president,
Gen. Pervez Musharraf, is matched only by the fear of living life without him.

For years, the notion that Mr. Musharraf is all that stands between Washington
and a group of nuclear-armed mullahs has dictated just how far the White House
feels it can push him to root out Al Qaeda and Taliban operatives who enjoy a
relatively safe existence in Pakistan.

The specter of Islamic radicals overthrowing Mr. Musharraf has also limited the
Bush administration's policy options, taking off the table any ideas about
American military strikes against a resurgent Al Qaeda, which has camps in
Pakistani tribal areas.

But just how fragile is Mr. Musharraf's hold on power? And might the United
States have more leverage than it believes?

The question of how to handle Mr. Musharraf is critical at a time when
intelligence officials widely agree that the Taliban is expanding its reach in
Pakistan, gradually spreading from remote areas into more settled regions of the
country.

The fear within Washington that Islamic extremism has become a dominant force in
Pakistan has been stoked in part by Mr. Musharraf himself. Some analysts say his
warnings are used to maintain a steady flow of American aid and keep at bay
demands from Washington for democratic reforms. He often invokes the dangers of
Islamic radicalism when meeting American officials in Washington and Islamabad,
and his narrow escape in two assassination attempts is frequently cited by
President Bush as evidence of his tenuous grip on power.

While the Islamists would surely take power in any way possible, an examination
of polling data and recent election results -- however suspect in a less than
democratic country -- provides little evidence that Islamists have enough
support to take over the country. If anything, they would likely control only
select areas.

The last time Pakistan went to the polls in 2002, religious political parties
received just 11 percent of the vote, compared with more than 28 percent won by
the secular party led by Benazir Bhutto, the former prime minister.

And that election may have even been a high-water mark for the Islamists, who
were capitalizing on surging anti-American sentiment after the invasion of
Afghanistan in 2001. Even though the Iraq war has also inflamed anti-Western
attitudes, these sentiments do not seem to have translated into electoral gains
for Islamist parties.

Islamist politicians received a drubbing in local elections in 2005, gaining
less support than expected in their power base in the tribal areas. In
September, a poll by the International Republican Institute, a respected
organization affiliated with the Republican Party that helps build democratic
institutions in foreign countries, found that just 5.2 percent of respondents
would vote for the main religious party, Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal, in national
parliamentary elections.

Although the poll found that this party was the most popular in Baluchistan, the
southwestern province where Taliban support is strong, Islamist leaders lagged
far behind both Mr. Musharraf and Ms. Bhutto, as well as another former prime
minister, Nawaz Sharif. It is also thought to be unlikely that a successful
attempt on Mr. Musharraf's life would mean wholesale changes to the power
structure of Pakistani politics.

For decades, the military has been the most dominant institution in Pakistan. If
Mr. Musharraf were to fall to an assassin's bullet, American diplomatic and
intelligence officials say, it is unlikely that there would be mass uprisings in
Lahore and Karachi, or that a religious leader in the Taliban mold would rise to
power.

''I am not particularly worried about an extremist government coming to power
and getting hold of nuclear weapons,'' said Robert Richer, who was associate
director of operations in 2004 and 2005 for the Central Intelligence Agency.
''If something happened to Musharraf tomorrow, another general would step in.''

Based on the succession plan, the vice chief of the army, Gen. Ahsan Saleem
Hyat, would take over as the leader of the army and Mohammedmian Soomro, an
ex-banker, would become president.

General Hyat, who is secular like Mr. Musharraf, would hold the real power. But
it is unclear whether General Hyat would be as adept as Mr. Musharraf at keeping
various interest groups within the military in line. American officials say that
Pakistan's intelligence service, the I.S.I., continues to play a direct role in
arming and financing the Taliban's re-emergence in western Pakistan, and there
are worries about the relationships between some senior military leaders and
Islamist groups.

The ties between Islamic militants and Pakistan's security services are decades
old, with the two sides working together most closely during the mujahadeen
battles against the Soviet Army in Afghanistan in the 1980s. Analysts generally
agree, however, that the military remains a largely secular institution that
takes seriously its role as protector of Pakistan's identity and would not allow
Islamists to become the dominant force in Pakistan.

While many in Washington agree that the threat of Islamic militants has become
something of a useful foil for Mr. Musharraf, there is a rift about just how the
White House should be treating the Pakistani president.

Some counterterrorism officials at the Pentagon argue that to the extent that
Mr. Musharraf's government feels real pressure, it is from those within the
Pakistani military who worry most about alienating Washington and jeopardizing
the flow of military aid to Pakistan.

The money and military hardware from the United States is crucial for Pakistan's
armed forces to keep pace with archrival India. Because of this dependency, some
officials argue, the Bush administration has powerful leverage to force Mr.
Musharraf to crack down on extremism.

On the other side of the debate, some State Department officials say that while
Islamic militants probably would not topple Mr. Musharraf, why roll the dice?

Mr. Musharraf might be frustrating to work with, they say, but he has the virtue
of being a known quantity. And with Iraq spiraling out of control and an
emboldened Iran flexing its muscle throughout the region, aren't things
complicated enough without taking a chance on a nuclear-armed Muslim nation of
165 million people?

''How many degrees of difficulty do you want to add?'' asks one Bush
administration official. ''This is one equation that we don't want to touch.''

Mr. Musharraf's turn against the Taliban after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, and
his status as a personal target of the militants, won him a reputation as a man
Washington could do business with. He developed a rapport with President Bush,
and received rock star treatment during a recent book tour through the United
States, even appearing on ''The Daily Show.'' (He shared tea and Twinkies with
Jon Stewart.)

In the United States, he is considered the voice of moderation, but Mr.
Musharraf has also navigated the often brutal world of Pakistani politics by
keeping his friends close and his enemies closer. Although he speaks ominously
about the Islamists' rising power, he has regularly brokered agreements with
them in the provinces as a way to gain allies amid the growing support
nationally for civilian challengers like Mr. Sharif and Ms. Bhutto. Pakistan
experts say this is smart politics, but the agreements have also effectively
strengthened religious groups in the rural areas and made punishing Islamic
militants in those areas more difficult.

''To the extent that religious extremism is a concern, it is a concern partly of
Musharraf's and the military's making,'' said Husain Haqqani, a professor of
international relations at Boston University and an adviser to several Pakistani
prime ministers. ''And, he has been very effective in turning this around into
getting more support from the U.S.''

The Democratic takeover of Congress has given the Bush administration its own
useful foil in its negotiations with Pakistan. During a recent meeting in
Islamabad with Mr. Musharraf, Vice President Dick Cheney said that the White
House has no intention of cutting aid to Pakistan, but mentioned that Democrats
had threatened to make aid conditional on a crackdown on Islamic militants in
the tribal areas.

Congress is unlikely to ever stem the flow of aid to Pakistan. But invoking
Congressional frustration with the country could play on Pakistani fears that
the United States is engaged in an ever tighter embrace with India.

And within Pakistan, that is considered the greatest threat of all.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: ISLAMA-BOUND -- If something happens to Pakistan's president,
Pervez Musharraf, Islamists may not take control, intelligence officials say.
(Photo by K. M. Chaudary/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); POLITICS
(89%); POLLS & SURVEYS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); ASSASSINATION (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (68%); PRIME MINISTERS (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(58%) Public Opinion; Elections; Islam; United States International Relations;
Foreign Aid; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) Taliban

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (93%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Mark
Mazzetti; Pervez (Gen) Musharraf

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Pakistan; Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

South Korea Reviews Its Dark Past, but the Pace Is Slow

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, March 9


In his final days, the Venerable Bogwang, a fisherman turned Buddhist monk,
wrestled with his conscience. The scriptures he revered exhorted him to leave
behind the entanglements of the material world.

But he could not shake off the nightmarish memories of the interrogation room of
South Korea's once-infamous Army Security Command, where, he said, he was held
for 43 days and tortured in 1983.

''They tied me naked in a steel chair and attached an electric cord to my
genitals,'' he said in his last interview. ''When they threw the switch,
electricity bolted through my spine and jolted my brain. It was as if my body
jumped a meter off the floor.''

By the time the military interrogators were done with him, he had signed a
confession that said he was a Communist spy. He served 15 years, and during that
time his wife, who had also been tortured, divorced him, and he never saw his
children again. He was released in 1998 and became a monk two years later.

He joined scores of South Koreans fighting to clear their names of political
subversion charges under the military dictatorships from the 1960s to the 80s.
Under the auspices of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, established by the
government of President Roh Moo-hyun at the end of 2005, investigations are
under way. Verdicts are being reviewed and in some cases overturned.

But on Feb. 25, the Venerable Bogwang died, apparently of natural causes, at his
hillside monastery, 60 miles south of Seoul.

His death, at 57, was a reminder of the painfully slow progress the Roh
government is making in delving into the country's tumultuous history, and what
a political minefield the past remains in South Korea.

In the interview nine days before his death, he spoke passionately about his
campaign to establish the truth of what happened to him 24 years before, at a
time when the military government often resorted to red scares to quash
political opposition.

''Senior monks say that I should forgive everything and leave it behind; they
say hatred begets hatred,'' he said. ''But they also say I should seek truth. My
mind is full of conflict. One thing I know is that I cannot leave behind the
false charge that I was a Communist spy.''

Former political prisoners are coming forward with accounts of witch hunts and
torture that can sound unreal to young South Koreans today. Large-scale
antigovernment demonstrations, tear gas and firebombs have long since receded
from the streets. North Korea stirs more sympathy for its economic plight than
it does fear.

The Korea of three decades ago was a very different place.

On Sept. 26, 1971, Lee Sang-chul -- the man who would become the Venerable
Bogwang -- was a deckhand on a fishing boat that drifted into North Korean
waters during a storm. It was seized by North Korean patrol boats.

The 21 crewmen were allowed to return home after 11 months, amid a budding
easing of tensions. Beforehand, however, the North Korean authorities brought in
Mr. Lee's uncle, who had been reported missing during the 1950-53 Korean War.
They warned Mr. Lee that a ''bad thing'' would happen to his uncle if he did not
spy for them.

Once back in the South, Mr. Lee underwent a 90-day debriefing and, according to
the police, confessed that he had been trained to spy. The crewmen were tried
and given suspended one-year sentences for entering Communist waters.

The young Mr. Lee thought his troubles were over. But 12 years later, on Nov.
15, 1983, agents from the Army Security Command, a powerful intelligence outfit
loyal to the military dictator Chun Doo-hwan, arrived at the shipyard where he
was working and shoved him into a black sedan.

The espionage activities of both North Korea and South Korea had diminished with
the mid-1970s easing of tensions, but political persecution had not.

In the South, anti-Communist squads from the police, the military and the main
intelligence agency closely monitored Koreans living in Japan, relatives of
South Koreans taken to the North during the war, relatives of the South Korean
fishermen abducted after the war and never seen again -- and those who, like Mr.
Lee, managed to return.

The government saw them as potential threats, and, according to testimony and
investigative reports by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as a pool of
scapegoats.

''They asked me to draw a map of the shipyard,'' the Venerable Bogwang recalled.
''When I did, they said I got that information for spy purposes. They asked me
where the police station was in my town and how many officers were there. When I
answered, they said I collected that information for the North Koreans.''

Interrogators deprived him of sleep for days, then made him sit in front of
high-intensity lights, he said. They tied him to a rod like ''a pig being
roasted,'' put a wet towel over his nose and eyes, and poured water laced with
mustard or pepper into his mouth.

Kim Byung-jin, 51, who was an interpreter for interrogators at the Army Security
Command, called such methods of torture common.

''They could make the victim say whatever they wanted him to say,'' he said.
''Truth was irrelevant.''

Mr. Kim did not just see the torture. A Korean resident of Japan, he was
studying at Yonsei University in Seoul in 1983 when he was brought in as a
Communist suspect and tortured before being put on the military's payroll for
two years.

''I still hear them saying to me, 'You ready? Here we go!' as they cranked up
the generator to send electricity to the wire tied around my fingers,'' Mr. Kim
said in an interview last month. He said he admitted to ''nonsensical charges''
after they threatened to send his wife to a brothel and his infant son to an
orphanage.

In November, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission began releasing its
reports, recommending that the courts retry several spy cases that it concluded
were built on torture and fabricated evidence. The commission also recommended
that the state formally apologize to those wrongly convicted. On Jan. 23, a
court acquitted, posthumously, eight men who were hanged in 1975 on charges of
organizing a ''People's Revolutionary Party,'' ostensibly to overthrow the
government at North Korea's behest. The court found that the men were executed
on the basis of confessions extracted under torture.

But with a presidential election looming at the end of this year, the
investigations are raising political hackles. Conservative critics call them a
''score-settling'' by leftists.

''This is a political offensive against me,'' Park Geun-hye, the daughter of
Park Chung-hee, who ruled South Korea with an iron fist for 18 years until his
assassination in 1979, told reporters in January. She hopes to run in the
December election as a candidate of the conservative opposition.

During the interview, the Venerable Bogwang recalled the day his interrogators
brought in his daughter and son, aged 6 and 4, to weaken his resolve.

''My daughter said, 'Daddy, please come home,' and kissed me,'' he said. ''That
was 24 years ago, and the last time I saw them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Lee was married before his imprisonment, but his family
deserted him to avoid the ideological stigma. He became a monk in 2000.
 Before becoming a monk, the Venerable Bogwang was Lee Sang-chul, a fisherman
who was imprisoned and tortured by his government. (Photographs by Seokyong Lee
for The International Herald Tribune)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); TORTURE (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(78%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (78%); MILITARY RULE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
ARMIES (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); ELECTIONS (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(71%); POLITICS (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (67%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (66%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(61%) Freedom and Human Rights; Torture  ; Elections; Election Issues; Politics
and Government; Political Prisoners

PERSON: Choe Sang-Hun

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (73%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (98%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%);
NORTHERN ASIA (79%)

REGION: South Korea; South Korea

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Do You Solve a Crisis Like Darfur?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 731 words


For anyone who thinks that ''genocide'' is absolutely the rock-bottom
possibility, keep an eye on Darfur.

The area of crisis has already spread from an area the size of France to one the
size of Western Europe, encompassing Chad and Central African Republic while
threatening to reignite the separate war between north and south Sudan. And aid
workers increasingly are finding themselves under attack, so that humanitarian
access is now lower than at any time since 2004.

Six weeks ago, I invited readers to send in their own suggestions for what we
should do about Darfur, and the result was a deluge of proposals from all over
the world.

The common thread was a far more muscular approach. Several readers suggested
that we should dispatch a private force -- supplied by a military contractor
like Blackwater USA -- to fight the janjaweed militia.

Many readers also recommended that we supply arms to Darfur refugees or rebel
groups. Some people suggested that we blockade Port Sudan, through which Sudan
exports oil.

Many also wanted a much tougher approach toward China, which has protected Sudan
diplomatically. Some advocated a boycott of all Chinese products, while others
favor a boycott of the Beijing Olympics in 2008.

After inviting the discussion, I feel ungrateful in criticizing such
well-meaning suggestions -- but I'm afraid that in the aftermath of the Iraq
war, aggressive military measures would be counterproductive. We would be
handing President Omar al-Bashir a propaganda victory and a chance to rally
support (''Those American crusaders are trying to steal another Arab country's
oil!'').

Likewise, Darfur is already awash with guns and irresponsible armed factions
terrorizing civilians. The last thing Darfur needs is more AK-47s.

As for China, a boycott would antagonize ordinary Chinese and cause Beijing to
dig in its heels. But I like the idea of activists like Eric Reeves of
organizing a ''Genocide Olympics'' campaign to shame Beijing into better
behavior.

Likewise, I approve of many suggestions that sought more television coverage of
Darfur. The slacker now is ABC News. The Tyndall Report, which monitors network
news coverage, found that ABC's nightly newscasts included just 11 minutes of
coverage of Darfur in all of 2006, compared with the 23 minutes ABC devoted to
the false confession to the killing of JonBenet Ramsey. If only a Darfuri would
falsely confess to killing JonBenet, maybe ABC would cover genocide

I've posted more reader suggestions on my blog, www.nytimes.com/ontheground. But
in general, what Darfur needs isn't a single dramatic solution but a collection
of incremental steps that add to the pressure for a peace agreement there.

President Bush could ratchet up the pressure by giving a prime-time speech on
Darfur. He and Tony Blair could lead a summit on Darfur in Europe. He could
invite leaders of China and Egypt to join him on a trip to a Darfur refugee camp
in Chad.

Mr. Bush is expected to announce soon a series of financial sanctions on Sudan
(similar to those that have inflicted considerable pain on North Korea and
Iran), and those are welcome. Enforcing a no-fly zone would also help add to the
pressure.

But the top priority for Darfur is something that few people talk about -- a
negotiated peace agreement. Peacekeepers are desperately needed, but the only
real hope for lasting security is a negotiated peace among all the tribes of
Darfur. And that is conceivable: an attempt last April came close, but
ultimately a flawed deal was reached that made the conflict worse.

Human rights groups have laid out excellent proposals for a Darfur peace
process, and they need a vigorous push. To get an agreement, Khartoum will have
to make a few more concessions (such as naming a Darfuri vice president, uniting
the Darfur provinces, verifying the disarming of janjaweed), and it will also
have to allow rebels to meet to work out negotiating positions.

Western countries should also pledge to help finance reconstruction and
compensation schemes, as incentives to wary Darfuris to back a peace deal. So
far the U.S. has spent $2.7 billion on Darfur, and it would be a bargain to
invest several hundred million dollars in a peace. Otherwise, north central
Africa may collapse completely into war and anarchy, costing us countless
billions and resulting in several million deaths over the coming decade.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (85%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING
(85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); ARMS TRADE (73%); DEFENSE SECTOR PERFORMANCE (73%);
REFUGEES (72%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (68%); DEFENSE
CONTRACTING (68%); PETROLEUM EXPORTS & IMPORTS (67%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (66%);
TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (65%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (64%); BLOGS & MESSAGE
BOARDS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Television; Foreign Aid

COMPANY: ACADEMI LLC (83%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS561612 SECURITY GUARDS & PATROL SERVICES (83%); NAICS561611
INVESTIGATION SERVICES (83%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (67%); TONY BLAIR (60%); OMAR AL-BASHIR (58%) Nicholas D
Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush; Tony (Prime Min) Blair

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); EUROPE (94%); CHINA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); WESTERN
EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (92%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Great Britain; Europe; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Biased Broadcasting Corporation

BYLINE: By Frank H. Stewart.

Frank H. Stewart is a professor in the department of Islamic and Middle Eastern
Studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and a visiting scholar at New York
University.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


LAST summer, the Archbishop of Algeria remarked to this newspaper that when
satellite dishes first appeared in Algeria, they were typically positioned to
receive French broadcasts. Now the majority receive programming from the Persian
Gulf.

''If you watch Western television, you live in one universe,'' said the
archbishop, ''and if you watch Middle Eastern television, you live in another
altogether.'' The Middle Eastern broadcasts, he added, tended to depict the West
in a negative light.

Washington is well aware of this problem and has tried to address it. In 2004,
the United States established its own Arabic-language satellite television
station, Al Hurra. But Al Hurra has not been a success, and stations like Al
Jazeera and Al Arabiyya, based in the Gulf states, continue to dominate the
region.

Those stations will soon face a formidable rival. The BBC World Service plans to
start an Arabic television service this fall, and the BBC knows what it is
doing. It has been broadcasting in Arabic on the radio for more than 60 years
and has a huge audience.

This new television station might sound like good news for America. Many of us
pick up BBC broadcasts in English, and we respect their quality. But the World
Service in English is one thing, and the World Service in Arabic is another
entirely. If the BBC's Arabic TV programs resemble its radio programs, then they
will be just as anti-Western as anything that comes out of the Gulf, if not more
so. They will serve to increase, rather than to diminish, tensions, hostilities
and misunderstandings among nations.

For example, a 50-minute BBC Arabic Service discussion program about torture
discussed only one specific allegation, which came from the head of an
organization representing some 90 Saudis imprisoned at Guantanamo. This speaker
stated that the prisoners were subject to disgusting and horrible forms of
torture and suggested that three inmates reported by the United States to have
committed suicide were actually killed. Another participant insisted that the
two countries guilty of torturing political prisoners on the largest scale were
Israel and the United States.

At the same time, the authoritarian regimes and armed militants of the Arab
world get sympathetic treatment on BBC Arabic. When Saddam Hussein was in power,
he was a great favorite of the service, which reported as straight news his
re-election to a seven-year term in 2002, when he got 100 percent of the vote.
President Bashar al-Assad of Syria enjoys similar favor. When a State Department
representative referred to Syria as a dictatorship, his BBC interviewer
immediately interrupted and reprimanded him.

The Arabic Service not only shields Arab leaders from criticism but also tends
to avoid topics they might find embarrassing: human rights, the role of military
and security forces, corruption, discrimination against minorities, censorship,
poverty and unemployment. When, from time to time, such topics do arise, they
are usually dealt with in the most general terms: there may, for instance, be
guarded references to ''certain Arab countries.''

By contrast, the words and deeds of Western leaders, particularly the American
president and the British prime minister, are subject to minute analysis,
generally on the assumption that behind them lies a hidden and disreputable
agenda. Last summer, when the British arrested two dozen people alleged to have
been plotting to blow up airplanes crossing the Atlantic, a BBC presenter
centered a discussion on the theory that these arrests had taken place because
Tony Blair, embarrassed by opposition to Britain's role in the conflict between
Hezbollah and Israel, wanted to distract the public while at the same time
associating Muslims with terrorism.

The British are among our closest and most reliable allies, and it is strange
that their government pays for these broadcasts, many of which are produced in
Cairo rather than in London. If the BBC models its Arabic television service on
its Arabic radio service, yet another anti-Western, antidemocratic channel will
find its place on the Arab screen.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION INDUSTRY (91%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (91%); SATELLITE
TELEVISION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%);
TORTURE (86%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (78%); MEDIA BIAS (78%); RELIGION (78%);
PUBLIC TELEVISION (78%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (78%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY
(78%); ELECTIONS (75%); CENSORSHIP (73%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (73%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (69%); CORRUPTION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); JAIL SENTENCING
(67%); PRISONS (67%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (66%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (64%); DISCRIMINATION (61%); SUICIDE (50%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(50%) United States International Relations; Television; News and News Media;
Radio

COMPANY: BBC WORLD SERVICE TELEVISION LTD (56%)

ORGANIZATION: Bbc Worldwide

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (50%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (50%) Frank H (Prof) Stewart

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); ALGERIA (94%); GULF STATES
(93%); SYRIA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Middle East; Great Britain; Middle East

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Captive in Guantanamo Makes Run for Office in Australia

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: AUBURN, Australia


Mamdouh Habib cannot drink cold water. He vomits when he tries to, he said. He
knows he must drink water, so he engages in vigorous exercise in order to force
some lukewarm water down.

He says his doctor has told him his stomach has been damaged. Mr. Habib thinks
it is from having gas forced into it through some kind of tubes inserted into
his rectum when he was detained and, he says, tortured in Egypt.

''It made you feel like you were flying,'' he said.

Mr. Habib, an unemployed 51-year-old father of four, was an early case of
rendition. He was seized in Pakistan in October 2001, where he has alleged that
he was tortured, then bound up by tough English-speaking men in black and
secretly flown to Egypt, where he was held and, by his accounts, tortured for
several months, before being shipped to the American detention facility at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in April 2002.

He was released from Guantanamo and returned to Australia in February 2005
without any charges filed against him, because the Bush administration did not
want the torture allegations aired in court, Australian and American officials
have said.

Now, he is fighting back. He is running in elections on March 24 for a seat in
the parliament of the state of New South Wales, whose capital is Sydney.

If the fear has been that those released from Guantanamo would return home more
radicalized from their experience, Mr. Habib, for his part, has decided to join
the establishment, it seems, as a nonestablishment candidate.

''We have to be inside the parliament to know what's going on, and to let the
people on the outside know what is going on, and that is why we are doing
this,'' said Raul Bassi, a native of Argentina, who recruited Mr. Habib to run.

The Habibs; Mr. Bassi, a 60-year-old atheist, human rights and antiwar
campaigner; and others from Mr. Habib's somewhat ragtag electoral network
gathered on a Saturday morning for coffee at Michel's, on the busy corner of
Auburn Road and Queen Street. The coalition includes the Greens, the Socialist
Alliance and the Communist Party.

''I'm from this community,'' Mr. Habib said, taking another cigarette. ''The
people in parliament are not from us -- they're rich people.''

Looking nothing like a traditional candidate, Mr. Habib, his hair in a ponytail,
was wearing aviator sunglasses, combat fatigues and a T-shirt with an upside
down American flag on it, along with a picture of a hooded prisoner behind
barbed wire, and the word ''terrorism'' defined as ''the systematic use of
violence and intimidation to achieve some goal.''

The multiracial nature of the Auburn district is visible everywhere, in the
people walking the streets -- women in full chador, Chinese, lanky Ethiopians
and Somalis -- and in the shops they go into. Within a 100 yards of Michel's
there is the Turkish Gozde Cafe; Ali Baba's Charcoal Chicken; Al Safra Pizza and
Kebab House.

Tony Oldfield, who works in a flour mill and is also part of the election team,
rattles off the census statistics, precisely: 18.1 percent Chinese, 10.7 percent
Anglo-Australian, 10.5 percent Lebanese, 4.5 percent Arabic and Turk; there are
also Afghans, Iraqis, Iranians.

American and Australian officials have said that Mr. Habib, who once ran a
commercial cleaning service, and then a restaurant, went to Pakistan in 2001,
and later to Afghanistan where he trained with Al Qaeda. Mr. Habib does not deny
going to Pakistan. He wanted to find a religious school for his children, he has
said.

Since starting his campaign, he has not been asked by the voters in his district
if he trained with Al Qaeda, he said, and if he is, he will answer. But, he
said, he is not going to answer that question from a journalist, nor from the
government.

Mr. Habib's campaign has less than $2,000, Mr. Bassi said, and is relying on
one-on-one contacts.

Mike Newman, a 41-year-old computer programmer wearing shorts and sandals who
emigrated from Britain seven years ago and whose wife is from Manila, signed a
petition in support of Mr. Habib.

''It's an alternative to the two major parties,'' he said, speaking of the
center-right Liberal Party and the center-left Labor Party. On race and
immigration issues, there is not a lot of difference between those parties, he
said.

Harla Kassem, 24, a bank officer of Lebanese descent, said her two brothers
planned to vote for Mr. Habib. But she did not think she would.

''I don't think he's normal, after what he's been through,'' she said,
delicately. There have been stories that Mr. Habib, like many Guantanamo
detainees, suffered serious mental problems while in custody. It is another
subject Mr. Habib does not wish to talk about.

Mr. Habib said he harbored no bitterness toward the American people. He has
sisters and cousins living in New York, he said. He even has respect for many of
the guards at Guantanamo. They were just doing their job, he said.

''You can't take your anger with you,'' he said. ''You have to control
yourself.''

After being beaten and interrogated in Pakistan, he said, an Australian official
told him he would never go home, would never see his family again. At the end of
what he says was a brutal interrogation, Mr. Habib stood up and shook the man's
hand. The man was astonished, Mr. Habib said.

''It makes me proud of myself,'' he said about his gesture. ''It gives me
victory. I have my dignity. He doesn't.''

Mr. Habib does not expect to win, but he does plan to keep fighting, his own
way.

''If we don't win this election, we'll go to the next one,'' he said. ''And if
we don't with that one, we'll go to the next, and the next one after that. This
is just practice.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mamdouh Habib with his wife, Maha, in Auburn, Australia, a
multiracial town in New South Wales where he seeks a state parliament seat.
(Photo by Tony Sernack for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (89%); ELECTIONS
(87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (70%);
POLITICS (70%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (69%); NAVIES (66%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (61%); AL-QAEDA (60%); RELIGION (50%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (50%)
Terrorism; Elections; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Mahdouh Habib; Raymond Bonner; Raul Bassi

CITY: SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (79%)

STATE: NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA (92%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRALIA (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); EGYPT (93%); PAKISTAN (92%); CUBA
(90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Australia; Pakistan; Afghanistan; New South Wales (Australia)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 23, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

New to Pentagon, Gates Argued For Closing Guantanamo Prison

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER and DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1518 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


In his first weeks as defense secretary, Robert M. Gates repeatedly argued that
the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, had become so tainted abroad
that legal proceedings at Guantanamo would be viewed as illegitimate, according
to senior administration officials. He told President Bush and others that it
should be shut down as quickly as possible.

Mr. Gates's appeal was an effort to turn Mr. Bush's publicly stated desire to
close Guantanamo into a specific plan for action, the officials said. In
particular, Mr. Gates urged that trials of terrorism suspects be moved to the
United States, both to make them more credible and because Guantanamo's
continued existence hampered the broader war effort, administration officials
said.

Mr. Gates's arguments were rejected after Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales
and some other government lawyers expressed strong objections to moving
detainees to the United States, a stance that was backed by the office of Vice
President Dick Cheney, administration officials said.

As Mr. Gates was making his case, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice joined him
in urging that the detention facility be shut down, administration officials
said. But the high-level discussions about closing Guantanamo came to a halt
after Mr. Bush rejected the approach, although officials at the National
Security Council, the Pentagon and the State Department continue to analyze
options for the detention of terrorism suspects.

The base at Guantanamo holds about 385 prisoners, among them 14 senior leaders
of Al Qaeda, including Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who were transferred to it last
year from secret prisons run by the Central Intelligence Agency. Under the
Pentagon's current plans, some prisoners, including Mr. Mohammed, will face war
crimes charges under military trials that could begin later this year.

''The policy remains unchanged,'' said Gordon D. Johndroe, a spokesman for the
National Security Council.

Even so, one senior administration official who favors the closing of the
facility said the battle might be renewed.

''Let's see what happens to Gonzales,'' that official said, referring to
speculation that Mr. Gonzales will be forced to step down, or at least is
significantly weakened, because of the political uproar over the dismissal of
United States attorneys. ''I suspect this one isn't over yet.''

Details of the internal discussions on Guantanamo were described by senior
officials from three departments or agencies of the executive branch, including
officials who support moving rapidly to close Guantanamo and those who do not.
One official made it clear that he was willing to discuss the internal
deliberations in part because of Mr. Gonzales's current political weakness. The
senior officials discussed the issue on ground rules of anonymity because it
entailed confidential conversations.

The officials said Mr. Gates and Ms. Rice expressed their concerns about
Guantanamo in conversations with Mr. Bush and others, including Mr. Gonzales,
beginning in January and onward. One widely discussed alternative would move the
prisoners to military brigs in the United States, where they would remain in the
custody of the Pentagon and would be subject to trial under military
proceedings. There is widespread agreement, however, that moving any detainees
or legal proceedings to American territory could bring significant
complications.

Some administration lawyers are deeply reluctant to move terrorism suspects to
American soil because it could increase their constitutional and statutory
rights -- and invite an explosion of civil litigation. Guantanamo was chosen
because it was an American military facility but not on American soil.

Placing the detainees in military brigs on United States territory might fend
off some of those challenges. The solution may eventually require a new act of
Congress establishing legal standing for the detainees and new rules for their
trial and incarceration if brought to the United States.

Mr. Gates's criticism of Guantanamo marks a sharply different approach than the
one taken by his predecessor, Donald H. Rumsfeld. It also demonstrated a new
dynamic in the administration, in which Mr. Gates was teaming up with Ms. Rice,
who often was at loggerheads with Mr. Rumsfeld. The State Department has long
been concerned about the adverse foreign-policy impact of housing prisoners at
Guantanamo.

In the end, Mr. Gates did succeed in killing plans to build a $100 million
courthouse and detention complex at Guantanamo, after he argued that the large
and expensive project would leave the impression of a long-lasting American
detainee operation there and that the money could be more effectively spent
elsewhere by the Pentagon. Mr. Gates approved a far more modest facility at
one-tenth of the cost.

The setback in his effort to close Guantanamo was described by senior Pentagon
officials as Mr. Gates's only significant failure during an effort in his first
three months in office to shift course from policies pursued by Mr. Rumsfeld.
The outcome suggests that Mr. Bush, Mr. Cheney and Mr. Gonzales remain committed
to a detention plan that has become one of the most controversial elements of
the administration's counterterrorism program.

Mr. Cheney's spokeswoman, Lee Anne McBride, said via e-mail that ''we don't
discuss internal deliberations.''

Mr. Bush has repeatedly said he ultimately wants to shutter the detention
operations at Guantanamo. But he has also said it is not possible to do so any
time soon.

State Department and Pentagon officials have said that even close allies are
uncomfortable with American policies toward Guantanamo, making it more difficult
in some cases to coordinate efforts in counterterrorism, intelligence and law
enforcement.

More than 390 detainees have been transferred abroad from the Guantanamo
facility since it was opened amid global controversy in 2002. Last year, 111
detainees were transferred out, and 12 more have been this year. About 20 of
those repatriated to home countries have been picked up again in sweeps of
terrorism suspects or have been killed or captured in battle, Pentagon officials
say.

Many countries do not want to take back the detainees held at Guantanamo. Some
home nations will not guarantee that returning detainees would be assured humane
treatment and fair trials, while others will not guarantee that detainees viewed
by American officials as still dangerous would not be set free.

Mr. Gates's challenge has sent a ripple through the White House, because it
forced officials to confront the question of whether Mr. Bush was actually
moving to fulfill his stated desire to close the detention facility. Officials
who advocate shutting down Guantanamo, including some at the Pentagon and the
State Department, said an underlying motivation of those who want to keep the
center open is that closing it would be seen as a public admission of an
incorrect policy -- something the Bush administration is loath to do.

Neither Mr. Gates nor Ms. Rice have made public their comments to Mr. Bush.
''Nobody is going to be insubordinate with the president,'' said one senior
administration official involved in the discussions. ''You know the saying: 'One
war, one team.' ''

But in a recent Pentagon news conference, Mr. Gates did speak about his concerns
over Guantanamo in general terms.

''I think that Guantanamo has become symbolic, whether we like it or not, for
many around the world,'' Mr. Gates said at the time. ''The problem is that we
have a certain number of the detainees there who often by their own confessions
are people who if released would come back to attack the United States. There
are others that we would like to turn back to their home countries, but their
home countries don't want them.''

He said officials ''are trying to address the problem of how do we reduce the
numbers at Guantanamo and then what do you do with the relatively limited number
that would be irresponsible to release.''

''And I would tell you that we're wrestling with those questions right now,'' he
continued.

In an interview on Thursday, Gordon England, the deputy secretary of defense who
is Mr. Gates's point man on detention issues, suggested that the long-term
answer to Guantanamo might be creating some new international legal structure or
set of multilateral agreements to manage captured members of global terrorist
organizations.

''I don't know the alternative unless the international community, frankly,
develops an alternative,'' Mr. England said. ''It is not a U.S. problem. It is
an international problem to be dealt with.''

Mr. England said American government officials had ''an extraordinarily high
degree of confidence from the information available'' that many Guantanamo
detainees were ''going to damage the country, so you just can't let them go.''

''So,'' he added, ''this is difficult. I know it's onerous. I know there are a
lot of questions about it. We deal with it the best we can. But at the end of
the day, we are not going to put the country or our citizens in jeopardy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An inmate peering from his cell at the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which has been used to hold terrorism suspects. (Photo by
Brennan Linsley/Associated Press)(pg. A19)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (88%); LAWYERS (78%); CLOSINGS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (76%); WAR CRIMES (74%); NAVIES (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%);
MILITARY BASES (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); AL-QAEDA (70%) Terrorism;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights; Shutdowns
(Institutional); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ALBERTO GONZALES (79%); DICK
CHENEY (78%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (78%) Thom Shanker; David E Sanger; Robert M
(Sec) Gates; George W (Pres) Bush; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; Alberto R (Atty Gen)
Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

What We Can Do

BYLINE: By RORY STEWART.

Rory Stewart's latest book is ''The Prince of the Marshes and Other Occupational
Hazards of a Year in Iraq.'' He runs the Turquoise Mountain Foundation in Kabul
and is a guest columnist this month.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 716 words


We must acknowledge the limits of our power and knowledge in Iraq, Afghanistan
and elsewhere and concentrate on what is achievable. The question is not ''What
ought we to do?'' but ''What can we do?''

This is rarely discussed. When I ask politicians whether we can defeat the
Taliban, they reply that we ''have to'' defeat the Taliban. If I ask whether we
can actually do any good by staying in Iraq, they reply that we have ''a moral
obligation'' to the Iraqi people.

By emphasizing moral necessity, politicians can justify almost any risk,
uncertainty or sacrifice and make compromise seem cowardly and criticism
treasonous. When I suggest recognition of Moktada al-Sadr or negotiation with
the Taliban, I am described as an appeaser. But these moral judgments are
fragile, and they increasingly cloak despair, paralysis and preparation for
flight.

We are learning, painfully, that many of the problems in Iraq or Afghanistan --
from violence and state failure to treatment of women -- are deeply embedded in
local beliefs, political structures and traumatic histories. Iraqis and Afghans
do not want their country controlled by foreigners and non-Muslims. A powerful
and effective minority is trying to kill us. The majority is at best lukewarm:
they may dislike Sadrists or the Taliban, but they prefer them to us.

We are also now aware how little we can comprehend. Our officials are on short
tours, lack linguistic or cultural training, live in barracks behind high blast
walls and encounter the local population through angry petitions or sudden
ambushes. We will never acquire the subtle sense of values, beliefs and history
needed to create lasting changes, still less as we once intended, to lead a
political, social and economic revolution.

Paul Bremer, then the top American administrator in Iraq, told us in October
2003 that we had six months to computerize the Baghdad stock exchange, privatize
state-owned enterprises and reform the university curriculum. Now he would be
grateful for stability. The American and British people have sensed that their
grand objectives are unachievable, and since no one is offering any practical
alternative, they are lapsing into cynicism and opposition.

Meanwhile the paralyzed leaders, afraid of their impotence, flit from troop
increases to flight, from engagement to isolation. We must prevent this by
acknowledging our limits, while recognizing that although we are less powerful
and informed than we claimed, we are more powerful and informed than we fear.

A year ago, for example, I felt it would be almost impossible to help
re-establish ceramics, woodwork and calligraphy and restore part of the old city
of Kabul. I worried that Afghans were uninterested, the standards too low, the
prices too high, the government apathetic and international demand nonexistent.
But I found great Afghan energy, courage and skill and received imaginative and
generous support from the U.S. government. Unexpected markets emerged; the
Afghan administration helped; men and women found new pride and incomes. There
are many much better established and more successful projects than this all over
Afghanistan.

My experience suggests that we can continue to protect our soil from terrorist
attack, we can undertake projects that prevent more people from becoming
disaffected, and we can even do some good. In short, we will be able to do more,
not less, than we are now. But working with what is possible requires humility
and the courage to compromise.

We will have to focus on projects that Iraqis and Afghans demand; prioritize and
set aside moral perfectionism; work with people of whom we don't approve; and
choose among lesser evils. We will have to be patient. We should aim to stop
illegal opium growth and change the way that Iraqis or Afghans treat their
women. But we will not achieve this in the next three years. We may never be
able to build a democratic state in Iraq or southern Afghanistan. Trying to do
so through a presence based on foreign troops creates insurgency and resentment
and can only end in failure.

''You are saying,'' the politician replies, ''that we ought to sit back and do
nothing.'' On the contrary I believe we can do a great deal. But ought implies
can. We have no moral obligation to do what we cannot do.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); POLITICS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PRIVATIZATION (78%);
FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%); CURRICULA (78%); RELIGION (66%); PETITIONS (64%);
STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%) Rory Stewart

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Justice System Is a Work in Progress

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 982 words


In the last few weeks, the two most famous prisoners at the Guantanamo Bay naval
base responded to proceedings against them by admitting their guilt.

That might appear to be a vindication of the Bush administration's strategy of
creating a built-from-the-ground-up military justice system limited to people
said to be terrorists.

But because of the unusual circumstances of the two admissions, it is not clear
yet that either one is truly representative of the system the administration has
established, legal experts said. Neither the guilty plea David Hicks entered on
Monday, admitting to providing material support to a terrorist organization, nor
the wide-ranging confession from Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, contained in a Pentagon
transcript of a closed hearing on March 11, had about it the solemn finality of
a conviction in a civilian criminal court, and in some ways, they were
aberrations.

To hear critics of the administration describe them, the conclusions of the two
proceedings were tainted by past abuse and a justice system not worthy of the
name.

''The proceedings themselves just demonstrate the absence of fixed rules,'' said
Jonathan Hafetz, a lawyer with the Brennan Center for Justice at New York
University School of Law who represents other prisoners at Guantanamo. ''This is
justice on the fly.''

The administration's defenders say the recent developments are more than
satisfactory and demonstrate that the administration may have struck the right
balance between gathering intelligence in wartime and providing prisoners with
the full array of due-process protections.

''We are finally beginning to see,'' said John Yoo, a law professor at the
University of California, Berkeley, and one of the principal architects of the
administration's legal strategy after the Sept. 11 attacks, ''whether the
military commissions can balance a fair trial with protecting national security
in a way that the civilian courts cannot. One of the purposes of the military
commissions was to provide a forum where the government and Al Qaeda terrorists
could reach plea bargains that would allow our intelligence agencies to win
their cooperation.''

Guilty pleas are common in ordinary criminal cases, too, of course. But in a
garden-variety criminal prosecution, the parties bargain, in the famous phrase,
in the shadow of the law.

In the usual case, defendants make a rational calculation based on the strength
of the evidence against them, the state of the law and, most important, outcomes
in earlier cases. If defendants think a plea will result in a shorter sentence
than the likely one at trial, discounted by the possibility of acquittal, they
plead guilty.

None of that holds at Guantanamo. The incentives and calculations are quite
different there.

Mr. Hicks, for instance, was bargaining in the shadow of many things -- the
conditions at the base, international diplomacy, homesickness and the
possibility of indefinite detention without charge. But he was not, for the most
part, bargaining in the shadow of the law.

The statute under which he was to be tried was brand new and untested. The
relevant regulations are as yet largely unwritten. There is no body of similar
trials to set the parameters for settlement discussions.

''The proceedings that led to Hicks's plea,'' Mr. Hafetz said, ''underscore that
the military commissions are a makeshift system that lacks legitimacy.''

In the hours before Mr. Hicks's plea, the military judge hearing the case, Col.
Ralph H. Kohlmann of the Marines, disqualified two defense lawyers, one for
refusing to agree to abide by regulations that have yet to be written.

Mr. Hicks's plea appears to be based on his calculation that he will be allowed
to serve out his sentence in his home country, Australia. He may even be able to
challenge his conviction there, in conventional courts.

The alternative to a transfer to Australia was a trial some months from now with
an unpredictable outcome, the possibility of having to serve any sentence at
Guantanamo and the risk of continued detention as an enemy combatant even once
that sentence was completed.

While Mr. Mohammed's calculations seemed very different from Mr. Hicks's, they
were just as unusual.

Mr. Mohammed, said to be the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks, did not appear
before a military commission like the one that heard from Mr. Hicks. The
function of a military commission is the one associated with most criminal
courts: it hears cases against defendants charged with violating the law and
decides whether they are guilty. Military commissions are largely open to the
public, and reporters and human rights groups saw Mr. Hicks plead guilty.

Mr. Mohammed, on the other hand, appeared before a combatant status review
tribunal. The session at which he apparently issued his comprehensive confession
was brief, closed to the public and took place before officers whose names were
not disclosed.

Detainees appearing before the status tribunals are not represented by lawyers.
And the tribunals' purpose is different from that of a military commission. All
they are meant to do is determine if the prisoner before it has been properly
designated as an enemy combatant.

Mr. Mohammed used the opportunity for grandstanding and propaganda, comparing
himself to George Washington and pleading on behalf of those he said were
falsely imprisoned.

He also seemed to allude to having been tortured while in C.I.A. custody, though
the transcript was redacted after the topic was introduced. Human rights groups
said such abuse could taint and undermine everything Mr. Mohammed said.

The Hicks case is unrepresentative in another way, legal experts said. The vast
majority of the 385 men held at Guantanamo have not been charged with any
crimes, and the Pentagon may never charge them. The only tribunal they may ever
see is the one that heard Mr. Mohammed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
NAVIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
MILITARY COURTS (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); MILITARY BASES (89%); GUILTY PLEAS
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); DUE PROCESS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%);
PLEA AGREEMENTS (75%); TRANSCRIPTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); AL-QAEDA
(71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); ACQUITTAL (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (66%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: David (Australian Taliban) Hicks; Khalid Shaikh Mohammed; George W
(Pres) Bush; Adam Liptak

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              429 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Echoes of '40s Internment Are Seen in Muslim Detainees' Suit

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1262 words


Holly Yasui was far away when a federal judge in Brooklyn ruled last June that
the government had wide latitude to detain noncitizens indefinitely on the basis
of race, religion or national origin. The ruling came in a class-action lawsuit
by Muslim immigrants held after 9/11. But Ms. Yasui, an American citizen of
Japanese ancestry, had reason to take it personally.

Her grandparents were among thousands of Japanese immigrants in the United
States who were wrongfully detained as enemy aliens during World War II. And her
father was one of three Japanese-Americans who challenged the government's
racial detention and curfew programs in litigation that reached the Supreme
Court in the 1940s.

Now, Ms. Yasui, along with Jay Hirabayashi and Karen Korematsu-Haigh, a son and
a daughter of the two other Japanese-American litigants, is urging an appeals
court in Manhattan to overturn the sweeping language of the judge's ruling last
year.

The ruling ''painfully resurrects the long-discredited legal theory'' that was
used to put their grandparents behind barbed wire, along with the rest of the
West Coast's Japanese alien population, the three contend in an unusual
friends-of-the-court brief to be filed today in the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit.

''Their interest is in avoiding the repetition of a tragic episode in American
history that is also, for them, painful family history,'' the brief states.

In recent years, many scholars have drawn parallels and contrasts between the
internment of Japanese-Americans after the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the
treatment of hundreds of Muslim noncitizens who were swept up in the weeks after
the 2001 terror attacks, then held for months before they were cleared of links
to terrorism and deported.

But the brief being filed today is a rare case of members of a third generation
stepping up to defend legal protections that were lost to their grandparents,
and that their parents devoted their lives to reclaiming.

''I feel that racial profiling is absolutely wrong and unjustifiable,'' Ms.
Yasui, 53, wrote in an e-mail message from San Miguel de Allende, Mexico, where
she works as a writer and graphic designer. ''That my grandmother was treated by
the U.S. government as a 'dangerous enemy alien' was a travesty. And it killed
my grandfather.''

Prof. Eric L. Muller, a legal historian at the University of North Carolina
School of Law, said he contacted Ms. Yasui and the others after reading about
the decision by the federal judge, John Gleeson. Both sides in the case, known
as Turkmen v. Ashcroft -- a lead plaintiff is Ibrahim Turkmen -- appealed parts
of the decision by Judge Gleeson. He let the Muslims' lawsuit continue, mainly
on their claims of unlawful detention conditions, but dismissed key elements of
their discrimination claims.

Asked to comment, the Justice Department would not discuss the Turkmen case, but
its appeal argues in part that government officials ''were confronted with
unprecedented law enforcement and security challenges in the wake of the Sept.
11 attacks,'' and that ''there were no clear judicial precedents in this
extraordinary context.''

Professor Muller said he drafted the brief on behalf of the three grandchildren
to try to persuade the Second Circuit to reject what he considers the needless
breadth of Judge Gleeson's opinion. ''Judge Gleeson's decision paints with such
a broad brush, there isn't really any stopping point,'' he said.

The judge held that under immigration law, ''the executive is free to single out
'nationals of a particular country.' '' And because so little was known about
the 9/11 hijackers, he ruled, singling out Arab Muslims for detention to
investigate possible ties to terrorism, though ''crude,'' was not ''so
irrational or outrageous as to warrant judicial intrusion into an area in which
courts have little experience and less expertise.''

The brief counters that the ruling ''overlooks the nearly 20-year-old
declaration by the United States Congress and the president of the United States
that the racially selective detention of Japanese aliens during World War II was
a 'fundamental injustice' warranting an apology and the payment of
reparations.''

And, it adds, the district court's deference to the government ''ignores the
tragic consequences of such deference'' for 120,000 people of Japanese ancestry
during World War II.

Among those people was Ms. Yasui's grandfather Masuo Yasui, who immigrated to
the United States in 1903 and became a successful businessman and apple grower
in Hood River, Ore., where his nine children were born and raised.

By 1940, he was one of 47,000 Japanese immigrants who lived in the 48 states,
nearly 90 percent on the West Coast. They had remained aliens because federal
law forbade naturalization of any person of Asian ancestry. Since the law also
forbade Japanese immigration after 1924, the United States had been home to all
of them for many years on Dec. 7, 1941, when Japan attacked Pearl Harbor.

Two months later, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066,
declaring West Coast residents of Japanese ancestry -- whether American citizens
or not -- ''enemy aliens.'' An 8 p.m. curfew was imposed on them; roundups sent
them to desolate internment camps.

Challenged by Fred Korematsu, Gordon Hirabayashi and Ms. Yasui's father, Minoru
-- all of them American citizens, like most of those interned -- the measures
were upheld, on a 6-to-3 decision, by the Supreme Court in 1944. The decision
was not repudiated by the courts until 1983.

''In the case of my grandfather, the tragedy was multiplied by the fact that he
was a hero in the eyes of his children, a leader in the Japanese-American
community of Hood River, and had always counseled his compatriots to be '200
percent American,' '' Ms. Yasui said. ''And look what it got him: arrested and
dragged out of his house a few days after the attack on Pearl Harbor,
transferred from one military prison to another for years, and not released
until several months after the war was over.''

She was only 5 when he died in the 1950s, she said, but she later learned that
he committed suicide, after days of hallucinations in which he imagined that the
F.B.I. was after him again.

The Hirabayashi and Korematsu grandparents, too, died before Congress enacted a
law apologizing for the internment and offering compensation of $20,000 each for
the survivors. Signed into law in 1988, the law was intended partly ''to
discourage the occurrence of similar injustice and violations of civil liberties
in the future.''

By then, courts re-examining the cases of the three Japanese-American litigants
found that the government had suppressed evidence that security fears were
overblown. For example, what the Army had suspected were signals sent to
Japanese submarines from California hillsides had actually come from ''farms
where people used flashlights to go to outside toilets,'' a former Justice
Department lawyer testified.

Since 9/11, Professor Muller said, ''post-Pearl Harbor fear is no longer a
historical fossil,'' making the new brief all the more significant.

Unlike the Japanese residents, it argues, the Muslim plaintiffs were not enemy
aliens over whom the government had almost complete power, but aliens accused
only of overstaying their visas.

If it was a grave injustice to subject ''enemy aliens'' to prolonged detention
on account of race and national origin in World War II, the brief says, it was
at least as unjust to single out the Turkmen plaintiffs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In April 1942, thousands of evacuees lined up outside a mess
hall at an ''assembly center'' in San Bruno, Calif., above. At right, in
Hayward, Calif., in 1942, a family awaited an evacuation bus. (Photographs by
Dorothea Lange)(pg. B2)
 Ibrahim Turkmen, who sued, saying he was illegally detained and deported.
(Photo by Yoray Liberman/Getty Images for The New York Times)(pg. B1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); JUDGES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ASIAN AMERICANS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION (89%); APPEALS (89%); APPEALS COURTS (88%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%);
SUPREME COURTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); DEPORTATION
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); CLASS ACTIONS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%);
REFUGEES (77%); RACE & RACISM (77%); HISTORY (75%); WORLD WAR II (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (75%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); RACIAL PROFILING (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(68%); HIJACKING (68%); WRITERS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%)
Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; Japanese-Americans; Suits and
Litigation; Decisions and Verdicts; Immigration and Refugees; Freedom and Human
Rights; Terrorism; Reparations

PERSON: John (Judge) Gleeson; Ibrahim Turkmen; Nina Bernstein

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);
WEST USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              433 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing South: North Carolina: An Apology For Slavery

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 137 words


The State Senate expressed regret for the practice of slavery and apologized for
official actions that promoted legalized discrimination over four centuries.
''When you dehumanize a human being, it's one of the worst things that you can
do,'' Senator Larry Shaw, Democrat of Fayetteville, said before senators
unanimously approved a symbolic resolution. The resolution acknowledged the
state's ''profound contrition for the official acts that sanctioned and
perpetuated the denial of basic human rights and dignity to fellow humans.'' The
resolution now goes to the House. Maryland lawmakers approved an apology for
slavery last week, and lawmakers in Georgia and Missouri are considering similar
legislation. In February, the Virginia General Assembly voted unanimously to
express its regret for that state's role in slavery.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (88%) Slavery

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (93%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%);
MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: North Carolina

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              434 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Radical Pakistani Cleric Threatens Suicide Attacks in Capital

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, April 6


A hard-line cleric said Friday that he was setting up a religious court here in
the country's capital, and threatened suicide attacks if the government did not
enact Islamic law and close down brothels and video stores within a month.

The announcement was made during Friday Prayer by Maulana Mohammad Abdul Aziz,
the head cleric of the Lal Mosque who is known for his extremist and
anti-American views. Mr. Aziz and his allies have stirred a national debate with
their drive to impose Taliban-style rule in the capital, prompting protests by
human rights advocates and political parties.

Mr. Aziz's remarks were the latest in a series of challenges by hard-line
clerics to the authority of the president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, who is
considered an ally of the United States and who has vowed to put Pakistan on the
path to what he has called ''enlightened moderation.''

''Pakistan was created for an Islamic system,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''But the
government, instead of implementing an Islamic system, is threatening us with a
police operation,'' he said, referring to the government's warnings of a raid if
the clerics took the law into their own hands.

''Rulers, listen! Our last option will be suicide attacks,'' Mr. Aziz said.

Some critics of the government say it has buckled under pressure from the
clerics, emboldening them. Others charge that the government has allowed the
clerics a free hand in order to divert attention from the constitutional crisis
that has roiled Pakistan since last month, when General Musharraf removed the
country's chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry, who had taken on cases
threatening the president's authority.

Pakistan officials, who deny such speculation, say they are monitoring the
cleric situation closely.

On Thursday, the Lal Mosque's Web site was blocked. Last week, the government
barred the transmission of an FM radio station set up by students at the
mosque's madrassa, or religious school.

''The setting up of such courts is tantamount to questioning the writ of the
government,'' Tariq Azeem Khan, the deputy state minister for information, said
in an interview on Friday evening, referring to the cleric's announcement. ''We
believe it is both illegal and un-Islamic. But we want to resolve the issue
through dialogue.''

Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao, the country's interior minister, echoed that sentiment
as he spoke at a news conference on Friday. ''The law will take its own
course,'' he said.

''What is the credibility of one man if he says he is going to enforce
Shariah,'' or Islamic law, Mr. Sherpao said. Most of the ulemas, or religious
scholars, have distanced themselves from the Lal Mosque clerics, he said.

Mr. Aziz and his brother Abdul Rashid Ghazi have emerged as vociferous opponents
of General Musharraf. Since January, hundreds of female students from Jamia
Hafsa, a religious seminary for girls affiliated with the Lal Mosque, have
occupied a public children's library here and staged a sit-in to protest a
government campaign to raze mosques built illegally on state-owned land. The
government has balked at breaking up the library occupation, saying it fears a
violent escalation.

Last week, female students from Jamia Hafsa kidnapped an alleged brothel owner
from a neighborhood in Islamabad. The woman was released only after she gave a
public confession.

Veiled students have also visited several video stores, urging their owners to
close.

On Friday evening, dozens of students gathered in front of the mosque around a
smoldering heap of Pakistani, Indian and English CDs and DVDs. ''These are all
dirty movies,'' one said, claiming that they had been handed over to the
students voluntarily by a local video store owner.

Owais Dar, 40, a video store owner in a nearby shopping mall, said he had not
been approached by the madrassa students to close down his business, but that
sales were already faltering. ''People don't feel that there is any law in the
country,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Burqa-clad students gathered on the roof of a religious school
in Islamabad to watch other students burn CDs and DVDs they deemed offensive.
(Photo by Aamir Qureshi/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); SUICIDE (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (89%); TERRORISM (78%); TALIBAN (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); INTERVIEWS (74%); VIDEO SALES & RENTALS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(72%); POLITICAL DEBATES (70%); POLITICS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (66%) Islam; United States International Relations; Terrorism;
Prostitution; Recordings and Downloads (Video)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (57%) Salman Masood; Maulana Abdul Aziz

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Pakistan; Islamabad (Pakistan)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              440 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

China and Japan in Delicate Minuet To Ease Deep Diplomatic Tensions

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 461 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, April 11


Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China began a three-day visit to Japan on
Wednesday, in what both countries described as an important step forward in
repairing diplomatic relations.

Shortly after Mr. Wen's arrival, he and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe held talks and
issued a statement that promised, in general, to increase cooperation in
economic, energy, environmental and military matters.

''Both countries support each other's peaceful development, and will enhance
political trust between the two countries,'' the statement read.

Mr. Wen is the first Chinese prime minister to visit Japan in nearly seven
years. Mr. Abe went to Beijing shortly after becoming prime minister last fall,
making the first public move to defuse tensions between the nations, traditional
rivals.

Relations deteriorated under former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, who made
annual visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, a memorial to Japanese war dead, including
war criminals of World War II.

China responded to Mr. Abe's visit by discouraging the kind of anti-Japanese
content on television and the Internet that had fanned nationalist sentiment.
Recently, China issued only muted criticism of Mr. Abe's denial that the
Japanese military had directly coerced women into sexual slavery during the war.

Still, little progress was made, in recent months or on Wednesday, on the flash
points: disputed gas and oil fields in the East China Sea; visits to Yasukuni
and other problems related to history; and suspicions each harbors about the
other's military ambitions.

The statement said China and Japan had agreed to ''look at history frankly and
jointly build a beautiful future.'' Before his visit, Mr. Wen warned Mr. Abe
against visiting the Yasukuni Shrine. Mr. Abe, a one-time committed visitor to
Yasukuni, softened his position as prime minister, saying that he would neither
deny nor acknowledge having visited the shrine.

But news that Mr. Abe had quietly visited the shrine -- leaked strategically to
the Japanese media last year -- could derail the current rapprochement. And
other delicate anniversaries, most significantly the 70th anniversary of the
Rape of Nanjing, occur this year.

The statement also said, ''China said Japan should play a more constructive role
in the international community.'' But China and Japan have been looking warily
at each other's more assertive diplomacy.

China has opposed Japan's bid for a permanent seat on the United Nations
Security Council, and is suspicious of its strengthening securities ties with
the United States and Australia.

Meanwhile, Japanese officials regularly criticize China's growing military
budget and, in a dig at Beijing, talk of strengthening ties with Asian nations
that share values of democracy and human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (91%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); ANNIVERSARIES (88%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); DEFENSE SPENDING (71%); WORLD WAR II (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(66%); SLAVERY (66%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%)

PERSON: WEN JIABAO (91%); SHINZO ABE (79%) Norimitsu Onishi; Wen Jiabao (Prime
Min); Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (73%); BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); EAST CHINA SEA (79%); PACIFIC OCEAN (78%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); JAPAN (97%); ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Japan; China

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              443 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia: Gambling That Tolerance Will Trump Fear

BYLINE: By CALVIN SIMS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Islam and Democracy; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1221 words


SEVEN years ago, in the pre-9/11 fall of 2000, I was retrieving my luggage at
the airport in Jakarta when a tall Indonesian man in a flowing white robe and
green scarf accidentally bumped me off my feet.

He apologized and helped me up. Then I noticed he was part of a gang of grim
young men stalking the airport with wooden rods.

He said they were from the Islamic Defenders Front and were searching for
Israelis to kill. I doubt they found any, but I was shocked. Such bullying and
militancy contrasted sharply with the Indonesia I had come to know on previous
reporting trips: a model of Islam as a tolerant, compassionate, inclusive and
peaceful religion.

The many varieties of culture and styles of life in this enormous archipelago
had bred a unique form of Islam -- or, more precisely, many such forms, thriving
side by side and often drawing on a rich pre-Islamic history replete with magic,
Buddhism and South Seas gods. I had thought the prospects for retaining this
style had only been enhanced by the coming of democracy in 1998.

It has not quite worked out that way, and now the big questions facing Indonesia
are: Can Islam and democracy co-exist? And what would such a democracy look
like?

Many optimists argue that there may be no place on earth better suited to be a
Muslim democracy. Indonesia has the world's largest Muslim population -- some
207 million people, rivalling the number of Muslims in the Middle East -- and
the optimists say its relaxed and varied traditions are one reason that the vast
majority of Indonesians remain committed to a tolerant form of Islam. The
fastest-growing Muslim movements, in fact, are moderate and outspoken in their
promises to compete only through democratic processes.

But there is also fear that the global rise of militant fundamentalism has begun
to change Indonesia. With democracy's arrival, radical Islamists were allowed to
return from exile, where the former military government had sent them. That was
followed by the terrorist bombing of a nightclub on the predominantly Hindu
island of Bali in 2002, in which 200 people died, then by other bombings in
Jakarta and Bali, again. The government says it has seriously weakened Jemaah
Islamiyah, a terrorism network blamed for those attacks. But the Islamic
Defenders Front, less lethal but more numerous, still vandalizes bars and discos
in Jakarta and beats up their patrons, trying to force the businesses to close.

Meanwhile, Islamic observance has turned more conservative. Many more women wear
the veil. And Islamic political parties have gained strength by arguing that
they can do something about Indonesia's endemic corruption and violence.

''Indonesia is an experiment in Muslim democracy, which if successful could have
ramifications for other parts of the world,'' said Sidney Jones, director of the
International Crisis Group's Jakarta office. ''If the United States wants to
advance democracy in the Islamic world, then Indonesia takes on added
importance.''

Experts don't think Indonesia is at risk of a takeover by Islamic militants
anytime soon. The two largest Muslim organizations, the Nahdlatul Ulama and
Muhammadiyah, stress tolerance and freedom of thought, and together have 70
million members.

Those groups were big winners in the transition to democracy. In the nine years
since the fall of its last autocrat, Suharto, who limited religious expression
in the name of nationalism, Indonesia has had three fair and open presidential
elections, one of which put a woman in the presidency. Security officials have
been able to arrest, convict and sentence more than 200 people for terrorist
acts, using an open legal system that would seem familiar in the West.

Still, the Indonesia I knew in the late 1990s has become a more fearful place.

''We are so happy with the democratization process in Indonesia, but there is a
blackness in this process,'' said Eve Sundari, a legislator from the Indonesian
Democratic Party. ''Now the door is open. Everybody can fight for their power to
control people. Suddenly Islamic groups want to impose to other Muslims their
laws.''

The surprise that democracy would complicate, rather than simplify, the
prospects for peace raises perplexing questions about Indonesia's example: Is
democracy the best antidote to terrorism? Even if so, can a culture of tolerance
survive that contest? Why are Indonesians appearing to turn more observant and
traditional just now? And does that mean they would accept violence, repression,
or sexism in the name of Islam?

The questions, yet to be answered, point to a conundrum: Pluralist democracy, by
definition, requires tolerance. Fundamentalist religion, by definition, demands
uniformity.

Indonesia's history, optimists say, may point the way to a compromise.

A leading explanation for Indonesia's traditional liberalism is that Islam did
not go there by force. It arrived in the 13th century on trading ships from the
Indian subcontinent, and island dwellers often layered its beliefs atop existing
Buddhist or Hindu practices. Allah had to keep company with Dewi, goddess of the
rice paddy; Nyai Loro Kidul, Queen of the South Seas; and Nini Tawek, the angel
of the Javanese kitchen.

Part of Islam's popularity in Indonesia has always been its adaptability. Early
Islamic preachers used Indonesian shadow puppet shows to disseminate the
religion -- culture instead of force. Even today, many Indonesian Muslims
regularly consult shamans -- mystical healers believed to have paranormal powers
-- to have fortunes told, or to have spells cast and removed.

That is the backdrop against which Azyumardi Azra, an Islamic scholar based in
Jakarta, says that the vast majority of Indonesia's Muslims ''believe in
democracy and fully embrace its principles.''

''While there is a growing sense of Islamic identity or piety among Muslims in
Indonesia -- people are free to practice religion in ways that were forbidden
under the dictatorship -- far less than 1 percent of the population subscribes
to extremist, global jihadist views,'' he says.

He and others argue that political and economic concerns, rather than religion,
have propelled the turn to Islamic parties -- issues like sectarian and ethnic
violence, poverty and corruption. A 43-year-old man named Rudy, who runs my
favorite warung, or food stall, in Jakarta, put it this way: ''Indonesians are
turning to Islam for help because everything else we have tried has failed us --
the Dutch, the military dictatorships, even democracy. My life is really no
better today than it was under Suharto.''

But any turn to religious movements worries some experts. It means, they say,
that the terms of political debate have already begun to change, with many
questions being framed around Islamic values.

Yenny Wahid, an outspoken critic of fundamentalism, says many would-be leaders
now feel a need to look pious. ''When you're close to god, you are a good person
and you have a certain level of impunity,'' she said.

An Indonesian government official said: ''It seems counterintuitive for us to be
worried about Indonesia's small bands of religious radicals in a country of tens
of millions of moderates. But there is a battle for the soul of our religion
going on here, and the voices that ring loudest these days are the extremists.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Variety -- In Jakarta, above, flowers are given out,
pre-Islamic-style, after singing to Allah
in Banda Aceh, top, women are caned under local Islamic law. (Photo by Kemal
Jufri/Polaris, for The New York Times)
 (Photo by Binsar Bakkara/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (85%); HISTORY (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CONSERVATISM (76%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (76%); BOMBINGS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);
ISLANDS & REEFS (73%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (69%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(67%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); POLITICS (63%); CORRUPTION (50%) Islam; Freedom
and Human Rights

PERSON: Calvin Sims

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%)

STATE: SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%); EARTH (74%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: Indonesia

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              449 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The 21st-Century Slave Trade

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE INDIA/NEPAL BORDER


Anyone who thinks that the word ''slavery'' is hyperbole when used to describe
human trafficking today should meet Meena Khatun. She not only endured the
unbearable, but has also shown that a slave trader's greed sometimes is no match
for a mother's love.

Human trafficking is the big emerging human rights issue for the 21st century,
but it's an awful term, a convoluted euphemism. As Meena's story underscores,
the real issue is slavery.

Meena was kidnapped from her village in north India by a trafficker and
eventually locked up in a 13-girl brothel in the town of Katihar. When she was
perhaps 11 or 12 -- she remembers only that it was well before she had begun to
menstruate -- the slaver locked her in a room with a white-haired customer who
had bought her virginity. She cried and fought, so the mother and two sons who
owned the brothel taught Meena a lesson.

''They beat me mercilessly, with a belt, sticks and iron rods,'' Meena recalled.
Still, Meena resisted customers, despite fresh beatings and threats to cut her
in pieces.

Finally, the brothel owners forced her to drink alcohol until she was drunk.
When she passed out, they gave her to a customer.

When she woke up, Meena finally accepted her fate as a prostitute. ''I thought,
'Now I am ruined,' '' she remembered, ''so I gave in.''

Meena thus joined the ranks of some 10 million children prostituted around the
world -- more are in India than in any other country. The brothels of India are
the slave plantations of the 21st century.

Every night, Meena was forced to have sex with 10 to 25 customers. Meena's
owners also wanted to breed her, as is common in Indian brothels. One purpose is
to have boys to be laborers and girls to be prostitutes, and a second is to have
hostages to force the mother to cooperate.

So Meena soon became pregnant. The resulting baby girl, Naina, was taken from
Meena after birth, as was a son, Vivek, who was born a year later.

The two children were raised mostly apart from Meena. Meena alerted the police
to her children's captivity (the police were uninterested), so her owners
decided to kill her.

At that, Meena fled to a town several hours away and eventually married a
pharmacist who protected her. Every few months, Meena would go back to the
brothel and beg for her children.

She was never allowed inside, and the children were told that their mother had
died. Still, Naina and Vivek regularly heard their mother's shouts and pleas and
occasionally caught glimpses of her. Other enslaved girls told them that she was
indeed their mother.

When Naina turned about 12, the brothel owners prepared to sell her as well. At
that Vivek, who was being forced to do the brothel's laundry, protested
vigorously. The owners beat Vivek, an extremely bright boy who was never allowed
to go to school, but he continued to plead that his big sister not be sold.
Finally, he escaped to search for his mother, in hopes that she could do
something. Eventually, they found each other.

They received help from a terrific anti-trafficking organization called Apne Aap
(www.apneaap.org), run by a former journalist named Ruchira Gupta. Ms. Gupta
covered trafficking and was so horrified by what she found that she quit her job
and devoted her life to fighting the brothel owners.

Ms. Gupta agitated for a police raid (apparently the first such raid on behalf
of a trafficked mother ever in the state of Bihar) that rescued Naina last
month. The girl, who is now about 13, is still recovering in a hospital from
severe beatings and internal injuries.

The brothel is still operating, and the police have not arrested the main
traffickers. But the brothel owners are threatening to kill Meena, her children
and the Apne Aap staff, because they are potential witnesses in a criminal case
against the traffickers. One Apne Aap staff member was stabbed a few days ago.

But whatever happens to Meena or Vivek, they are in the vanguard of a new global
abolitionist movement. (Video of them and the brothels can be found on my blog,
www.nytimes.com/ontheground.)

This is an issue crying out for world leaders -- and community groups -- to
seize and run with. President Bush has pressed the issue more than his
predecessors, but he could do much more. If a little boy like Vivek can stand up
to modern slavers, why can't world leaders do the same?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%);
PROSTITUTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); LABOR
TRAFFICKING (89%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (88%); CHILDREN (86%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (75%); HOSTAGE TAKING (75%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(73%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (51%) Children and Youth; United States International
Relations; Sexual Slavery

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Meena Khatun; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: NORTH INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: India; Katihar (India)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              465 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Accuses China and Russia Of Arming Sudan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 256 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


China and Russia are supplying arms to Sudan that are being used to fuel the
violence in the Darfur region, in violation of a United Nations arms embargo,
Amnesty International said in a report on Tuesday.

''The irresponsible transfer of arms to Sudan and its neighbors are a
significant factor in the massive human rights catastrophe in Darfur and its
spread into eastern Chad,'' Amnesty International said.

The report said ''the bulk'' of the arms were transferred from China and Russia,
without giving specific figures. It added that Beijing and Moscow should have
been aware that their military equipment was being used for attacks on
civilians.

A Sudanese government spokesman, Bakri Mulah, denied the report's accusations,
saying, ''It is the sort of claim that has no material proof.'' A spokeswoman
for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Jiang Yu, said Chinese sales to African
nations were ''very limited and small in scale,'' but refused to say whether any
were being made to Sudan. The Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement that
''no Russian weapons have been shipped to Darfur.''

In March 2005, the Security Council extended an arms embargo already in force in
Darfur for the rebels and the militias to include Sudan's government.

The Amnesty report said the group was particularly concerned about Russian Mi-24
helicopter gunships acquired by Sudan that were said to be used for attacks in
Darfur.

A photo of three Chinese ''Fantan'' fighter jets on the tarmac of an airport in
southern Darfur was also in the report.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMS TRADE (92%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ARMS EMBARGOES
(90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); AIRPORTS (71%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (70%);
HELICOPTERS (64%) Arms Sales Abroad; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) United Nations

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (74%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (58%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CHAD (92%); AFRICA
(79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); China; Russia

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              478 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Propping Up the General

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 457 words


It seems the more unpopular Pakistan's military dictator, Gen. Pervez Musharraf,
becomes at home and the less he is willing to fight the Taliban, the more the
Bush administration clings to him.

Washington is afraid, and entirely not without reason, that nuclear armed
Pakistan's next ruler could be even worse. The answer is not to stand by while
the general cranks up his repression. That only feeds the fundamentalist and
anti-American passions that Washington fears.

Instead of propping up the general, Washington should use the leverage it gets
from roughly $2 billion a year in aid to encourage an early return to democratic
rule.

Since Sept. 11, 2001, the United States has been paying about half that amount
each year to reimburse Pakistan's military for fighting Taliban and Al Qaeda
forces along the Afghan border. Eight months ago, General Musharraf radically
pared back those efforts, but the lavish American payments have continued.
Cutting back on those patrols makes it easier for the Taliban and Al Qaeda to
kill American and NATO troops. Congress must insist that future payments be
linked to actual counterterrorist activity and results, as some American
military officials now recommend.

Washington's uncritical support has also reinforced the general's arrogance and
insularity, which are at the heart of his current political problems. In March,
he arbitrarily suspended Pakistan's independent-minded chief justice, setting
off protest demonstrations which have continued ever since. The suspension came
as the court was preparing to hear challenges to the general's schemes to keep
himself in power -- as both army commander and president -- with his
presidential candidacy ratified by the current, submissive Parliament, not the
new one due to be elected later this year.

Members of the general's ruling party are now urging him to reach a compromise.
Some are even calling on him to open up the election to other serious
contenders, including two former prime ministers, Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz
Sharif, now living in exile. Both governments were badly stained with
corruption. But there can be no meaningful return to democracy without the free
participation of Pakistan's two most popular political leaders. General
Musharraf is resisting this good advice, but could change his mind if Washington
added its voice to the call for free elections.

A succession of uniformed dictators has misruled Pakistan for more than half of
its 60-year history. All have advertised themselves as great friends of
Washington, but all have fanned extremism while discrediting America's
reputation among ordinary Pakistanis. There is no security with General
Musharraf. The United States belongs on the side of Pakistani democracy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY RULE (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(89%); ELECTIONS (88%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ARMIES (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); POLITICS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (69%); COUNTERTERRORISM (68%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (65%);
CORRUPTION (64%) Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights; Elections; Politics and
Government; Foreign Aid; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (90%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (58%); NAWAZ SHARIF (58%) Pervez
(Pres) Musharraf; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              488 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 28, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official Is Expected to Become Chief Prosecutor for War Crimes Tribunal

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 411 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, June 27


The chief prosecutor at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Carla Del Ponte,
is  expected to be succeeded  by the United Nations official leading the inquiry
into the killing in 2005 of Rafik Hariri, former prime minister of  Lebanon,
United Nations officials in The Hague and in New York said  Wednesday.

The United Nations official, Serge Brammertz, a well-known Belgian criminologist
who has led the  Hariri inquiry, has been invited to take up the prosecutor's
post at the United Nations tribunal in The Hague in December when his  mandate
in Lebanon expires, the officials said. Mr. Brammertz,  seen as the strongest
candidate for the job, has  accepted, the officials said. He could not be
reached immediately for comment.

Ms. Del Ponte's second term expires in September, and she wanted to step down.
She  has been asked to stay on  until the end of the year, or at least until her
successor is able to take over,  said the officials, who asked not to be
identified because the new candidate had not yet been announced.

On Wednesday, in an interview in the office she has occupied for almost eight
years, Ms. Del Ponte said   that she would be willing to stay on  but was
awaiting formal approval from the Swiss government, still nominally her employer
since her days as the Swiss attorney general.

What Mr. Brammertz will face as chief prosecutor for crimes during the wars of
the 1990s in the former Yugoslavia will depend on whether Gen. Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic, the fugitive Bosnian Serb leaders, are arrested soon.

The tribunal is expected to close its doors by 2010 but may continue if one or
both of its most notorious fugitives arrive.

Ms. Del Ponte, while often frustrated by the lack of Serbian cooperation, is
once again raising expectations that at least one of the two fugitives, General
Mladic, will be brought to trial.

Referring to her visit to the Serbian capital  this month, she said in the
interview: ''I was told in Belgrade they will give me Mladic. I know now that
they are willing to arrest him, that now the political will exists.''

Mr. Brammertz would not be a  newcomer to The Hague. Until January 2006, when he
took over the United Nations inquiry into the killing of Mr. Hariri in Beirut,
he was deputy prosecutor at the International Criminal Court, which opened in
The Hague in 2002 to try the gravest human rights abuse cases. He has also led
major inquiries in Belgium,  where he has been attorney general.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); ARRESTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON
(79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); LEBANON (94%); SERBIA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SWITZERLAND (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
BELGIUM (58%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              490 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Repression By China, And by Us

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


I'd meant to focus this column on a Chinese woman whose battle for justice has
led the police to arrest her more than 30 times, lock her in an insane asylum,
humiliate her sexually, shock her with cattle prods, beat her until she is
crippled and, worst of all, take away her young daughter.

The case of Li Guirong, a graying 50-year-old who now hobbles on crutches,
reflects China at its worst -- government by thuggery. But each time I start
this column, I feel that President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney have
pulled the rug out from under me. Do I really have the right to complain about
torture or extra-legal detentions in China when we Americans do the same in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba?

I keep remembering a heated conversation I had in Yunnan Province when I lived
in China years ago. I reproached an official for China's torture and arbitrary
imprisonment, and he retorted that China was fragile and had lost hundreds of
thousands of lives in the chaos of the Cultural Revolution. ''If you Americans
ever faced the threat of chaos, you would do just the same,'' he said.

''Impossible!'' I replied.

Yet I owe him an apology, for he has been proven right. The moment we did feel a
threat, after 9/11, we held people without trial, and beatings were widespread
enough that more than 110 of our prisoners died in custody in places like Abu
Ghraib, Bagram and Guantanamo.

Our extrajudicial detentions and mistreatment of prisoners are wrong in and of
themselves. But they also undercut our own ability to speak against oppression
and torture around the world.

If I protest here about the abuse of Ms. Li, Chinese officials will simply say
that we Americans are hypocrites who should clean up our own house before we go
around pointing fingers. But let me protest anyway.

Ms. Li's story began in 1994, when her husband was badly injured in a fall in
the state-owned coal mine where they both worked. Rather than pay medical care
and disability, the mine fired him.

Ms. Li protested to local officials -- and then the mine fired her as well. So
she made a series of trips to Beijing to appeal for help from the central
government -- but each time the police just rounded her up and sent her back to
her native Jilin Province.

Twice the local police sentenced her to a labor camp. The first time, she was
imprisoned for a year for trying to tell her story to a British journalist. The
second time, she was imprisoned for 18 months for escalating her protests and
trying to contact government leaders.

Local officials once had her stripped naked in front of male police officers and
strapped down to a bed in a mental hospital, where they gave her injections of
drugs that for a time left her in a stupor.

Another time, she was beaten and kicked so badly that she is still unable to
walk without crutches. But the worst outrage, she says, is the targeting of her
children.

The authorities threatened to deny her eldest daughter, Wang Lingli, a place in
university, although in the end she scored so brilliantly on her college
entrance exams that the officials backed off. Ms. Wang, who confirms her
mother's story, is now looking after her severely disabled father and is about
to graduate from university -- but only if she can pay $2,850 she still owes in
college fees.

As for the younger daughter, now 12, the authorities carted her off to an
orphanage. That just breaks Ms. Li's heart. I brought two of my own children
when I interviewed Ms. Li, and she told me how much she missed her own little
girl as she held my daughter and wept and wept.

The United States must stand up against such human rights abuses around the
world -- and our first step should be to clean up our act.

Our own equivalent of Ms. Li is Sami al-Hajj, a cameraman for Al Jazeera who has
been held in Guantanamo for more than five years. He still suffers from painful
injuries that he apparently received in beatings while in American custody.

The U.S. government has never offered a hint of evidence that he is anything but
a journalist. Indeed, Mr. Hajj's lawyers say that the interrogators have offered
to release him immediately if he will spy on Al Jazeera.

So, Mr. Bush, give prisoners like Mr. Hajj their rights -- and give America back
its moral authority to speak up for human rights around the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
ARRESTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (78%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS
(77%); SENTENCING (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%); JOURNALISM (66%); ACCIDENTAL
INJURIES (61%); WRITERS (61%); COAL MINING (61%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (55%); DICK CHENEY (55%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); JILIN, CHINA (79%);
YUNNAN, CHINA (79%); NORTHEAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              491 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Secret Prisons in 2 Countries Held Qaeda Suspects, Report Says

BYLINE: By STEPHEN GREY and DOREEN CARVAJAL; Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 7


Investigators have confirmed the existence of clandestine C.I.A. prisons in
Romania and Poland housing leading members of Al Qaeda, contends a new report
from the Council of Europe, the European human rights monitoring agency.

Dick Marty, the Swiss senator leading the inquiry, said in a recent interview
that his conclusions were based on information from intelligence agents on both
sides of the Atlantic, including members of the C.I.A. counterterrorism center.
The report is to be released on Friday.

The report says the jails operated from 2003 to 2005. ''Large numbers of people
have been abducted from various locations across the world and transferred to
countries where they have been persecuted and where it is known that torture is
common practice,'' it says.

These suspects included Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the confessed master planner for
the Sept. 11 attacks; Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a member of the Hamburg, Germany, cell
that organized the conspiracy; and Abu Zubaida, believed to have been a senior
figure in Al Qaeda.

The report says that some of the information comes from trusted intelligence
agents, who reported directly to former President Aleksander Kwasniewski of
Poland and to two former Romanian leaders, Ion Iliescu and Traian Basescu.

The governments of Poland and Romania have denied the existence of such prisons,
and officials could not be reached for comment on Thursday. Poland has
criticized Mr. Marty and his investigators in the past for not traveling there
to investigate the compound that the report describes as a prison.

The current president, Lech Kaczynski, has said that since he came to power in
December 2005 ''there has been no secret prison -- I am 100 percent sure of
it,'' adding, ''I am assured there never were any in the past either.''

Romania has repeatedly denied the presence of a secret prison there.

But last year, President Bush acknowledged for the first time that terrorism
suspects had been held in C.I.A.-run prisons overseas, without specifying where.

Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman, said Thursday that, ''While I've yet to see
the report, Europe has been the source of grossly inaccurate allegations about
the C.I.A. and counterterrorism,'' and he added, ''People should remember that
Europeans have benefited from the agency's bold, lawful work to disrupt
terrorist plots.''

The report contends, ''What was previously just a set of allegations is now
proven.'' An advance copy of the report was obtained by the British Channel 4
program ''Dispatches'' and provided to The New York Times.

Apart from the statements of what his report describes as former and serving
intelligence agents, Mr. Marty quotes aviation records that he suggests provide
detailed evidence of clandestine visits by C.I.A. planes to Szymany, in Poland;
as well as the text of confidential military agreements signed between the
United States and Romania that, he suggests, allowed the establishment of a
C.I.A. base in the country.

Mr. Marty said the C.I.A.'s partners in establishing the secret prisons were the
military intelligence agencies of both countries, which reported only to their
presidents and defense ministers. Neither the countries' prime ministers nor the
two Parliaments' intelligence committees were consulted or informed.

Prisoners in the secret jails were subjected to sleep deprivation and
water-boarding, or simulated drowning, said Mr. Marty, who also said that the
two jails had been divided into two categories.

The main C.I.A. jail was centered in a Soviet-era military compound at Stare
Kjekuty, in northeastern Poland, where about a dozen high-level terrorism
suspects were jailed, the report concludes. Lower-level prisoners from
Afghanistan and Iraq were held in a military base near the Black Sea in Romania,
the report contends.

Jails were staffed entirely by the C.I.A., and local guards secured the
perimeters, the report says. ''The local authorities were not supposed to be
aware of the exact number or the identities of the prisoners who passed through
the facilities -- this was information that they did not 'need to know,' '' the
report said.

Mr. Marty said last month in an interview with the Swiss newspaper La Liberte
that the report relied on information from disaffected C.I.A. agents and other
intelligence officials on the other side of the Atlantic. Many of the agents
said they were surprised that the prisons remained a secret for so many years.
''They spoke to me because they found what was happening to be disgusting,'' he
was quoted as saying.

The report includes more specific conclusions than a study issued in June last
year that contended that at least 14 European countries had accepted secret
transfers of terrorism suspects by the United States. That report listed a web
of landing points around the world that it said had been used by American
authorities for its air network.

The new report contends that the C.I.A. took extraordinary measures to cover its
activities. When C.I.A. jets flew to the Szymany airport in Poland, they used
flight plans with ''fictitious routes,'' it says, giving no indication that the
airport was the destination. Polish air traffic controllers -- working with
military intelligence -- completed the cover-up, the report says.

Although the report singled out Poland and Romania, it said that it could not
rule out the possibility that other European countries permitted these jails to
operate.

Among its accusations, this report said NATO agreements, under the guise of
waging a ''war on terror,'' provided the framework that the C.I.A. used to
expand its European operations after Sept. 11.

The Marty report says it would be pointless for researchers to visit the Polish
compound because ''we have no doubts about the capability of those who would
have removed any traces of the prisoner's presence.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(79%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); CONSPIRACY (74%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); COUNCIL OF EUROPE (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: HAMBURG, GERMANY (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (70%)

COUNTRY: POLAND (95%); ROMANIA (94%); EUROPE (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
GERMANY (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              495 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1065 words


INTERNATIONAL A2-11  New Plan to Arm Sunnis Against Qaeda Militants With the
four-month-old buildup of American troops showing only modest success in curbing
insurgent attacks, American commanders are turning to another strategy that they
acknowledge is fraught with risk: arming Sunni Arab groups that have promised to
fight militants linked to Al Qaeda -- in many cases, their former allies.  A1
Iraq's leading political blocs agreed to remove the speaker of Parliament from
his position after accusations that his bodyguards assaulted a Shiite lawmaker
as the speaker cursed him. Members of Parliament and a spokesman for the
speaker's party confirmed the assault and the plans for removal. A6  Gaza
Infighting and Air Strikes The Israeli Air Force struck at least two buildings
in Gaza City in what appeared to be a response to a raid across the Gaza-Israel
border by Palestinian militants.

Also, internal violence between the main rival Palestinian organizations, Hamas
and Fatah, flared again in the Gaza Strip, with at least four people killed over
the weekend.  A9   Flooding in China Kills 66 Torrential rains in southern China
have unleashed surging floodwaters that have swept through small cities and
farming villages, claiming at least 66 lives, forcing nearly 600,000 people to
be relocated and destroying millions of dollars in property, the state news
media reported. A11   Bush Tour Reaches Albania President Bush's visit to
Albania was the fifth stop on his eight-day, six-country swing through Europe.
The first sitting president to visit the country, he told the Albanians that he
supported their effort to join NATO and wanted independence soon for Kosovo
without making any fresh commitments.  A3  Sri Lankan Rights Panel Report An
international panel appointed by the government of Sri Lanka has issued a stark
indictment of a presidential commission intended to investigate serious human
rights violations, saying that its activities so far ''do not satisfy
international norms and standards.''  A11   NATIONAL A12-17  State Budgets Get
Boost From Booming Economy State lawmakers across the country have found
themselves with more money than they planned as they wind down their regular
sessions. Burned by several years of shortfalls, states have kept their
estimates of total revenues on the conservative side and are now reaping plenty
from higher than expected tax collections and booming local economies.   A1
Mixed Views of Romney Bid To many Mormons, Mitt Romney's bid for the presidency
is both a proud sign of progress and a cause of real trepidation. Even his many
Mormon supporters find the moment fraught with anxiety because his candidacy is
bringing intense scrutiny to their church and could worsen longstanding bigotry.
A1  Repatriation of the Dead The repatriation of remains has become increasingly
commonplace as towns across Mexico have sent their children to find work in the
United States. As debate rages in Congress over a proposed immigration law, the
journey of the dead suggests that for many Mexicans the sojourn in the United
States, legal or not, is meant to be temporary.   A1  Immigration Unresolved
Senate Democrats opened the door to reviving the stalled immigration measure,
calling on Republicans to resolve their internal divisions and produce an
agreement on how to move the legislation forward. Republican critics of the bill
have called for more chances to eliminate provisions they describe as amnesty.
A12  Transit Expansion Project After operating for 32 years, efforts are under
way to expand the transit system designed to shuttle between West Virginia
University's two campuses, which sit two miles apart. At a cost of up to $40
million a mile, the expansion would extend the system, once derided as a waste
of money but now relied on by the city of Morgantown.   A12   NEW YORK/REGION
B1-5  Medical Marijuana Bill Advances in Connecticut On June 1, the Connecticut
State Senate, following the House, passed a bill that allows people with certain
medical conditions to grow as many as four marijuana plants for ''palliative
use.'' It is unclear whether Gov. M. Jodi Rell will sign the bill, which would
make Connecticut the 13th state in the nation to permit marijuana for medical
purposes. B1  Border Rules May Hurt Tourism Many people in the Niagara Falls
tourism industry fear that a set of new rules suggested by the 9/11 Commission
requiring Americans traveling by land or sea to Canada, Mexico, Bermuda and the
Caribbean to present a passport could discourage millions of visitors from
crossing the border and result in billions of dollars a year in lost revenue.
B1  The Pull of Homelessness After reading an article about Johnny Five, a
homeless man who lived beneath an abandoned train station in the Bronx, a
nonprofit group arranged for him to move into an apartment. But for the next
several months, Johnny would drift between his old life and his new one.  B1
ARTS E1-10   Two Big Winners at Tonys ''The Coast of Utopia,'' Tom Stoppard's
eight-and-a-half-hour epic, was the big winner at the 61st annual Tony Awards,
setting the record for the most awards won by any play in Tony history.
Meanwhile, the musical ''Spring Awakening,'' won best book, score, direction and
choreography and best featured actor. E1  OBITUARIES B7  Richard Rorty A scholar
whose inventive work on philosophy, politics, literary theory and more made him
one the of world's most influential contemporary thinkers, he was 75.  B7  John
P. McGovern A Houston real-estate investor whose philanthropy helped endow
medical facilities at Duke University and other institutions, he was 85. B7
BUSINESS DAY C1-8  Editor Leaves Publisher Daniel Menaker, the executive editor
in chief of the Random House Publishing Group, is leaving the company at the end
of June.  C1  Agency Loses Big Client Creative Artists Agency has tried
expanding its client base from mainstream entertainment companies to a widening
ring of customers, but the loss of Hasbro in the month before the release of the
movie ''Transformers'' is an example of how cruel the corporate world can be. C1
Business Digest C2  EDITORIAL A18-19  Editorials: Pakistan's dictator; a test of
the Senate; economic life after college; mental health in prisons.   Columns:
Nicholas D. Kristof and Paul Krugman.  Bridge E6 Crossword E2 Metro Diary B2 TV
Listings E9 Weather B8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); FLOODS &
FLOODING (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); RELIGION (89%); AL FATAH (78%); TERRORISM
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HAMAS (78%); BUDGETS (77%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS
(76%); CONSERVATISM (76%); RELOCATIONS (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); AIR FORCES (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); WEATHER (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (70%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (65%); MORMONS & MORMONISM (63%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: MITT ROMNEY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (75%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL
(94%); ALBANIA (93%); CHINA (92%); IRAQ (92%); SRI LANKA (92%); KOSOVO (79%);
EUROPE (79%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              496 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dinner With A Warlord

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; Paul Krugman is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: A Hilltop In Eastern Congo


One hint that this would be an unusual interview came when the warlord walked in
wearing a button reading ''Rebels For Christ.''

Then when I reached to sip the cafe au lait that the guerrilla leaders offered
me in their jungle redoubt, they looked reproachful and quickly bowed their
heads and said grace.

I'm taking a student and a teacher along on a reporting trip to Africa, and we
wanted to look at how civil wars tear countries apart and block the continent's
economic development. So we rented a jeep and drove past the last checkpoints
outside the city of Goma, and then jounced along a tortuous dirt road into the
hills.

We traveled through gorgeous green hills and forests, thatch-roof villages and
mist-shrouded canyons. Government is only a rumor here, for the capital is 1,200
miles away and has no control in the east and offers no services. There is no
postal service, no national health or education system, no authority to rein in
the ultimate boss in the third world: a man with a gun.

Along the way to see the warlord, we stopped at an elementary school. It is
financed by the parents, who pay $9 per year per child to the eight teachers who
instruct 520 students. Many parents cannot afford that sum, so they keep their
children at home.

The school building hadn't been kept up since the Belgians ruled Congo in the
years before 1960. The Belgians were brutal colonial masters in Congo, but after
enduring subsequent rounds of kleptocratic incompetence and civil war, some
Congolese feel nostalgic for the lesser tyranny of colonialism.

Finally we were stopped by a band of soldiers who searched us carefully and then
led us past more guards with AK-47s and grenade launchers to the sanctum of
Laurent Nkunda, the chieftain of a swath of war-torn eastern Congo.

Mr. Nkunda, 40, is a smart and charismatic man with a university education who
treated us to several hours of lively conversation in his fluent English,
followed by a tasty chicken dinner. He described himself as a devout Pentecostal
and said that most of his troops had converted as well; he showed us a church
where he said they pray daily, and he showed photos of baptisms of the soldiers.

Then again, the government has issued an international arrest warrant against
him for war crimes, and human rights monitors like Refugees International say
that his troops have killed and raped civilians and pillaged their villages. He
denies the charges.

''I'm not a warlord  I'm a liberator of the people,'' he said.

That's the problem: So are they all.

More than four million people have died in Congo's wars since 1998, making it
the most lethal conflict since World War II.

Probably no slaughter has gotten fewer column inches -- or fewer television
minutes -- per million deaths. So even after all that suffering, Congo still
hasn't risen to a prominent place on the international agenda.

That's why I came here with Leana Wen and Will Okun, the student and teacher
from my win-a-trip contest. (Video and photos of the trip and blogs by Will and
Leana are at nytimes.com/twofortheroad.)

The U.N. did hold elections last year, and much of Congo is indeed more stable
today. But here in this region of eastern Congo, a wretched situation is getting
even worse.

Since January about 150,000 people have been driven from their homes by renewed
violence, and there are widespread fears that a larger war is looming.

''We see war coming,'' Mr. Nkunda said, and he pulled out his laptop to show a
map indicating that various government-backed forces are being dispatched to
attack him. He added: ''The only reply to war and ammunition is war and
ammunition.''

I told him -- a bit nervously -- that such tribalism and fighting has torn apart
a country that should be one of Africa's richest. But Mr. Nkunda, who quotes
Gandhi, emphasized that what counts here is simply force. ''You go by
strength,'' he said.

There are no easy solutions here, although some steps are essential: supporting
professional training and reform of the Congolese security forces, pressuring
neighboring Rwanda to support central authority over the full country,
bolstering the peace process, and interdicting mineral exports that finance
rebel armies. But the most important step is simply for the international
community to acknowledge that a war that costs four million lives must be an
international priority, even if the victims aren't staring at us from television
screens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); RELIGION
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (88%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%);
CHILDREN (76%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (76%); TEACHING & TEACHERS
(76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (76%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (76%);
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (76%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); WORLD WAR II (70%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (68%); REFUGEES (65%); ARREST WARRANTS (60%); ARRESTS (60%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              497 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Desperation Rises at Closed Border Crossings Between Gaza Strip and Israel

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER and ISABEL KERSHNER.

Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, June 18


A Palestinian man was killed Monday at the volatile and closed border between
Israel and Gaza after Palestinian gunmen opened fire on Israeli soldiers,
officials said. The attack took place near the area where several hundred people
trying to flee Gaza had been camped out and Israeli troops fired back.

Hospital officials said that Jihad Madhoun, 35, had died and that five other
people had been wounded. A spokeswoman for the Israeli Army said its soldiers
responded to shooting from across the Erez checkpoint amid a flurry of gunfire
that pinned down bystanders and reporters on the Israeli side. The spokeswoman
said the army had not confirmed hitting anyone.

''If there were injuries, it was not necessarily because of our fire,'' the
spokeswoman said.

The incident highlighted the growing problem at the border crossings between
Israel and Gaza, closed since the Islamic group Hamas defeated its rival, Fatah,
in Gaza after five days of fighting last week.

Several hundred people, most of them Fatah supporters, have been camped out at
Erez, saying they fear for their lives unless they are allowed to escape through
Israel to the West Bank. The dead man was a close relative of Samih Madhoun, a
senior Fatah leader executed by Hamas militants last week, though it was unclear
whether he and the wounded people were among those camped out.

Israel, which closed the checkpoint on Thursday, has said it will not allow a
crossing by the group, which includes some women and children.

More broadly, Gaza has been cut off for four days now. While aid officials say
the situation is not yet dire, Israel will not deal with Hamas,  even at the low
level of coordinating trucks through checkpoints.

''Hamas is a terrorist organization,'' said Shlomo Dror, a spokesman for the
Coordinator of Activities in the Territories, the Israeli government agency that
deals with the Palestinian areas. ''They can't say on the one hand that they
want to destroy Israel, and on the other  'we need your help.' We won't help
Hamas. From our point of view, let them fail.''

Some officials said, though, that they were trying to find a way to prevent a
humanitarian crisis without dealing with Hamas. ''We have no interest in
creating hardship -- that would play into Hamas's hands,'' said Mark Regev, a
spokesman for the Foreign Ministry. ''We want to ensure a flow into Gaza of
humanitarian support and we are currently looking for solutions. We will have to
be creative.''

Israel has periodically closed the borders to put pressure on Palestinians, but
in the past, the Israelis were willing to talk to members of the Fatah party in
the Palestinian government to coordinate the traffic of food, commerce and
relief supplies.

Now, independent aid agencies say, the situation is different, though Israel has
allowed  shipments of medical supplies and there have been some inconclusive
talks with aid groups. With Gaza almost wholly dependent on the outside world
for food, and with 1.1 million of its 1.5 million people receiving some sort of
food assistance, the clock is ticking toward crisis.

Fresh foods like milk and meat are running out, and prices on items like flour
are rising, aid officials said Monday. Hospitals are reporting supplies,
despite new shipments.

Human rights advocates say  Israel will have to find some new way of letting
assistance and supplies in. ''Israel is going to have to rethink its treatment
of Hamas,'' said Sari Bashi, director of Gisha, an Israeli human rights group.
''You can't provide for the needs of the civilian population of Gaza without
talking to someone in power.''

Aid officials say privately that several ideas have been floated, including
asking the United Nations or an aid group to coordinate cross-border traffic on
the Gaza side. As long as the solution does not involve dealing with Hamas,
Israeli officials say they are willing to consider anything.

The immediate problem, Israeli and aid officials agree, is a breakdown of the
Palestinian side of the border: Most of the regular border guards have fled, the
offices and terminals looted after Hamas overran Fatah and its militiamen
ransacked Fatah-controlled installations.

For the moment, Kevin Kennedy, relief coordinator for the United Nations Office
of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Palestinian areas, said the United Nations
had stockpiled enough food to last six weeks for people now getting aid. But, he
said, that amount assumes that regular supplies from the outside  and that those
supplies would dwindle more quickly if the borders were not reopened and more
people needed their help.

Kirstie Campbell, of the United Nations World Food Program, said the aim was to
head off a crisis before it happened: Now, she said, bakers have between five
and six days of flour left to make bread, and bread shortages are likely to
cause yet more instability in an already uncertain atmosphere.

''It's a main staple of the Palestinian diet, so when there is no bread
available at the bakeries, people start to panic,'' she said.

Israel has been letting a small number of people into Gaza: on Monday they
included a Palestinian man released from an Israeli jail; a woman who had been
treated in a hospital in Tel Aviv; and Nahim Alian, who arrived at Erez and
rested on the customs counter a package wrapped in blue plastic. It contained
the body of his son, Mahmoud, just a few months old, who had died in an Israeli
hospital. He was going  home to bury him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Among the few people allowed into the Gaza Strip yesterday was
Nahim Alian, with a bundle on the counter holding the body of  his 4-month-old
son, Mahmoud, who had died of heart disease at an Israeli hospital. (Photograph
by Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); BORDER CONTROL (90%);
SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (78%);
HOSPITALS (72%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (68%); RELIGION (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              499 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Bones We Carried

BYLINE: By LORI ANDREWS.

Lori Andrews, a professor at Chicago-Kent College of Law, is the author of ''The
Silent Assassin,'' a novel.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 541 words


Chicago

THE White House visit today by President Nguyen Minh Triet of Vietnam will take
place just a few miles from the resting place of some of his countrymen. When
American G.I.'s returned from the Vietnam War, some tried to smuggle home the
skulls of Vietcong and North Vietnamese soldiers. The graffiti-covered skulls
served as ashtrays, candle holders and trophies. Six skulls were seized by the
Customs Service. They remain in limbo, relegated to a drawer on the campus of
the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.

At a time when President Bush plans to chastise the Vietnamese leader about
human rights abuses, a question confronts his own administration: Should we
return the Vietnamese trophy skulls?

The importance of human remains has been highlighted over the past six years by
the efforts to identify bits of bone and ash from the bodies of people who died
in the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001. More than 1,000
cubic yards of dirt and other material from near ground zero are still being
screened for bone fragments and other remains. Grieving families continue to
inundate forensics experts from the World Trade Center site with old
toothbrushes, licked stamps and razor blades that might provide a DNA sample and
a genetic link to the bodies of their loved ones.

But what of the similar desires of a people 8,000 miles away? Many Vietnamese
worship their ancestors as part of their religion. They believe that if a
person's bones cannot be found, his soul wanders aimlessly and cannot be cared
for properly by his descendants.

About 300,000 Vietnamese soldiers went missing in action in what the Vietnamese
call the American War. A Vietnamese television program, with several episodes
each week, describes what is known about the final days of Vietnamese M.I.A.'s
to help their relatives find their bones.

American soldiers have been active in this work. They've turned over to the
Vietnamese Embassy the wallets and photos they took from slain Vietnamese
soldiers. They've drawn maps to show where mass graves were dug. Those efforts
have helped locate the remains of thousands of North Vietnamese soldiers.

The Armed Forces Institute of Pathology on the Walter Reed campus received the
Vietnamese skulls by default. The Defense Department institute is known for its
sensitive handling of human remains. Its lab receives the bodies of all the
American soldiers who are killed in Iraq. The medical examiner and his staff
identify those remains by linking soldiers to their families through DNA
testing. After the Sept. 11 attacks, 50 forensic experts from the institute
raced to help, identifying 184 Pentagon victims and all the passengers of United
93.

Human remains are not trinkets. They are people's links to their past and
societies' testimony to their history. With the Vietnamese government now
helping to find the remains of American soldiers on Southeast Asian soil, the
fate of the Vietnamese trophy skulls on our soil is a litmus test for how
empathetic we can be about our former enemies' remains and how serious we are
about creating a new relationship with Vietnam. President Bush needs to return
the skulls. For in honoring the dead, we also show our respect for the living.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VIETNAM WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); FORENSICS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DNA (88%); EVIDENCE (87%); FORENSIC
DNA TESTING (87%); ARMIES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (77%);
WAR & CONFLICT (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); HEALTH CARE (75%); GENETIC
SCREENING (75%); BIOETHICS (75%); PATHOLOGY (75%); CORONERS COURTS & OFFICES
(73%); SMUGGLING (72%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (72%); VANDALISM (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (69%); TERRORISM (68%); DNA TESTING (65%); RELIGION (64%); TELEVISION
PROGRAMMING (63%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); VIET NAM (95%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); IRAQ
(79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              501 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Say NATO Airstrike Killed at Least 25 Civilians in the South

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK and TAIMOOR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 22


At least 25 civilians, including nine women, three infants and an elderly
village mullah, were killed in an airstrike early Friday morning when they were
caught in a battle between Taliban and NATO forces in southern Afghanistan, the
police chief of Helmand Province said.

The situation was grimly familiar: the Taliban launched an attack under the
cover of darkness and then retreated into the village of Kunjakak in the Grishk
district of Helmand. NATO commanders ordered air support, and the result was
devastating.

Lt. Col. Mike Smith,  a NATO spokesman, said in a written statement that perhaps
30 Taliban insurgents had been killed in the airstrike, adding that while an
unknown number of innocents might have lost their lives, the fault was entirely
the enemy's. ''In choosing to conduct such attacks in this location at this
time, the risk to civilians was probably deliberate,'' Colonel Smith said. ''It
is this irresponsible action that may have led to casualties.''

Afghans are not only angry with the Taliban, whose terrorizing tactics include
using suicide attacks and concealed roadside bombs, they are also upset by what
they see as the sometimes indiscriminate death toll of allied bombs and rockets.

That concern has been echoed by foreign charities working in the country.
Earlier this week, Acbar -- a coalition of Afghan and international relief
agencies that include CARE, Save the Children and the Mercy Corps -- criticized
the United States and its allies, saying that hasty military action has led to
at least 230 civilian deaths this year.

''Members of Acbar recognize the challenges faced by soldiers in a battlefield
environment, but military forces must at all times respect international
humanitarian and human rights law,'' the organization said. ''Notably, forces
must distinguish between civilians and combatants and use force strictly in
proportion with legitimate military objectives.''

Acbar's critique went beyond airstrikes. It noted 14 instances in which
civilians had been ''killed for simply driving or walking too closely'' to
foreign soldiers. It mentioned ''abusive raids and searches of Afghan homes''
that have sapped support for both international aid workers and the
multinational military presence.

Little is known about Friday's fighting in Kunjakak. Helmand Province's police
chief, Muhammad Hussein Andiwal, said that the battle began Thursday night and
that the Taliban used at least two civilian compounds in their efforts to
escape.

These are brutal days in Afghanistan. The Taliban have launched several suicide
attacks, including Sunday's bombing of a police bus in Kabul that killed 24
people. On Monday, seven children were killed in a religious compound during an
airstrike by the United States-led coalition in the eastern province of Paktika.
There are reports that dozens of civilians have died during days of fighting in
the Chora district of Uruzgan Province in the south.

''This past week has been very tough,'' said Christopher Alexander, the deputy
special representative of the United Nations Secretary General in Afghanistan.
''I've seen the reports. In the Chora attack, the Taliban literally slit the
throats of men, women and children and burned the bodies. But there was also
close air support that killed civilians,'' he said, referring to the NATO
airstrike.

Various groups here in Kabul keep a running tally of casualties; there is wide
variation in numbers. According to Mr. Alexander, during the past two years the
number of wartime dead has risen fourfold. So far this year, the United Nations
has counted about 2,800 deaths, which is 20 to 30 percent above the pace of
2006.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%);
BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); RELIGION (78%); DEATHS (78%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES
(72%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (72%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%); POLICE FORCES (57%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%); MERCY CORPS (54%); SAVE
THE CHILDREN (54%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              502 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 386 words


A front-page article yesterday described a crackdown in Iran that has included
the jailing of three Iranian-Americans, repression or intimidation of
nongovernment organizations pressing for broader legal rights, warnings to
newspaper editors against articles on banned topics, arrests of advocates for
women's rights and of student leaders, and the detention of 150,000 people for
wearing clothing considered not Islamic.

The headline over the article said that Iran was cracking down on dissent and
"parading examples" in the streets, and one paragraph in the article also said
that young men detained for wearing tight T-shirts or western-style haircuts had
been "paraded bleeding through Tehran's streets by uniformed police officers."
The Times caption on an official Iranian news agency photograph that ran with
the article said that it showed a police officer punishing a young man in public
for wearing un-Islamic clothing by forcing him to suck on a plastic container
normally used for intimate hygiene, a punishment the article also asserted was
for that offense.

But the man in the photograph, according to widespread Iranian news reports, was
one of more than 100 people arrested recently on charges of being part of a gang
that had committed rapes, robberies, forgeries and other crimes. The caption
published on the Web site of the news agency, Fars, had said only that the man
was being punished as part of a roundup of ''thugs'' in a Tehran neighborhood.

The current repression has made reporting in Iran difficult. In this case, The
Times relied on an interview with a researcher for a nongovernment agency that
no longer operates within Iran who said the photograph was evidence of a more
visible police role in public crackdowns on what the authorities consider
immoral behavior. The reporter then wrongly interpreted what the researcher said
as applying to a crackdown on dress, and incorporated the erroneous
interpretation into the body of the article, without giving any indication of
the source for it.

These errors could have been avoided with more rigorous editing. The article
should not have said that young men had been paraded through the streets for
wearing un-Islamic dress, and the headline over it should not have said that
dissenters were being paraded as part of the crackdown.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editor's Note

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); NEWS REPORTING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); ARRESTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); RELIGION (76%); WEB SITES (73%);
ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (72%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (72%); COUNTERFEITING
(51%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAN (88%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              503 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Students Protest Treatment In Terror Cases

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING: WASHINGTON; Pg.
15

LENGTH: 117 words


President Bush was presented with a letter signed by 50 high school seniors in
the Presidential Scholars program urging a halt to ''violations of the human
rights'' of terror suspects held by the United States. The White House said Mr.
Bush had not expected the letter but took a moment to read it. ''The president
enjoyed a visit with the students, accepted the letter and upon reading it let
the students know that the United States does not torture and that we value
human rights,'' Dana Perino, the deputy press secretary, said. The students had
been invited to the East Room to hear the president speak about his effort to
win Congressional reauthorization of the No Child Left Behind education law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); US NO CHILD LEFT
BEHIND ACT (88%); AWARDS & PRIZES (88%); HIGH SCHOOLS (88%); TERRORISM (87%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (86%); EDUCATION LAW (73%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              505 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 387 words


A front-page article yesterday described a crackdown in Iran that has included
the jailing of three Iranian-Americans, repression or intimidation of
nongovernment organizations pressing for broader legal rights, warnings to
newspaper editors against articles on banned topics, arrests of advocates for
women's rights and of student leaders, and the detention of 150,000 people for
wearing clothing considered not Islamic.

The headline over the article said that Iran was cracking down on dissent and
''parading examples'' in the streets, and one paragraph in the article also said
that young men detained for wearing tight T-shirts or western-style haircuts had
been ''paraded bleeding through Tehran's streets by uniformed police officers.''
The Times caption on an official Iranian news agency photograph that ran with
the article said that it showed a police officer punishing a young man in public
for wearing un-Islamic clothing by forcing him to suck on a plastic container
normally used for intimate hygiene, a punishment the article also asserted was
for that offense.

But the man in the photograph, according to widespread Iranian news reports, was
one of more than 100 people arrested recently on charges of being part of a gang
that had committed rapes, robberies, forgeries and other crimes. The caption
published on the Web site of the news agency, Fars, had said only that the man
was being punished as part of a roundup of ''thugs'' in a Tehran neighborhood.

The current repression has made reporting in Iran difficult. In this case, The
Times relied on an interview with a researcher for a nongovernment agency that
no longer operates within Iran who said the photograph was evidence of a more
visible police role in public crackdowns on what the authorities consider
immoral behavior. The reporter then wrongly interpreted what the researcher said
as applying to a crackdown on dress, and incorporated the erroneous
interpretation into the body of the article, without giving any indication of
the source for it.

These errors could have been avoided with more rigorous editing. The article
should not have said that young men had been paraded through the streets for
wearing un-Islamic dress, and the headline over it should not have said that
dissenters were being paraded as part of the crackdown.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editors' Note

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); NEWS REPORTING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); ARRESTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); RELIGION (76%); WEB SITES (73%);
ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (72%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (72%); COUNTERFEITING
(51%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAN (88%)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              507 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hamas Reports Progress On Freeing Israeli Soldier

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Dec. 31


Palestinian groups involved in holding an Israeli soldier who was captured in
late June said Sunday that significant progress had been made toward a prisoner
exchange that would release him.

A spokesman in Gaza for the military wing of Hamas said Sunday that ''there is a
breakthrough'' in the prisoner issue ''and we hope it will be concluded very
soon.'' The spokesman, Abu Ubaida, suggested that a deal could be close for the
release of Cpl. Gilad Shalit, captured by Hamas and two other militant groups in
a raid into Israel on June 25.

A spokesman for the larger Hamas movement in Gaza, Fawzi Barhum, confirmed
Sunday that ''there has been progress,'' while the Palestinian prime minister,
Ismail Haniya, of Hamas, said last Thursday that the Israeli soldier would be
freed soon.

Egypt has spent months trying to broker a deal. But its efforts have been
stymied repeatedly by the refusal of Hamas leaders in exile -- in particular
Khaled Meshal, who heads the Hamas political bureau -- to sanction an agreement
that would send Corporal Shalit home before hundreds of Palestinian prisoners
are released.

The government of Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel played down the prospect
of quick results. A spokeswoman for Mr. Olmert, Miri Eisin, said a release was
not imminent and there remained ''problems,'' a view echoed by the Palestinian
negotiator, Saeb Erekat.

Mr. Olmert is to meet Thursday with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in Sharm el
Sheik, Egypt, and there has been news media speculation that a deal could be
announced there.

The Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, said a prisoner exchange would
be discussed at the meeting. ''The deal is ready,'' he told the London daily
newspaper Al Hayat. But the deal ''awaits a Palestinian side capable of taking
its own decisions.''

''Once the decision is Palestinian, without foreign pressure, then the exchange
will take place,'' Mr. Aboul Gheit said, an apparent and apparently bitter
reference to the influence that Syria and Iran have over Mr. Meshal and the
military wing of Hamas. Mr. Meshal lives in exile in Damascus, Syria, where the
government has rebuffed all Western requests to close his office.

''The deal will be done once both sides agree on the overall deal Egypt has
proposed and is trying to put into effect,'' Mr. Aboul Gheit said.

The Egyptians have been working on a deal under which Corporal Shalit would be
delivered into their hands. The Israelis, who will not deal directly with Hamas,
would then begin to release some Palestinian prisoners, beginning with women and
youngsters, with more to follow once the corporal is back in Israel.

The total of Palestinian prisoners to be released has been described variously
at 450 to 1,000, including some who have served long sentences in Israeli
prisons for serious offenses. The Israelis are always reluctant to release
prisoners convicted of involvement in killing Israelis.

Mr. Olmert is also trying to ensure that the Palestinian Authority president,
Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah, gets credit for the swap, not the militants of Hamas and
the Popular Resistance Committees who captured Corporal Shalit.

The Palestinian groups put the onus on Israel. ''The swap depends on whether
there is an Israeli intention to make it happen,'' said a spokesman for the
Popular Resistance Committees, who calls himself Abu Mujahed. He said Corporal
Shalit was in good health.

The capture of the corporal resulted in a return of Israeli soldiers to the Gaza
Strip, which they had left in 2005. A bloody summer and autumn followed, with a
series of Israeli incursions, continuing Palestinian rocket attacks into Israel
from Gaza and fierce internal Palestinian fighting as Hamas and Fatah struggled
for power.

Mr. Olmert had made the release of Corporal Shalit a condition for a serious
meeting with Mr. Abbas, but changed his mind as the situation deteriorated and
Washington pressed for some political movement with Fatah.

As of November, Israel was holding 9,075 Palestinian prisoners, including 345
minors, according to the independent Israeli human rights group B'Tselem.

On Friday, the Israeli soldier's father, Noam Shalit, published a letter in the
Palestinian daily Al Quds, addressing his son and appealing to his captors.

He wrote: ''The fact that we don't know how you are, how you feel, how you are
making it through the winter, and how the Palestinian organizations holding you
are treating you, is very hard for us. They declare that you are a prisoner of
war, but unfortunately, they are preventing you from receiving the rights to
which you are entitled as a prisoner of war according to international law, and
also according to the exalted Islamic law.''

Mr. Shalit then quoted verses from the Koran on the treatment of prisoners and
said he hoped that during the Muslim feast of Id al-Adha, which began over the
weekend, ''a change would take place in the position of the Palestinian
organizations holding you,'' to enable the Palestinian families of prisoners
held in Israel to soon see their relatives.

He asked the captors to show his son the letter, which ends: ''Don't break
before you are released, which is very close, and we are doing all we can so
that your release and the release of the Palestinian prisoners will be very
close.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cpl. Gilad Shalit, in an undated photo provided by his family,
was captured by gunmen on June 25.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (94%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
SENTENCING (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(74%) Palestinians; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Hamas

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (79%); HOSNI MUBARAK (52%) Steven Erlanger; Gilad (Cpl)
Shalit

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (97%); ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); SYRIA
(92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Israel; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              510 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 2, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Checking Out, in Style or in Turmoil

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 4; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THE TV WATCH; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 621 words


In a New Year's weekend bracketed by deaths, it turns out that it was sound, not
pictures, that made shocking television.

The background noise in a camera-cellphone recording of Saddam Hussein's
execution -- jostling and sectarian insults -- belied the Iraqi government's
portrait of the hasty hanging as a cool, considered meting of justice.

The accompanying dark and blurry shot of the Iraqi dictator falling though the
gallows' trapdoor -- shown in its two-minute entirety on the Internet but not on
most television news programs -- was about as distinct as a sonogram. It was an
unsettling sight, but not really all that graphic or gruesome.

It was more the idea of watching Mr. Hussein die -- a snuff reality show -- that
spooked many viewers. It certainly gave news directors pause. But the first
images of the execution, filmed by Iraqi officials and shown within hours on
Iraqi and American television, came without the ambient sounds that defined his
final moments.

Networks and cable news outlets hesitated briefly about showing the unexpurgated
version after it began ricocheting around the Internet on Sunday. But most news
programs showed at least some of it. The tape turned out to hold redeeming --
and damning -- news value: it suggested to viewers that the execution that
President Bush initially described as ''an important milestone'' in Iraq's
advance toward democracy was actually more of a millstone.

Next to the screams and confusion around the gallows in Baghdad, the slow,
stately processions in honor of former President Gerald R. Ford seemed almost on
mute. As well-wishers lined up to pass before his flag-covered coffin, lying in
state in the Capitol rotunda, the only sound came from marine guards' high-gloss
shoes squeaking on the polished marble floor.

Small wonder CNN kept going back to snippets of ''Get Up (I Feel Like Being a)
Sex Machine, Pt. 1,'' sung at the raw, boisterous tribute to James Brown in
Augusta, Ga. Michael Jackson stood onstage like a bereaved relative, and the
Rev. Al Sharpton stepped up as mourner in chief, giving instructions to St.
Peter. ''You need to open up the gates for the Godfather,'' he thundered. Mr.
Brown's music was the unofficial soundtrack of the era when Mr. Ford was in
office (Mr. Brown sang ''Say It Loud -- I'm Black and I'm Proud'' at President
Richard M. Nixon's inaugural festivities in 1969), so those incongruous segues
made poetic sense.

Some of the most startling images of the new year were the ones meant to
distract and entertain. As he did last year, a frail Dick Clark, 77, took a seat
in ABC's Times Square studio to preside over his signature holiday special,
''Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve.''

Ryan Seacrest, a Dick Clark Mini-Me and the host of ''American Idol,'' actually
led the show. But despite a 2004 stroke that left him in a wheelchair and his
speech impaired, Mr. Clark, wearing a tuxedo jacket with shiny lapels, made
brief cameos. His voice was slurred and his face gaunt and waxy, but he smiled
gamely as he introduced Christina Aguilera and called out the countdown to
midnight.

Television has little patience with the aging and not much time for stroke
victims, so it was both reassuring and painful to see Mr. Clark struggling to
still fit into his nickname, ''America's oldest teenager.''

Anyone who thinks that elderly entertainers can gracefully retire and surrender
the limelight don't know anything about show business. As usual, the
hardest-working man in it said it best.

In an interview he gave in 1989 while in prison for, among other things, a
PCP-fueled high-speed car chase, Mr. Brown was asked how he was feeling.

''I'm well rested,'' the singer replied. ''But I miss being tired.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ryan Seacrest, left, and Dick Clark on ABC's New Year's Eve
broadcast. (Photo by Heidi Gutman/ABC)(pg. E7)
 An Internet video image of Saddam Hussein at his execution. (pg. E1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (78%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); TERRORISM (73%); REALITY TELEVISION (73%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (72%); PARADES & MARCHES
(69%); NEWS REPORTING (68%); POLITICS (65%) Television; New Year; Television;
United States Politics and Government; Television; Presidents and Presidency
(US); Terrorism; Capital Punishment; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); RYAN SEACREST (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); RICHARD
NIXON (57%); AL SHARPTON (50%) Alessandra Stanley; Saddam Hussein; Gerald
Rudolph Jr Ford; Dick Clark; James Brown; Ryan Seacrest

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); AUGUSTA, GA, USA (52%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              512 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 2, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Plan for Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 73 words



To the Editor:

I was heartened by ''No Sanctuary'' (editorial, Dec. 23), in which you urge
long-overdue action on Sudan.

Whether it's sending United Nations peacekeepers into Darfur; freezing the
assets of all Sudanese officials involved in the genocide; imposing a no-flight
zone over Darfur; or using all three measures, we can no longer remain innocent
bystanders to genocide.

(Rabbi) H. David Teitelbaum
Redwood City, Calif., Dec. 23, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(86%); PEACEKEEPING (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: H David (Rabbi) Teitelbaum

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (70%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (73%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              517 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 38 words


An article on Monday about the handling of the video of Saddam Hussein's
execution by television networks and Web sites referred imprecisely to the site
littlegreenfootballs.com. It posted a link to the video, not the video itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); INTERNET CRIME
(86%); GENOCIDE (86%); INTERNET & WWW (86%); TERRORISM (84%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(84%) Correction Stories; Capital Punishment; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Recordings and
Downloads (Video); Computers and the Internet; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) Saddam (Pres) Hussein

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              519 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 119 words


A front-page article yesterday about an Iraqi government investigation of the
abusive behavior at the execution of Saddam Hussein, including the unauthorized
cellphone camera recording of it, misstated the account of a witness who said he
saw two others there holding cellphone cameras aloft to record Mr. Hussein's
final moments. While the witness, Munkith al-Faroun, a prosecutor at Mr.
Hussein's trial, said both of the others were officials, he did not identify one
of them as Mowaffak al-Rubaie, the national security adviser. Mr. Rubaie, who
could not be reached for comment in the article, said yesterday that he had
handed his cellphone to security officials an hour before the hanging and had
not recorded it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS (88%); RELIGION (86%); ETHICS (85%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(85%); GENOCIDE (84%); TERRORISM (59%) Correction Stories; Capital Punishment;
Cellular Telephones; Demonstrations and Riots; Ethics; Islam; Recordings and
Downloads (Video); United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Nuri Kamal Al- (Prime Min)
Maliki

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              520 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 4, 2007 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Soldier Reaches Plea Deal In the Killing of 3 Iraqis

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 812 words


A soldier from the 101st Airborne Division is scheduled to plead guilty next
Tuesday to a reduced charge for mercy killing in connection with the death of
three unarmed Iraqi men shot by American infantrymen last spring, according to
lawyers for other defendants in the case.

The terms of the plea arrangement will allow the soldier, Specialist Juston R.
Graber, originally charged with capital murder, to be convicted of aggravated
assault and to receive a nine-month prison sentence in exchange for his
testifying against three other members of his squad, the lawyers said.

The three other soldiers, members of the same company as Specialist Graber in
the division's Third Brigade, still face courts-martial on premeditated-murder
charges, making them eligible for the death penalty or, barring that, life in
prison. Army prosecutors have accused them of carrying out an impromptu plan,
following a raid on a marshy island northwest of Baghdad, to kill the three
Iraqis after cutting off their plastic handcuffs and forcing them to run, still
blindfolded, from the squalid hut where they had been discovered.

The two soldiers accused of firing on the men as they fled -- Specialist William
B. Hunsaker and Pfc. Corey R. Clagett -- have said they shot in self-defense
after the three broke free from the thin ''zip-tie'' handcuffs and attacked
them.

A third soldier, Staff Sgt. Raymond L. Girouard, the squad's ranking member, is
accused of devising the plan to kill the men, then punching Private Clagett and
cutting Specialist Hunsaker to give the appearance that they had been attacked.

None of these three defendants have entered a formal pea.

The guilty plea by Specialist Graber, to be entered before an Army judge at Fort
Campbell, Ky., and his testimony against the other soldiers will make gaining
their acquittal far more difficult than it would have been had all four kept a
unified legal front, lawyers for the three others said.

''It changes the complexion of the entire case and makes the case much stronger
against Clagett, Hunsaker and Girouard,'' said Paul Bergrin, a lawyer for
Private Clagett who said he had not expected Specialist Graber to get ''such an
outstanding deal.''

''It gives the government's case credibility and corroboration where they didn't
have it before,'' Mr. Bergrin added. ''It requires us to rethink our strategy.''

Specialist Graber's two military lawyers, Capt. Shaun Lister and Capt. Will
Suddeth, did not reply to e-mailed requests for comment or phone messages left
with military officials at Fort Hood, Tex., where both are based. Their client's
willingness to testify for the prosecution, though, was bitter news to the three
other defendants.

Michael Waddington, a lawyer for Specialist Hunsaker, said Specialist Graber's
plea arrangement felt like a betrayal, ''especially when we've been disclosing
our strategy'' to his lawyers for months. Specialist Graber's legal team had
joined with Mr. Waddington, Mr. Bergrin and Capt. Ted Miller, a lawyer for
Sergeant Girouard, in a collaborative pact known as a joint defense agreement,
which lawyers often create if their clients face similar charges in the same
incident.

Defense lawyers said Specialist Graber's plea was not particularly surprising,
given the disparity between the evidence against him and the charges he had
faced.

According to the evidence, Specialist Graber made a last-second decision to
shoot the dying man after a squad medic declared him beyond help and, according
to sworn statements from soldiers not charged in the case, after Sergeant
Girouard said, ''Put him out of his misery.''

But Army prosecutors nonetheless charged Specialist Graber, 21, with
premeditated murder, creating an enormous incentive, defense lawyers for the
three other soldiers said, for him to plead guilty to a lesser charge that more
closely fit the crime.

The first court-martial in the case will be Private Clagett's, scheduled to
begin Jan. 15 at Fort Campbell, Mr. Bergrin said. Two other soldiers, Sgt.
Leonel Lemus and Pfc. Bradley Mason, are expected to testify for the prosecution
that they heard Sergeant Girouard conceive a plan to free the Iraqi men from
their handcuffs and have Private Clagett and Specialist Hunsaker kill them.

But Mr. Bergrin said he would call a powerful witness of his own: Col. Michael
Steele, the brigade commander, who, according to several soldiers' sworn
testimony, told some soldiers to ''kill all military-age males'' they
encountered during the raid, on May 9.

Colonel Steele's lawyer, Lt. Col. Raymond A. Jackson, said on Wednesday that
Colonel Steele had never given such an order, a denial putting him at odds with
several soldiers under his command.

The Army has granted Colonel Steele immunity to testify, Mr. Bergrin said, and
once on the stand and under oath, ''he's going to have to tell the truth.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 5, 2007



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about a guilty plea by Army Specialist Juston
R. Graber to a reduced charge of mercy killing in connection with the deaths of
three Iraqi men misstated the original charge against him and the maximum
punishment three other soldiers could receive if convicted. Specialist Graber
was charged with noncapital murder, not capital murder. The three other soldiers
scheduled for courts-martial face life in prison -- not the death penalty -- if
convicted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PLEA AGREEMENTS (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); CAPITAL CRIMES (90%);
ARMIES (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); GUILTY PLEAS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%);
CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); MILITARY COURTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); SENTENCING (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); TERRORISM
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); SELF DEFENSE (73%); ACQUITTAL (72%); GENOCIDE
(72%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Plea Bargaining

PERSON: Juston R (Specialist) Graber; Paul Von Zielbauer; William B (Specialist)
Hunsaker; Corey R (Pfc) Clagett; Raymond L (Sgt) Girouard

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              521 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a War With Vague Boundaries, A Terror Detainee Longs for Court

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2425 words


Ali al-Marri, whom the government calls a sleeper agent for Al Qaeda and who is
the only person on the American mainland still held as an enemy combatant,
spends his days in a small cell in solitary confinement at the Navy brig in
Charleston, S.C. When he is in an ironic mood, his lawyers say, he calls the
cell his villa.

Mr. Marri waits there for word from his wife, two sons and three daughters, whom
he last saw in 2001, just before his arrest in Peoria, Ill., where he was
studying computer science at Bradley University.

Letters arrive, but they are late and have words and sentences blacked out. A
note his wife sent to him 10 months ago landed recently. It began with a
standard Muslim invocation, but a word was missing. Mr. Marri is pretty sure it
was ''Allah.''

But mostly Mr. Marri waits for word from a federal appeals court, which will
soon rule on one of the most urgent questions in American law, one his case
presents in stark form: May the government indefinitely detain a foreigner
living legally in the United States, without charges and without access to the
courts?

Mr. Marri, who is 41 and a citizen of Qatar, wants the right to challenge
President Bush's assertion that he is a terrorist and ''a grave danger to the
national security of the United States.''

The Bush administration says the courts cannot second-guess the president when
he decides that someone is an enemy combatant, at least when noncitizens are
involved. Detaining combatants is a military rather than a criminal matter, the
administration says, adding that its purpose is not to punish the prisoner but
to stop him from returning to the battlefield.

The implications of that position are startling, according to a brief filed last
month in Mr. Marri's case by some 30 constitutional scholars. ''The government's
interpretation would be vastly threatening to the liberty of more than 20
million noncitizens residing in the United States,'' the brief said, ''exposing
them to the risk of irremediable indefinite detention on the basis of unfounded
rumors, mistaken identity, the desperation of other detainees subject to
coercive interrogation, and the deliberate lies of actual terrorists.''

Kathleen M. Blomquist, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, disputed that
contention.

''Of all the terrorists currently in the custody of the United States military,
al-Marri is the only one who was captured in the United States,'' Ms. Blomquist
said, adding that the notion that millions of people are at risk is ''unfounded
and absurd.''

Mr. Bush's determination that Mr. Marri is an enemy combatant, she said, was
based on substantial evidence, including ''his association with Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed, mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, and files found on his computer
concerning chemical weapons of mass destruction.''

Mr. Marri maintains his innocence, his lawyers say. But they have refused to
offer point-by-point rebuttals of the government's detailed assertions, calling
instead for prosecutors to offer evidence to back them up in court.

''In a civilized society and under American law and tradition,'' said Jonathan
Hafetz, a lawyer for Mr. Marri with the Brennan Center for Justice at New York
University School of Law, ''the government has the obligation to prove its
case.''

One of Mr. Marri's brothers, Mohammed Marri, in a telephone interview from
Qatar, rejected the charge that Mr. Marri is a terrorist. ''For sure it's not
true,'' he said.

A third brother, Jarallah, is at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, held as an enemy
combatant based on accusations that he had visited a Qaeda camp. ''This is not a
proper way to treat other people from other countries,'' Mohammed Marri said of
his brothers and other detainees. ''If they are guilty, let them prove it in
court.''

An Exclusive Club

  The Charleston brig can hold 288 military prisoners and 6 enemy combatants,
but there have never been more than 3 in the exclusive enemy combatant club. Two
of them are now gone.

One of them, Yaser Hamdi, was freed and sent to Saudi Arabia after the United
States Supreme Court allowed him to challenge his detention in 2004. Jose
Padilla was transferred to the criminal justice system last year just as the
Supreme Court was considering whether to review his case. That leaves only Mr.
Marri.

Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla are American citizens, but Mr. Marri is not. They were
seized abroad or on their way back to the United States, while Mr. Marri was
living what seemed to be an ordinary life, in Peoria, a city often caricatured
as the nation's most ordinary, with a family and a minivan.

The government contends in a partly declassified declaration from a senior
defense intelligence official, Jeffrey N. Rapp, and in a recent book by former
Attorney General John Ashcroft, that Mr. Marri was a Qaeda sleeper agent sent to
the United States to commit mass murder and disrupt the banking system.

The assertions have not been tested in court, and human rights groups say they
are based on unreliable evidence ''There is substantial reason to believe,''
lawyers for two of the groups wrote in a brief in November, ''that the
allegations of the Rapp declaration are derived from the torture of two men
interrogated at Guantanamo Bay and other detention sites: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed
and Mustafa Ahmed al-Hawsawi.''

The government says that Mr. Hawsawi was one of the financiers of the Sept. 11
attacks.

Mr. Rapp's declaration cites the personal views of Mr. Mohammed, who is often
referred to as K.S.M. ''K.S.M. considered al-Marri an ideal sleeper agent,'' Mr.
Rapp wrote.

Kept in Isolation

  Mr. Marri was kept in isolation at the brig and, according to his court
filings, subjected to tough interrogation. Interrogators threatened to send him
to Egypt or Saudi Arabia, according to a lawsuit filed on his behalf in 2005,
''where, they told him, he would be tortured and sodomized and where his wife
would be raped in front on him.''

''By winter '05,'' Andrew J. Savage, who also represents Mr. Marri, said in a
recent interview, ''I genuinely thought he was losing his mind. He told me in
this sort of indirect way that he might not be able to hold on, that his mind
was playing tricks on him.''

Mr. Padilla's lawyers have said that their client's time in the brig was so
grueling that he is not fit to stand trial. But while Mr. Padilla was passive,
Mr. Marri pushed back. He put wet toilet paper on the video camera, for
instance. The brig responded by taking away his mattress, Koran and hygienic
products, including his toilet paper.

''There is almost nothing to distract him from his torment,'' his lawyers wrote
in the lawsuit, ''and he therefore becomes preoccupied with his pain and the
degradation he suffers.''

Perhaps as a consequence of the lawsuit, conditions have improved.

When Mr. Marri's lawyers were first allowed to see him in October 2004, after
the decision in Mr. Hamdi's case, Mr. Marri was behind a transparent barrier and
bound in leg-irons and handcuffs that were linked to a belly-chain and fastened
to the floor. Officials from the Defense Intelligence Agency and the brig were
present, and the conversation was videotaped.

On a recent visit, Mr. Savage said, he met his client in a visiting lounge. Mr.
Marri, who was not restrained, was wearing stylish bifocals rather than
institutional prison glasses. He was also wearing a watch, which makes it easier
for him to know when to pray.

Mr. Savage brought hummus and pita bread. ''We sat down, we broke bread, and we
had a three-and-a-half hour conversation, unmonitored,'' Mr. Savage said.

Mr. Marri is now allowed to watch television in the evening, but not the news.
He reads newspapers and magazines, but they are edited. ''Brig staff remove all
materials associated with the war on terror from them,'' Cmdr. Stephanie L.
Wright, the brig's commanding officer, said in court filing in July.

Sometimes that makes for a thin newspaper. ''All I get is sports and obits,''
Mr. Marri has complained, Mr. Savage said. He is critical of the former, saying
there is not enough soccer coverage.

The Defense Department has allowed journalists and others to tour the Guantanamo
facility, where Mr. Marri's brother Jarallah and 400 other men are being held.
All of the Guantanamo prisoners are foreigners who were seized abroad. The
government has not asserted that the brothers were working together.

The Defense Department refused a recent request to inspect the Charleston brig.
A spokesman, Cmdr. J. D. Gordon, cited ''operational security concerns
surrounding the detention of an alleged al Qaeda-linked operative in the U.S.
mainland,'' a reference to Mr. Marri. Commander Gordon added that ''it has
always been our policy to treat all detainees humanely.''

Return to the United States

  Mr. Marri spent eight years in the United States as a young man, graduating
from Bradley with an undergraduate degree in business administration in 1991.
When he returned to the United States 10 years later, he brought his family.

In his declaration, Mr. Rapp noted that Mr. Marri's profile ''differed
significantly from that of the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers.'' Those differences,
Mr. Rapp said, made Mr. Marri all the more attractive to Al Qaeda.

The years between Mr. Marri's two stints at Bradley are a mystery. The
government says he trained at a Qaeda camp in Afghanistan for about a year and a
half between 1996 and 1998, specializing in poisons. The government also says
that Mr. Marri visited the United States briefly in 2000, which Mr. Marri has
denied.

In the summer of 2001, Mr. Rapp wrote, Mr. Mohammed introduced Mr. Marri to
Osama bin Laden. Mr. Marri ''offered to be an Al Qaeda martyr,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.

''Al Qaeda instructed al-Marri that it was imperative that he arrive in the
United States prior to Sept. 11, 2001, and that if al-Marri could not do so,
that he should cancel all his plans and go to Pakistan,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.

The Marris arrived in Peoria on Sept. 10, 2001.

Mr. Marri soon came to the attention of the F.B.I., which first interviewed him
less than a month later. In December, agents searched his laptop, finding
''research consistent with the tradecraft and teachings associated with Al
Qaeda,'' Mr. Rapp wrote. Mr. Marri was arrested on Dec. 12, 2001, and held as a
material witness at the request of prosecutors in New York. He was indicted two
months later on charges of credit card fraud. In January 2003, the government
added charges of lying to federal agents and financial institutions, and
identity theft. Mr. Marri pleaded not guilty. His family has since returned to
the Middle East.

For a year and a half, the government pursued a conventional criminal case. Mr.
Ashcroft, in his book ''Never Again,'' which was published in October, wrote
that Mr. Marri ''rejected numerous offers to improve his lot'' by cooperating
with investigators. ''He insisted,'' Mr. Ashcroft wrote, ''on becoming a 'hard
case.' ''

In June 2003, as the case was nearing trial, the government abruptly changed
course, taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system and moving him into
indefinite military detention. That means, Mr. Ashcroft later wrote, that Mr.
Marri can be held ''at least until the war against Al Qaeda was over.''

In its rush to move Mr. Marri, the government short-circuited its criminal case.
On hearing that a federal judge in Peoria would allow Mr. Marri's lawyers to
file papers opposing the transfer as long as the criminal case was alive, the
government agreed to dismiss the criminal charges with prejudice, meaning they
cannot be refiled.

The decision, however, would not prevent the government from charging Mr. Marri
with other crimes outlined in Mr. Rapp's declaration.

The declaration has served the purpose for which it was designed. In August, it
persuaded Henry F. Floyd, a federal judge in Spartanburg, S.C., to deny a habeas
corpus petition challenging Mr. Marri's detention. Saying that Mr. Marri had
''offered nothing more than a general denial'' of the assertions in the
declaration, Judge Floyd dismissed the petition.

Neither side was happy with the ruling. Mr. Marri has appealed to the United
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, saying that the
president does not have the power to detain him as an enemy combatant.

A foreigner living legally in the United States, his lawyers say, is not the
same as a soldier captured on a battlefield. Even if the president does have the
power, they say, he should be required to support his assertions with evidence.

The government argues that Judge Floyd gave Mr. Marri too full a hearing. It
cited the recent Military Commissions Act, which says that the courts have no
jurisdiction to hear challenges from any alien ''who has been determined by the
United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant.''

The case will be heard Feb. 1

The government offered Mr. Marri a sort of consolation prize should the appeals
court dismiss his case. It said he could try to persuade a combatant status
review tribunal, convened by the Defense Department, that he was not an enemy
combatant. That would apparently be the first such proceeding on the mainland;
all of the others known to have been conducted were at Guantanamo Bay.

A Different View

  In a brief filed in November, eight former Justice Department officials,
including Janet Reno, the attorney general in the Clinton administration, said
that taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system as his case approached trial
''has given to the appearance of manipulation of the judicial process.'' The
brief listed several criminal statutes available to prosecute people accused of
terrorism along with many successful prosecutions under them.

''The criminal justice system has proven that it can make the cases,'' Ms. Reno
said in an interview. ''For the president to be able to designate someone as an
enemy combatant, without process and without regulation, just doesn't make any
sense and isn't necessary.''

Ms. Blomquist, the Justice Department spokeswoman, said, ''While we respect the
views of former law enforcement officials, the United States cannot afford to
retreat to a pre-September 11 mind-set that treats terrorism solely as a
domestic law enforcement problem.''

Mr. Marri shared a fantasy with one of his lawyers not long ago. ''I'd love to
be taken back to Saudi Arabia and they would beat the'' -- here, he swore --
''out of me for six months,'' Mr. Marri said, according to Mr. Savage. ''It
would be brutal, but it would be finite.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ali al-Marri, below, a terrorism suspect, is being held in a
Navy brig in South Carolina. A letter from his wife, above, has words blacked
out. (pg. A13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LAWYERS
(73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (72%); ARRESTS (70%); HIJACKING (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); EVIDENCE
(67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); APPEALS COURTS (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(65%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (55%) Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking;
World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); US NAVY (58%); BRADLEY UNIVERSITY (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) Adam Liptak; Ali Saleh Kahlah Al- Marri; George W
(Pres) Bush; Khalid Shaikh Mohammed

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (90%); PEORIA, IL, USA (77%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              522 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Debacle in the Gallows

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 700 words


To the Editor:

''The Ugly Death of Saddam Hussein'' (editorial, Jan. 4) emphasizes the lack of
planning and oversight by the Bush administration. To say that the execution was
''a shaming embarrassment'' and that ''all Americans will be blamed'' is an
understatement.

If the United States' pre-emptive invasion of Iraq is considered one of the
major strategic blunders in American history, the execution of Saddam Hussein
while the United States was the occupying force in Iraq may come close to
rivaling that blunder.

Why couldn't Iraqi justice be served once there was a functioning Iraqi
government and United States forces were out of Iraq, and why couldn't the Bush
administration have insisted that this be so?

Leonard Cohen
Sugar Land, Tex., Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Lies were told to go to this war, and lies were told to extend it. Now there are
brand-new lies that promise victory only if we add more troops.

A debacle needs no reinforcements. Let our young people come home to start their
lives anew. And let President Bush reap his whirlwind.

Christopher Woods
Houston, Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Your editorial doesn't mention the fact that President Bush has not yet watched
the cellphone video of Saddam Hussein's execution, according to White House
spokesmen.

Let me get this straight: the delivery of Saddam Hussein to justice was one of
the president's only legitimate reasons left standing for the invasion of Iraq;
the United States held him in custody until the Iraqi government requested that
he be delivered to pay the ultimate price; the United States may have delivered
him ''into the hands of a Shiite lynch mob''; there is a worldwide outcry about
the circumstances surrounding the execution; and the Bush administration is
struggling to distance itself from the execution.

And yet the president has not even bothered to watch the video to assess the
situation? With our worldwide credibility once again on the line, how can we
ever trust that he knows what he is talking about?

Rick Smith
Los Angeles, Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Re ''Iraq to Examine Abusive Conduct Toward Hussein'' (front page, Jan. 3):

The ''trial'' of Saddam Hussein, measured by most American judicial standards,
might be considered a farce. It is ironic that there is now some upset that
during the execution of Mr. Hussein, after his release from American custody,
there seemed to be a lack of dignity and courtesy among the participants. Could
it be that it is the execution itself that lacks dignity and courtesy?

John Maguire
Oakland, Calif., Jan. 3, 2007

To the Editor:

Such a fuss in your paper over the ''abusive conduct'' toward Saddam Hussein!
Perhaps the Shiites should have consulted Miss Manners on the proper decorum for
the execution of a mass murderer?

Donald Hoffmann
Kansas City, Mo., Jan. 3, 2007

To the Editor:

Tony Snow, the White House press secretary, when asked about the appalling
cellphone video of Saddam Hussein's execution, declared that ''the most
important thing to keep in mind is, this is a guy who killed hundreds of
thousands of people and received justice,'' while absolving the Americans of
responsibility for handing him over to the Shiite Iraqi regime just minutes
before he was hanged (''Despite Misgivings, White House Says Little Against
Hanging,'' news article, Jan. 4).

Supervising hasty executions, of course, was one of George W. Bush's precious
few qualifications for office six years ago. Still, the White House cannot have
it both ways, extolling the virtues of democracy while overlooking the expanding
disaster in Iraq.

The world's democracies, many of which have banned the death penalty, can only
conclude that America cares little for the rule of law.

Timothy Stewart-Winter
Chicago, Jan. 4, 2007

To the Editor:

Why is it so hard for our elected officials to admit error? The lynching of
Saddam Hussein was wrong, whether or not you agree with capital punishment and
irrespective of the magnitude of his crimes.

This administration is quick to condemn homosexuality, abortion and euthanasia.
For once, I'd like it to condemn true immorality. Only then we will regain the
moral authority we once enjoyed.

Bill Schrier
Carmel, Calif., Jan. 3, 2007


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Rob Shepperson)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); ETHICS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); HISTORY
(71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (68%); GENOCIDE (60%); TERRORISM (59%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (59%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Capital Punishment;
Ethics; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%) Leonard (Lr Writer) Cohen;
Christopher Woods; Rick (Lr Writer) Smith; John Maguire; Donald (Lr Writer)
Hoffman; Timothy Stewart-Winter; Bill Schrier; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); HOUSTON, TX, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY
AREA, CA, USA (69%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (50%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              531 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 9, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein's Voice Speaks in Court In Praise of Chemical Atrocities

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1512 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Jan. 8


The courtroom he dominated for 15 months seemed much smaller on Monday without
him there to mock the judges and assert his menacing place in history.

But the thick, high-register voice of Saddam Hussein was unmistakable. In audio
recordings made years ago and played 10 days after his hanging, Mr. Hussein was
heard justifying the use of chemical weapons against the Iraqi Kurds in the late
1980s, predicting they would kill ''thousands'' and saying he alone among Iraq's
leaders had the authority to order chemical attacks.

In the history of prosecutions against some of the last century's grimmest men,
there can rarely have been a moment that so starkly caught a despot's unpitying
nature.

On one recording, Mr. Hussein presses the merits of chemical weapons on Izzat
Ibrahim al-Douri, his vice-president, and now, the Americans believe, the
fugitive leader of the Sunni insurgency that has tied down thousands of American
troops. Mr. Douri, a notorious hard-liner, asks whether chemical attacks will be
effective against civilian populations, and suggests that they might stir an
international outcry.

''Yes, they're very effective if people don't wear masks,'' Mr. Hussein replies.

''You mean they will kill thousands?'' Mr. Douri asks.

''Yes, they will kill thousands,'' Mr. Hussein says.

Before he was hanged Dec. 30 for offenses in another case, Mr. Hussein had used
the so-called Anfal trial, involving the massacre of as many as 180,000 Iraqi
Kurds, as a platform for arguing that the chemical weapons attacks of the kind
that devastated the town of Halabja on March 16, 1988, were carried out by
Iranian forces then fighting Iraq in an eight-year war.

But the recordings told another story. Court officials gave no hint as to how
they obtained the recordings, which Iraqis familiar with Mr. Hussein's voice
said seemed to be authentic. But they appeared to have been made during meetings
of his Revolutionary Command Council and of the Baath Party High Command, two
groups that acted as rubber stamps for his decisions. Mr. Hussein regularly
ordered meetings to be recorded, according to Iraqis who knew the inner workings
of Mr. Hussein's dictatorship.

Mr. Hussein sounds matter of fact as he describes what chemical weapons will do.
''They will prevent people eating and drinking the local water, and they won't
be able to sleep in their beds,'' he says. ''They will force people to leave
their homes and make them uninhabitable until they have been decontaminated.''

As for the concern about international reaction, he assures Mr. Douri that only
he will order the attacks. ''I don't know if you know this, Comrade Izzat, but
chemical weapons are not used unless I personally give the orders,'' he says.

When Iraq resumed the genocide trial of its former leaders on Monday, Mr.
Hussein's high-backed, black vinyl seat at the front of the dock was left
ominously empty. Something about the six remaining defendants, including Ali
Hassan al-Majid, Mr. Hussein's cousin, who was known among Iraqis as Chemical
Ali for his role in overseeing the attacks on the Kurds, suggested that they
felt orphaned without the commanding presence of Mr. Hussein.

Gone were the cries of ''Mr. President!'' as Mr. Hussein entered the court to
join them in the dock, and gone, too, was the emboldened posture they took from
Mr. Hussein, with frequent challenges and insults to witnesses, prosecutors and
judges. Perhaps Mr. Hussein's hanging, and the humiliating taunts he endured
from witnesses and guards as he stood with the noose around his neck, had broken
the last illusions among those surviving him that they could somehow evade a
similar end.

When the chief judge, Muhammad Ureibi al-Khalifa, began the proceedings by
abruptly cutting the microphone as Mr. Majid stood to intone a prayer in memory
of Mr. Hussein, the former dictator seemed to be judicially, as well as
existentially, dead. But the anticlimactic beginning swiftly gave way to the
most astonishing day of testimony since Mr. Hussein and his associates went on
trial. Once more, it was Mr. Hussein, this time in an involuntary orgy of
self-incrimination, who dominated.

In the sequence of scratchy recordings -- some with the dialogue quite clear,
some barely decipherable -- Mr. Hussein repeatedly showed the ready resort to
brutality that seized Iraq with fear during his 24 years in power. At one point,
he is heard telling a general to summarily execute field commanders who fail to
adequately prepare their defenses against Kurdish guerrilla raids.

He cites as a precedent ''some commanders who abandoned their positions when
they found themselves in an awkward situation, who deserved to have their necks
cut, and did.'' At another point, he tells subordinates to execute any internal
security officials who fail to stop Iraqi soldiers sneaking home from the
Iranian front on fake passes.

''If you arrest any of them, cut off their heads,'' he says. ''Show no mercy.
They only joined the security to avoid having to join the army and fight Iran.''

One recording revealed, more clearly than anything before, Mr. Hussein's
personal involvement in covering up Iraq's attempts to acquire unconventional
weapons, the program that ultimately led to President Bush sending American
troops to overthrow him. Talking to the general who led Iraq's dealings with
United Nations weapons inspectors until weeks before the 2003 invasion, he
counseled caution in the figures being divulged on the extent of Iraq's raw
supplies for chemical weapons, so as to disguise the use of unaccounted-for
chemicals in the attacks on the Kurds.

But it was Mr. Hussein's chilling discussion of the power of chemical weapons
against civilians that brought prosecutors and judges to the verge of tears, and
seemed to shock the remaining defendants. One of the recordings featured an
unidentified military officer telling Mr. Hussein that a plan was under
development for having Soviet-built aircraft carry containers, packed with up to
50 napalm bombs each, which would be rolled out of the cargo deck and dropped on
Kurdish towns.

''Yes, in areas where you have concentrated populations, that would be useful,''
Mr. Hussein replies.

Another recording involves a General Thabit, who was not further identified by
the prosecutors, telling Mr. Hussein that his forces had used chemical weapons
in the northern sector of Kurdistan, but that ''our supplies of the weapons were
low, and we didn't make good use of the ones we had.'' The general notes that
Iraq's production of mustard gas and sarin, a nerve gas, was ''very low,'' and
says they should be used sparingly. ''We're keeping what we have for the
future,'' he says.

Before they recovered enough to begin pleading their innocence, Mr. Hussein's
erstwhile companions in the dock buried their heads in their hands, gazed at the
floor, and glanced furtively toward TV cameras transmitting live coverage of the
trial. Mr. Majid shifted uneasily in his seat as one recording had him telling
officials to warn Kurdish refugees that they would be attacked with chemical
weapons if they attempted to return to their villages.

The prosecutor, Munkith al-Faroun, came to court as almost the only person who
attended Mr. Hussein's execution on Dec. 30 to emerge with an unsullied
reputation. It was he, as he and others confirmed, who attempted to halt the
taunts hurled at Mr. Hussein as he stood with the noose around his neck, moments
before the trapdoor opened. Over the hubbub, an illicit camera phone recording
showed Mr. Faroun calling out for silence, ''Please, no!'' he said. ''The man is
about to be executed.''

But back in the courtroom, Mr. Faroun became, again, the man holding Mr. Hussein
to account and, in one poignant moment, counseling restraint among those who
have expressed outrage over the manner of the former ruler's execution. That
moment came after the court watched television images taken after the Halabja
attack, which more than any other event focused world attention on the
atrocities committed under Mr. Hussein.

The video showed the horrors: a father wailing in grief as he found his children
lying along a street littered with bodies; dead mothers clutching gas-choked
infants to their breasts in swaddling clothes; young sisters embracing each
other in death; and trucks piled high with civilian bodies. ''I ask the whole
world to look at these images, especially those who are crying right now,'' Mr.
Faroun said, referring to the outpouring of sympathy for Mr. Hussein.

The recordings played at Monday's trial session, seemingly eliminating any doubt
about Mr. Hussein's role in the attacks on the Kurds, may go a long way to
answering criticism of the government for executing him before he was judged for
the worst of his crimes.

American justice department lawyers, who have done much of the behind-the-scenes
work in sifting tons of documents and other evidence gathered after the invasion
of 2003, had never hinted that they held the trump card, judicially and
historically, that the audio recordings seem likely to be.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tahir Tawfiq al-Ani, a former governor of Mosul and one of the
remaining defendants at the Anfal trial, at court yesterday in Baghdad. (Pool
photo by Darko Vojinovic)(pg. A8)
 Ali Hassan al-Majid, one of six remaining defendants on trial. (Pool photo by
Darko Vojinovic)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); GENOCIDE
(76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%) Kurds;
Biological and Chemical Warfare; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Recordings and Downloads (Audio)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) John F Burns; Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              535 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein Cousin Says He Ordered Executions

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Jan. 11


In the Baghdad courtroom where Saddam Hussein was sentenced to die in November,
new testimony on Thursday featured a startling admission by his cousin Ali
Hassan al-Majid, known to Iraqis as Chemical Ali.

He said he had ordered troops to execute all ''saboteurs'' who defied government
orders to abandon Kurdish villages in northern Iraq during a military operation
in 1988.

Evidence at the trial has centered on the Hussein government's use of chemical
weapons and mass executions against the Kurds. Mr. Majid made an immediate
impression by occupying the seat left vacant by Mr. Hussein, who was hanged
midway in the so-called Anfal trial for the killing of as many as 180,000 Kurds.

After listening to audio recordings that showed him issuing instructions in his
role as overseer of the campaign against the Kurds, Mr. Majid rose to tell the
judges that he was responsible for ordering executions in the villages. ''I gave
orders to the troops to catch anyone they find there and execute them after
investigating them,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); ARMED
FORCES (88%); SENTENCING (88%); EVIDENCE (88%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); TERRORISM (68%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Kurds; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Ali Hassan Al- Majid; Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              538 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Southeast Asians Consider Pact Against Terrorism

BYLINE: By CARLOS H. CONDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 426 words

DATELINE: CEBU, the Philippines, Jan. 11


Ten Southeast Asian countries meeting here are hammering out a regional
antiterrorism agreement, officials said Thursday, the day after a series of
terrorist bombings in the southern Philippines underscored the need for such a
measure.

''The terrorists merely accomplished the opposite of what they wanted,'' said
Victoriano Lecaros, a Philippine government spokesman. ''The attacks only
emphasized the need to address terrorism in Southeast Asia. There is now a
renewed urgency to deal with terrorism.''

Leaders of the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or
Asean, will consider the measure, the Asean Convention on Counterterrorism, at
their annual summit meeting here on Saturday. The agreement aims to improve
information and intelligence sharing among the group's members and encourage
them to adopt domestic antiterrorism laws, officials said.

''Global terrorism has assumed new forms of virulence, and we will make sure
that the community is more secure and resistant to the threat of terror,'' said
Alberto Romulo, the Philippine foreign minister.

Bombs ripped through three southern cities here on Wednesday night, killing
eight people and wounding dozens, the police said. No group claimed
responsibility, but two radical Islamist groups, Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah
Islamiyah, are suspected, an official said, because they were behind similar
bombings in the past.

Foreign ministers meeting here before the summit meeting discussed the
convention on Wednesday night. Opponents of the antiterrorism agreement fear
that it could be used to suppress human rights.

One result of the discussions was that Indonesia invited several countries,
including the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Australia, to meet in March to
discuss terrorism.

The attacks Wednesday in the southern region of Mindanao, where there is an
active Islamist separatist movement, followed claims by President Gloria
Macapagal Arroyo in recent weeks that her government had made progress fighting
terrorists.

''They were trying to send a message,'' said Oscar Calderon, the chief of the
national police, referring to the attackers. ''They wanted to embarrass the
government because of the meetings in Cebu.''

The Philippine police and military have been receiving help from the United
States and Australia in fighting Abu Sayyaf, which has been giving refuge to
Jemaah Islamiyah members. Jemaah Islamiyah is a Southeast Asian terrorism
network that originated in Indonesia and was said to be behind the 2002 Bali
bombings that killed more than 200 people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(63%) Terrorism; Bombs and Explosives

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (91%); ABU SAYYAF GROUP
(55%); JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (55%)

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (57%) Carlos H Conde

COUNTRY: SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (98%); ASIA (96%); PHILIPPINES (95%); AUSTRALIA
(92%); INDONESIA (92%); MALAYSIA (79%); THAILAND (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Far East, South and Southeast Asia and Pacific Areas

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              540 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 13, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Official Attacks Top Law Firms Over Detainees

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1078 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


The senior Pentagon official in charge of military detainees suspected of
terrorism said in an interview this week that he was dismayed that lawyers at
many of the nation's top firms were representing prisoners at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, and that the firms' corporate clients should consider ending their
business ties.

The comments by Charles D. Stimson, the deputy assistant secretary of defense
for detainee affairs, produced an instant torrent of anger from lawyers, legal
ethics specialists and bar association officials, who said Friday that his
comments were repellent and displayed an ignorance of the duties of lawyers to
represent people in legal trouble.

''This is prejudicial to the administration of justice,'' said Stephen Gillers,
a law professor at New York University and an authority on legal ethics. ''It's
possible that lawyers willing to undertake what has been long viewed as an
admirable chore will decline to do so for fear of antagonizing important
clients.

''We have a senior government official suggesting that representing these people
somehow compromises American interests, and he even names the firms, giving a
target to corporate America.''

Mr. Stimson made his remarks in an interview on Thursday with Federal News
Radio, a local Washington-based station that is aimed at an audience of
government employees.

The same point appeared Friday on the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal,
where Robert L. Pollock, a member of the newspaper's editorial board, cited the
list of law firms and quoted an unnamed ''senior U.S. official'' as saying,
''Corporate C.E.O.'s seeing this should ask firms to choose between lucrative
retainers and representing terrorists.''

In his radio interview, Mr. Stimson said: ''I think the news story that you're
really going to start seeing in the next couple of weeks is this: As a result of
a FOIA request through a major news organization, somebody asked, 'Who are the
lawyers around this country representing detainees down there?' and you know
what, it's shocking.'' The F.O.I.A. reference was to a Freedom of Information
Act request submitted by Monica Crowley, a conservative syndicated talk show
host, asking for the names of all the lawyers and law firms representing
Guantanamo detainees in federal court cases.

Mr. Stimson, who is himself a lawyer, then went on to name more than a dozen of
the firms listed on the 14-page report provided to Ms. Crowley, describing them
as ''the major law firms in this country.'' He said, ''I think, quite honestly,
when corporate C.E.O.'s see that those firms are representing the very
terrorists who hit their bottom line back in 2001, those C.E.O.'s are going to
make those law firms choose between representing terrorists or representing
reputable firms, and I think that is going to have major play in the next few
weeks. And we want to watch that play out.''

Karen J. Mathis, a Denver lawyer who is president of the American Bar
Association, said: ''Lawyers represent people in criminal cases to fulfill a
core American value: the treatment of all people equally before the law. To
impugn those who are doing this critical work -- and doing it on a volunteer
basis -- is deeply offensive to members of the legal profession, and we hope to
all Americans.''

In an interview on Friday, Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales said he had no
problem with the current system of representation. ''Good lawyers representing
the detainees is the best way to ensure that justice is done in these cases,''
he said.

Neither the White House nor the Pentagon had any official comment, but officials
sought to distance themselves from Mr. Stimson's view. His comments ''do not
represent the views of the Defense Department or the thinking of its
leadership,'' a senior Pentagon official said. He would not allow his name to be
used, seemingly to lessen the force of his rebuke. Mr. Stimson did not return a
call on Friday seeking comment.

The role of major law firms agreeing to take on the cases of Guantanamo
prisoners challenging their detentions in federal courts has hardly been a
secret and has been the subject of many news articles that have generally cast
their efforts in a favorable light. Michael Ratner, who heads the Center for
Constitutional Rights, a New York-based human rights group that is coordinating
the legal representation for the Guantanamo detainees, said about 500 lawyers
from about 120 law firms had volunteered their services to represent Guantanamo
prisoners.

When asked in the radio interview who was paying for the legal representation,
Mr. Stimson replied: ''It's not clear, is it? Some will maintain that they are
doing it out of the goodness of their heart, that they're doing it pro bono, and
I suspect they are; others are receiving moneys from who knows where, and I'd be
curious to have them explain that.''

Lawyers expressed outrage at that, asserting that they are not being paid and
that Mr. Stimson had tried to suggest they were by innuendo. Of the
approximately 500 lawyers coordinated by the Center for Constitutional Rights,
no one is being paid, Mr. Ratner said. One Washington law firm, Shearman &
Sterling, which has represented Kuwaiti detainees, has received money from the
families of the prisoners, but Thomas Wilner, a lawyer there, said they had
donated all of it to charities related to the September 2001 terrorist attacks.
Mr. Ratner said that there were two other defense lawyers not under his group's
umbrella and that he did not know whether they were paid.

Christopher Moore, a lawyer at the New York firm Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &
Hamilton who represented an Uzbeki detainee who has since been released, said:
''We believe in the concept of justice and that every person is entitled to
counsel. Any suggestion that our representation was anything other than a pro
bono basis is untrue and unprofessional.'' Mr. Moore said he had made four trips
to Guantanamo and one to Albania at the firm's expense, to see his client freed.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, wrote to President Bush on Friday asking him to disavow Mr. Stimson's
remarks.

Mr. Stimson, who was a Navy lawyer, graduated from George Mason University Law
School. In a 2006 interview with the magazine of Kenyon College, his alma mater,
Mr. Stimson said that he was learning ''to choose my words carefully because I
am a public figure on a very, very controversial topic.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LEGAL SERVICES (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); LEGAL ETHICS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); NAVIES (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (72%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (71%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); CIVIL SERVICES (67%); RADIO FORMATS (66%); MEDIA
SYNDICATION (66%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (61%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(54%) Terrorism; Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of
War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Legal Profession; Ethics

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (54%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis; Charles D Stimson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              542 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cheney Defends Efforts To Obtain Financial Records

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 842 words


Vice President Dick Cheney yesterday defended efforts by the Pentagon and the
Central Intelligence Agency to obtain financial records of Americans suspected
of terrorism or espionage, calling the practice a ''perfectly legitimate
activity'' used partly to protect troops stationed on military bases in the
United States.

But the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee expressed concern over the
expansion of the military's domestic intelligence collection efforts and said
his committee would investigate how the Pentagon was using its authority.

Appearing on ''Fox News Sunday,'' Mr. Cheney said ''national security letters''
issued to banks and credit agencies were an essential tool for investigating
terrorism cases in the United States.

He said the Pentagon had crossed no legal boundaries in issuing the letters
independent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

''There's nothing wrong with it or illegal,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''It doesn't
violate people's civil rights. And if an institution that receives one of these
national security letters disagrees with it, they're free to go to court to try
to stop its execution.''

Representative Silvestre Reyes, a Texas Democrat who is the new chairman of the
House Intelligence Committee, said his panel would examine the matter. Mr. Reyes
also indicated that he might renew efforts to pass a law requiring various
agencies to get court approval before issuing national security letters.

''Any expansion by the department into intelligence collection, particularly on
U.S. soil, is something our committee will thoroughly review,'' he said in a
statement issued to the news media.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the Pentagon has issued hundreds of letters to
American banks and other financial institutions seeking information about
suspects in counterterrorism or counterespionage investigations.

Banks are not required to hand over the information, but Pentagon officials said
that financial institutions usually complied.

The C.I.A. also uses the letters as an investigative tool, but issues them far
less frequently than does the Pentagon, intelligence officials said.

The use of the national security letters by the Pentagon and the C.I.A. was
first reported in The New York Times yesterday.

By law, the Pentagon and the C.I.A. are barred from any domestic law enforcement
activities. But government officials said that their authority to issue the
letters dated back several decades and was strengthened by the USA Patriot Act,
an antiterrorism law passed in 2001.

Mr. Cheney said yesterday that the letters were valuable for protecting American
forces stationed at hundreds of bases in the United States.

Since Sept. 11, the Pentagon has increased its domestic intelligence collection
efforts to help ensure that American bases are protected from potential
terrorist attacks.

The efforts have been criticized by civil liberties organizations, who say the
Pentagon is using ''force protection'' to spy on Americans and collect
information on groups like war protesters.

The American Civil Liberties Union said yesterday that it had ''serious
concerns'' about the use of the letters by the Pentagon and the C.I.A., and it
called for a Congressional investigation to examine the frequency and legal
basis for the records demands, along with civil liberties safeguards in place.

''This country has a long tradition of rejecting the use of the C.I.A. and the
Pentagon to spy on Americans, and rightfully so,'' said Caroline Fredrickson,
director of the A.C.L.U.'s Washington office. ''Today's published report that
the Pentagon and C.I.A. have been relying on 'national security letters' to
collect the financial records of Americans without judicial supervision or
Congressional oversight raises a host of questions that need to be answered.''

Pentagon officials said the financial documents obtained through the national
security letters usually did not establish an individual's links to terrorism or
espionage and had rarely led to criminal charges.

But officials said the records still had intelligence value, and the Pentagon
plans within the next year to incorporate the records into a database at its
Counterintelligence Field Activity office.

With the Democrats now in charge of both houses of Congress, the House and the
Senate Intelligence Committees are planning hearings on various intelligence
programs conducted by the Bush administration since Sept. 11, 2001.

At the top of the agenda are hearings on the National Security Agency's domestic
surveillance program and the C.I.A.'s detention and interrogation of terrorism
suspects.

Mr. Reyes indicated yesterday that the military's domestic collection efforts
could also be a priority for his committee.

''We want our intelligence professionals to have strong tools that will enable
them to interrupt the planning process of our enemies and to stop attacks
against our country,'' his statement said.

''But in doing so, we also want those tools to comply fully with the law and the
Constitution.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vice President Dick Cheney said the Pentagon action ''doesn't
violate people's civil rights.'' (Photo by Freddie Lee/Fox News Sunday)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); TERRORISM (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); CREDIT COLLECTIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (78%); APPROVALS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (70%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%) Terrorism; Surveillance of Citizens by Government;
United States Armament and Defense; Espionage; Military Bases and Installations;
Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (71%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(56%) Central Intelligence Agency

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (71%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (71%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (93%); SILVESTRE REYES (79%) Mark Mazzetti; Dick (Vice Pres)
Cheney; Silvestre (Rep) Reyes

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              545 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

White House Retreats Under Pressure

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17


The Bush administration's abrupt abandonment on Wednesday of its program to
eavesdrop inside the United States without court approval is the latest in a
series of concessions to Congress, the courts and public opinion that have
dismantled major elements of its strategy to counter the terrorist threat.

In the aftermath of the 2001 attacks, President Bush asserted sweeping powers to
conduct the hunt for operatives of Al Qaeda, the detention of suspects and their
interrogation to uncover the next plot. But facing no new attack to justify
emergency measures, as well as a series of losses in the courts and finally the
Democratic sweep of the November election, Mr. Bush has had to retreat across
the board.

''I think there's no question that both politically and legally, the president
has been chastened,'' said Douglas W. Kmiec, professor of constitutional law at
Pepperdine University and generally a supporter of the administration's
interpretation of executive power.

Harold Hongju Koh, the dean of Yale Law School and a critic of the
administration's legal theories, said the president's strategy might have
provoked so strong a judicial and Congressional rebuff that it would ultimately
accomplish the opposite of his goal. ''I think historians will see it as an
exorbitant and extreme theory of executive power that ended up weakening the
presidency,'' Mr. Koh said.

That would be an extraordinary outcome, and one that is far from assured. In
some areas, the administration has preserved its freedom to act, notably in
persuading Congress last fall to deny prisoners held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
the right to challenge their detention in American courts. The full details of
the new approach to the domestic eavesdropping program have not been publicly
disclosed.

Mr. Bush's legal strategy has been directed not only by the practical need to
prevent attacks but also by the belief, expressed most fervently by Vice
President Dick Cheney, that presidential powers, and the war-making power in
particular, were excessively curbed in reaction to the Vietnam War and the
Watergate scandal.

Among the laws passed in the post-Vietnam, post-Watergate era was the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, a hard-fought compromise between the
security agencies and civil libertarians. The National Security Agency and the
F.B.I. could keep eavesdropping on spy and terror suspects in the United States,
but only by justifying their actions to a federal judge in secret hearings
before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.

For more than two decades, that compromise served, and government eavesdropping
on American soil took place only under court order. But after the Sept. 11
attacks, the White House decided that the court approval process was too slow
and cumbersome to match the terrorist threat and that the president had the
power to bypass the FISA act and order surveillance on his own authority as
commander in chief.

In December 2005, a few days after the program of eavesdropping without warrants
was disclosed by The New York Times, Mr. Cheney linked it explicitly to the
broader question of executive power. ''It was true during the cold war, as well
as I think what is true now, the president of the United States needs to have
his constitutional powers unimpaired, if you will, in terms of the conduct of
national security policy,'' Mr. Cheney told reporters. ''So when you're asking
about my view of the presidency, yes, I believe in a strong, robust executive
authority.''

The same philosophy guided administration actions in other areas. Hundreds of
men were labeled unlawful enemy combatants and imprisoned at Guantanamo Bay, a
location chosen in the hope that it would be beyond the reach of American
courts. Dozens of terrorist suspects were seized by the Central Intelligence
Agency and held in secret overseas locations.

Some of those C.I.A. prisoners were interrogated using techniques far harsher
than anything approved in earlier wars, including waterboarding, a simulated
drowning that many human rights advocates believe crossed the line into torture.

Slowly but surely, each of those programs has been eroded. In some cases, the
press has uncovered them, creating an outcry from civil libertarians and some
Democrats in Congress and often revealing a rift inside the administration.

In others, the courts have weighed in, upholding some of the administration's
moves but setting firm limits to others. In the Hamdi case in 2004, Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the Supreme Court's majority, ''We have long since
made clear that a state of war is not a blank check for the president when it
comes to the rights of the nation's citizens.''

Last year, in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, the court rejected the rules for military
commissions to try unlawful combatants. Mr. Bush subsequently ordered the C.I.A.
to move its 14 so-called high-value Qaeda suspects to Guantanamo to await legal
proceedings. Though a new list of approved interrogation techniques has not been
finalized, officials say it will not include waterboarding.

The N.S.A. program, too, has faced tough scrutiny.

A federal judge in Detroit ruled the program unconstitutional, a finding now on
appeal. Under pressure from some Republicans as well as Democrats in Congress,
the administration first agreed to brief the full Senate and House intelligence
committees on the closely guarded program and then accepted the idea of
legislation to bring the program under the law. The several proposals pending in
Congress to rein in the N.S.A.'s eavesdropping may now become moot.

But even if Mr. Bush has again backed away in the face of legal and political
trouble, he has by no means given up on the national security agenda that he
clearly sees as his legacy, for better or worse. Despite strong opposition from
Congress and the public, he has decided to send more American troops into combat
in Iraq. Mr. Bush remains commander in chief, whose constitutional powers remain
formidable.

Democrats may have been empowered by the election and by the administration's
recent setbacks, but while voicing loud protests over Mr. Bush's new plan for
Iraq, they are moving cautiously, with most willing at least for now to embrace
only symbolic resistance.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LAW
SCHOOLS (90%); ESPIONAGE (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPROVALS (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (84%); WIRETAPPING (78%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%);
LEGISLATION (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); LAWYERS
(74%); ELECTIONS (73%); HISTORY (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); JUDGES (73%);
POLITICAL SCANDALS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); VIETNAM
WAR (69%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (68%) Terrorism; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Wiretapping
and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Privacy; Law and Legislation

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (58%) Scott Shane; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (68%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              552 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkish Police Arrest Teenage Suspect in Editor's Killing

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 20


The Turkish police on Saturday arrested a 17-year-old suspect in the killing of
a newspaper editor who championed Armenian rights, Turkish authorities said.

The editor, Hrant Dink, 52, a Turk of Armenian descent, was shot Friday
afternoon outside the office of his newspaper, Agos. A gunman was recorded by a
surveillance camera nearby, and the police appealed to the public for help in
identifying him.

On Saturday night, Ogun Samast was captured in Samsun, a Black Sea port, after
his father recognized his images from the surveillance video and notified the
police in Trabzon, their hometown, said Muammer Guler, Istanbul's governor, at a
news conference just before midnight.

''The suspect was captured in Samsun on a passenger bus destined to Trabzon,
together with all the evidence, including his gun and the white beret'' seen in
the video, Mr. Guler said.

Mr. Samast, an unemployed secondary school graduate who arrived in Istanbul a
week ago, admitted killing Mr. Dink, the Samsun police said.

The police are also looking into possible links between Mr. Samast and the
killing of a Catholic priest, Andrea Santaro, last February. The assailant was a
16-year-old who, like the priest and Mr. Samast, was from Trabzon.

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan praised the efforts of the security forces
Saturday and expressed satisfaction that an arrest had been made before Mr.
Dink's funeral on Tuesday. ''We're going to continue investigations with the
same determination,'' Mr. Erdogan told the reporters, assuring that the arrest
was only the start.

Mr. Guler said at a news conference earlier Saturday that Mr. Samast had visited
the Agos office on Friday. He apparently posed as a university student hoping to
meet Mr. Dink, whose secretary told the young man he would need an appointment.

The secretary later saw him loitering outside the office before Mr. Dink was
attacked, Mr. Guler said.

Kazim Kolcuoglu, head of the Istanbul Bar Association, noting that Mr. Samast
and the killer of Mr. Santaro were under 18, said that minors in Turkey are used
in slayings because they face lower penalties than an adult convicted of the
same crime.

As a 17-year-old, Mr. Samast will be interrogated by a public prosecutor instead
of the police, and will be tried at a minors' court, which will lead to certain
reductions on his possible jail term, Mr. Kolcuoglu said.

Mr. Dink's murder has shocked Turkey. Mr. Erdogan condemned the shooting as a
direct attack on Turkey's stability, and analysts from diverse political
backgrounds appeared to agree.

''If the trigger finger aimed at the air of stability and confidence in Turkey,
it hit the bull's eye,'' wrote Mehmet Barlas, a columnist for the center-right
newspaper Sabah.

Although analysts like Mr. Barlas saw the assassination as a politically
motivated attack on Turkey's progress toward membership in the European Union,
others blamed a controversial law under which Mr. Dink had been convicted of
insulting the Turkish identity.

Mr. Dink, who angered many in Turkey by challenging the official Turkish version
of the 1915 Armenian genocide, was given a six-month, suspended sentence. But in
the eyes of many radical nationalists, it made him a target.

Meanwhile, people continued to flock to the Agos office in Istanbul. Chants of
''We are all Armenians, we are all Hrants,'' filled the air.

''We're here because we lost one of us,'' said a 33-year-old woman. As a
teacher, she declined to give her name because it is illegal in Turkey for
public workers to make public comments. ''I want to see the perpetrators be
brought to justice and the plot behind this assassination clarified
immediately,'' she said.

Agos, the only bilingual Armenian-Turkish newspaper in Turkey, was founded and
run by Mr. Dink since 1996.

''We lost the voice that spoke for us, but Turkey lost as much as we did,'' said
Nadya Ismezoglu, an Armenian woman standing outside the Agos office. ''Our pain
is indescribable.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Turks yesterday at the scene of the killing of Hrant Dink, an
editor shot Friday as he left his office in Istanbul. (Photo by Lynsey Addario
for The New York Times)
 A security camera image of a man sought in the killing of Mr. Dink. (Photo by
Istanbul Police Department, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUVENILE CRIME (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); WRITERS
(78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY
(76%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (75%); PRESS CONFERENCES (74%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (69%);
MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (65%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(65%); JUVENILE COURTS (61%); MURDER (58%); SHOOTINGS (58%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations; News and News Media  ; Freedom of
the Press; Armenians

ORGANIZATION: Agos (Turkish Newspaper); Roman Catholic Church

PERSON: RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (78%) Sebnem Arsu; Hrant Dink; Ogun Samast; Andrea
Santaro

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (91%)

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (72%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); ARMENIA (94%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              553 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Army Says Improper Orders By Colonel Led to 4 Deaths

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 943 words


Army investigators say that Col. Michael D. Steele, a decorated combat veteran
and brigade commander in Iraq, issued improper orders to his soldiers that
contributed to the deaths of four unarmed Iraqi men during a raid in May,
according to military documents.

No charges have been filed against Colonel Steele in the Army's continuing
investigation. But two Defense Department officials said last week that Colonel
Steele was formally reprimanded in the summer by Lt. Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli,
the former commander in Iraq, for not reporting the deaths and other details of
the raid. The action was not made public.

The reprimand and the controversy surrounding the raid have effectively ended
the career of Colonel Steele, an aggressive officer known for unorthodox methods
and who was portrayed in the book and movie ''Black Hawk Down'' as a fearless
fighter during Special Operations missions in Somalia in 1993.

The four Iraqi men were killed on a channel island northwest of Baghdad on May 9
by members of the division's Third Brigade Combat Team, which Colonel Steele
commanded. Four soldiers were later charged with murder by military prosecutors,
who said they captured the men, then turned them loose and killed them as part
of a staged escape attempt. Over the past two weeks, two of the soldiers have
pleaded guilty to lesser charges.

The military's administrative investigation into Colonel Steele centered on how
he communicated the rules of engagement, the instructions that all soldiers must
follow to determine whether they may legally use lethal force against an enemy,
to his soldiers before the raid.

The colonel improperly led his soldiers to believe that distinguishing
combatants from noncombatants -- a main tenet of the military's standing rules
of engagement -- was not necessary during the May 9 mission, according to a
classified report in June by Brig. Gen. Thomas Maffey, a deputy commander tapped
by General Chiarelli to investigate Colonel Steele. ''A person cannot be
targeted on status simply by being present on an objective deemed hostile by an
on-scene commander,'' General Maffey wrote in his June 16 report.

Although the colonel's ''miscommunication'' of the rules contributed to the
deaths of four unarmed Iraqis, General Maffey wrote, formal charges were not
warranted ''in light of his honest belief of the correctness of the mission
R.O.E.'' The general recommended that Colonel Steele be admonished, a lesser
punishment than the formal reprimand he eventually received.

Several soldiers have said in sworn statements that Colonel Steele told them to
kill all military-age males. Colonel Steele and two lawyers representing him did
not respond to several e-mail and phone messages requesting comment on the case.
But in testimony he gave on June 3 to General Maffey and another investigator at
an Army garrison in Tikrit, Colonel Steele said he did not use ''specific
language'' to order his soldiers to kill all military-age males, and that ''we
don't shoot people with their hands up.''

On June 10, an investigative report by the 101st Airborne Division's lawyers
concluded: ''Although clearly unintentional, confusion regarding the R.O.E. was
the proximate cause of the death of at least four unarmed individuals, none of
whom committed a hostile act or displayed hostile intent.''

In his June 3 testimony, Colonel Steele said he told his men that Army
intelligence had shown that the island held dozens of fighters for Al Qaeda.
''Guys, you are going to get shot coming off the helicopter,'' Colonel Steele
said he told them before the raid. ''If you don't get shot, you ought to be
surprised.''

As it turned out, the assault occurred without encountering any hostile fire,
and the soldiers found only unarmed men, women and children. Only excess caution
by Colonel Steele's troops spared the Iraqi civilians from being shot, General
Maffey wrote in his report.

The military's investigations of Colonel Steele's actions before and after the
raid also determined that the fourth Iraqi man killed in the assault was 70
years old, unarmed and not a legitimate target.

After the raid, several soldiers noticed blindfolds and plastic handcuffs on the
bodies of three of the men who were killed. Colonel Steele testified that he
ordered a junior officer to begin an investigation into the deaths but to avoid
reporting any findings to the division commander until the colonel returned from
leave a few weeks later.

The formal reprimand Colonel Steele received effectively blocks any chance for
his promotion, according to former and current military officers. ''When you're
looking to go from colonel to general, and it's a 2 percent selection rate,
you're looking to throw people out, and that's an easy one,'' said John D.
Hutson, the former judge advocate general of the Navy.

In November, Colonel Steele was reassigned out of Iraq and the 101st Airborne
Division to an administrative assignment at Fort McPherson, Ga., where the Army
Forces Command oversees the readiness of United States-based active-duty and
Army Reserve soldiers. He will work in the unit responsible for Army operations
and training, including developing methods of teaching soldiers how to handle
enemy detainees, an Army spokesman said.

In addition to the trial of the four soldiers charged in the killings during the
raid, an investigation is continuing into whether at least 10 other soldiers
from Colonel Steele's former brigade lied to cover up three of the deaths,
according to a classified report in December by the Army's Criminal
Investigative Division. A division spokesman declined to comment on its
investigation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (79%); LAW OF WAR (79%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); WAR & CONFLICT (79%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (79%); GUILTY PLEAS (77%); EVIDENCE (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); TERRORISM (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); GENOCIDE (66%); MURDER
(58%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; Michael D (Col) Steele

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); SOMALIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              558 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Armenian Editor's Death Leads to Conciliation

BYLINE: By SUSANNE FOWLER and SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 22


The killing of an Armenian-Turkish editor in Istanbul last week and the sorrow
it has generated within Turkey are leading to rare conciliatory gestures between
Turkey and Armenia, historic enemies, and to calls for changes in laws here
defending Turkish identity.

On Monday, Armenian political and spiritual figures accepted an invitation from
the Turkish government to attend the funeral of Hrant Dink, the founder of an
Armenian-Turkish newspaper, who was killed outside his office on Friday,
apparently by a young nationalist fanatic.

The suspect in the slaying, Ogun Samast, 17, was escorted back to the scene of
the crime Sunday night by law enforcement authorities.

The head of the Istanbul security forces said that Mr. Samast ''was driven to
commit the crime by his nationalistic feelings'' and had no ties to any group.

Mr. Dink was a staunch defender of free speech and like other intellectuals was
prosecuted for insulting ''Turkishness'' and sentenced to six months in jail,
though his term was suspended.

Bulent Arinc, the parliamentary chairman from the ruling Justice and Development
Party, said he would back efforts to abolish the measure under which Mr. Dink
was prosecuted, known as Article 301.

''It can be discussed to totally abolish or completely revise the Article 301,''
Mr. Arinc said, adding that members of Parliament ''are open to this.''

Despite the fact that the Armenian-Turkish border has been sealed since 1993 and
diplomatic relations severed, Armenia is sending a deputy foreign minister,
Arman Kirakossian, to the funeral, and the archbishop of the Armenian Church of
America, Khajag Barsamian, also accepted the government's invitation to the
ceremony.

Earlier, the Armenian defense minister, Serzh Sarkisyan, called for improved
relations so that Armenia could ''establish ties with Turkey with no
preconditions,'' the Turkish news channel NTV reported.

High-level Turkish government officials are expected to attend the funeral.

Turkey and Armenia have long been at odds over Turkey's refusal to use the term
''genocide'' to describe the deaths of Armenians beginning in 1915. Many
scholars and most Western governments say more than a million Armenians were
killed in a campaign they describe as genocide. Turkey calls the loss of life a
consequence of a war in which both sides suffered casualties, and has suggested
that a group of envoys from each country analyze the history. Armenia has
expressed a willingness to participate but insists that the border must first be
reopened to trade.

But many Armenians living abroad hold a much harder line and are lobbying the
United States and European governments to deny Turkey entrance into the European
Union until Ankara recognizes the killings as genocide.

Norman Stone, professor of history at Koc University in Istanbul, said Mr. Dink
was killed at a time when Turkey was reacting to pressure to respond to the
Armenian issue.

''There are a lot of balanced people here who say, 'Look, the genocide issue is
unclear, but if you just leave it as a matter of massacres, then we can start
making progress,' '' Mr. Stone said.

The funeral is shaping up to be far more than a farewell to a popular though
controversial figure. The fact that the government is permitting it to take
place on a grand scale is another sign of a change.

A wide boulevard in the heart of Istanbul's main commercial district will be
closed to traffic as the funeral cortege gathers outside the offices of the
newspaper where Mr. Dink was shot.

The mayor of the district, Mustafa Sarigul, said the local government will hand
out carnations and release hundreds of pigeons as a symbol of peace. Mr. Dink
once said, ''I may see myself as frightened as a pigeon, but I know that in this
country people do not touch pigeons.''

The procession is expected to advance for about a mile before the body is driven
across the Golden Horn to the Kumkapi district for a Christian funeral Mass at
the Church of the Virgin Mary. Among the Turkish government officials expected
to attend the Mass are the interior minister, Abdulkadir Aksu, and the deputy
prime minister, Mehmet Ali Sahin. Burial is to follow at the Balikli Armenian
Cemetery.

Most Armenian Turks live in Istanbul, the diverse and cosmopolitan center of
Turkey. But the antinationalist demonstrations that followed Mr. Dink's killing
also surfaced in places as diverse as Izmir, the Aegean coastal city that is
Turkey's third largest, and in Sanliurfa and Hatay, which are close to Turkey's
eastern border with Syria.

''Public opinion in both countries, weary of the years-long conflict, had
reached a point of explosion,'' said Kaan Soyak, a director of the
Turkish-Armenian Business Development Commission, the only bilateral trade
council of Turkish and Armenian executives. ''That's what lies behind the
massive outpouring for Mr. Dink.''

Ethnic Armenian Turks, like Jewish and Greek Turks, are an officially recognized
minority group and as such are allowed to operate their own schools. Mr. Dink,
for example, attended Armenian schools in Istanbul until entering a state-run
university.

Mr. Dink was labeled as a target among nationalist groups on their Web sites.
Mr. Samast, the suspect, read and was influenced by those postings, according to
the Anatolian news agency.

Seven other suspects were also being detained over the weekend, including Yasin
Hayal, who served 11 months in jail for the bombing of a McDonald's restaurant
in Trabzon in 2004.

Mr. Hayal, a known nationalist, is suspected of having a history of Islamic
militant activity. He attempted to join the rebels in Chechnya but was turned
away at the border, his former lawyer, Fatih Cakir, said by telephone on Sunday.

Havva Samast, Mr. Samast's mother, knew that her son and Mr. Hayal were friends.

''I couldn't believe my eyes when I saw him on television and had a shock,'' she
said during a televised interview with the Dogan News Agency from her and her
son's home city of Trabzon. ''He couldn't have done this on his own. I know that
he was friends with'' Mr. Hayal.

But many here still blame Article 301 for Mr. Dink's death and see it as an
obstacle to freedom of speech in Turkey.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(87%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
HOMICIDE (78%); HISTORY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (77%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); LOBBYING (76%); SENTENCING (75%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%); RELIGION (72%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%);
JAIL SENTENCING (70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (50%) Armenians; Freedom of the Press; Freedom of Speech and
Expression

PERSON: Susanne Fowler; Sebnem Arsu; Hrant Dink; Ogun Samast

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (94%); ANKARA, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); ARMENIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia; Istanbul (Turkey); Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              560 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Brandeis, Carter Responds to Critics

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK; Katie Zezima contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: WALTHAM, Mass., Jan. 23


In his first major public speech about his controversial book ''Palestine: Peace
Not Apartheid,'' former President Jimmy Carter told an audience at Brandeis
University that he stood by the book and its title, that he apologized for what
he called an ''improper and stupid'' sentence in the book and that he had been
disturbed by accusations that he was anti-Semitic.

Although controversy had preceded his visit here, Mr. Carter was greeted with a
standing ovation and treated with obvious respect by the audience, even as
students asked questions that were critical of his assertions.

''This is the first time that I've ever been called a liar and a bigot and an
anti-Semite and a coward and a plagiarist,'' Mr. Carter told the crowd of about
1,700 at Brandeis, a nonsectarian university founded by American Jews, where
about half the students are Jewish. ''This is hurting me.''

He added, ''The fact that they deteriorate into ad hominem attacks on my
character has probably been a greater barrier to progress than the fact that I
chose a particular word in the title.''

Mr. Carter said he realized his use of the word ''apartheid'' ''has caused great
concern in the Jewish community.'' He said he used it ''knowing that it would be
provocative.'' He said he intended to describe conditions not in Israel but in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and did not mean to ''equate Zionism with
racism,'' but to point out ''that this cruel oppression is contrary to the
tenets of the Jewish religious faith and contrary to the basic principles of the
state of Israel.''

But he said a sentence in which he seemed to suggest that Palestinians would not
have to end their suicide bombings and acts of terrorism until Israel withdraws
from the territories ''was worded in a completely improper and stupid way,''
adding, ''I have written my publisher to change that sentence immediately. I
apologize to you personally, to everyone here.''

While many students and professors said they disagreed with elements of the
book, they said they welcomed the opportunity to hear Mr. Carter.

''I'm happy to have a contrary viewpoint, I'm happy to have a former president,
I'm happy to have controversy,'' said Daniele Kohn, 21, a fine arts major, who
asked Mr. Carter why, in a television interview, he had seemed to suggest that
the Palestinian condition was worse than the Rwandan genocide. (Mr. Carter
responded that he had not meant to suggest that.) ''I think this school hasn't
gotten publicly upset in far too long.''

Mr. Carter's book has prompted criticism from many American Jews and some Middle
East experts, who say it contains factual errors and misrepresents the role of
both the Israelis and the Palestinians. In addition to the word apartheid, with
its implication that Israel's actions resemble the racist policies of South
Africa, these critics object to Mr. Carter's assertion that Israel has committed
human rights abuses against the Palestinians, that pro-Israel lobbyists have
stifled debate in the United States and that American newspaper editorials are
overwhelmingly pro-Israel.

The book prompted the resignations of 14 of Atlanta's business and civic leaders
from the Carter Center's advisory board. Kenneth W. Stein, a professor at Emory
University who was the first executive director at the Carter Center, resigned
his position as a fellow there in December. And Dennis Ross, a former envoy to
the Middle East who is now a news analyst, has accused Mr. Carter of using maps
that Mr. Ross created without his permission, and mislabeling them in the book,
accusations Mr. Carter has denied.

Mr. Carter initially rejected an invitation to speak at Brandeis because it
suggested that he debate Alan M. Dershowitz, a Harvard law professor who has
sharply criticized the book. Wanting the university to welcome contrary views,
more than 100 students and faculty members signed a petition contending that Mr.
Carter should be invited without conditions. Questions were pre-selected by the
committee that invited Mr. Carter, and the questioners included an Israeli
student and a Palestinian student.

After Mr. Carter left, Mr. Dershowitz spoke in the same gymnasium, saying that
the former president oversimplified the situation and that his conciliatory and
sensible-sounding speech at Brandeis belied his words in some other interviews.

''There are two different Jimmy Carters,'' Mr. Dershowitz said. ''You heard the
Brandeis Jimmy Carter today and he was terrific. I support almost everything he
said. But if you listen to the Al Jazeera Jimmy Carter, you'll hear a very
different perspective.''

Mr. Carter started his Brandeis speech by calling it ''the most exciting
invitation'' he had received since his inaugural address 30 years ago, and
enumerating his years of pro-Jewish stances and involvement in the Middle East
peace process.

Responding to one of the criticisms of him, he said ''I have never claimed or
believed that American Jews control the news media. That is ridiculous to
claim.'' He said ''a lot of support for Israel comes from Christians like me who
have been taught since they were 3 years old to honor and protect God's chosen
people from whom came people like our Christian savior, Jesus Christ.''

But he said he believed there was too little willingness in Congress and
elsewhere to debate or accept his premise that ''Israel will never find peace
until it is willing to withdraw from its neighbors' land and permit the
Palestinians to exercise their basic human and political rights.''

Despite the warm and dignified welcome, several students said they were
disturbed by the book and Mr. Carter's conclusions.

''He did some great work in the past,'' said David Kuperstein, a junior, but
''it has made me a little bit angry, the unfounded skew and bias that he
specifically shows in his book toward Israel.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Former President Jimmy Carter acknowledging an audience at
Brandeis University, where he spoke yesterday about his new book on the Middle
East. With him on stage was Mari Fitzduff, a Brandeis professor. (Photo by Jodi
Hilton for The New York Times)
 Demonstrators on the Brandeis campus yesterday expressed their opposition to
Mr. Carter's book, ''Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid.'' Critics have said the
book contains errors and misrepresentations. (Photo by Adam Hunger/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (87%); LITERATURE (78%); PLAGIARISM
(78%); RACE & RACISM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); SCHOOL CHEATING (77%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(76%); BOMBINGS (72%); RELIGION (68%); GENOCIDE (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (67%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%) Palestinians; Books and Literature; Anti-Semitism;
Terrorism; Bombs and Explosives

ORGANIZATION: Brandeis University

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (94%) Jimmy Carter; Alan M Dershowitz; Pam Belluck

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (94%); RWANDA (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Israel; Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              563 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2007 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Official Ready to Re-examine Law Shielding Turks' Identity

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 24


Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul called Wednesday for changes in a controversial
law that penalizes insults against Turkish identity.

Hrant Dink, the Turkish-Armenian newspaper editor who was assassinated last
week, had been convicted under the law late last year. Many Turks say the
conviction labeled Mr. Dink a traitor in the eyes of ultranationalist groups and
made him a target.

''We see that in its present version, it causes some problems,'' the foreign
minister said of the law, adding that his government supported free speech as
long as it did not incite violence.

Mr. Gul's comments suggest that change is not far away; the government consulted
civic organizations last year about revisions to the language of the law.

In the wake of Mr. Dink's slaying, calls to revise the law, Article 301 of the
penal code, began with the chairman of Parliament, Bulent Arinc, when he said
Saturday that he was in favor of a move against the law.

The law, which carries a jail term of six months, has been applied mostly
against intellectuals, like the Nobel laureate in literature Orhan Pamuk, who
have commented about the Armenian genocide by the Ottoman Army in the 1910s.
Virtually anyone tried under the law, convicted or not, has drawn public threats
and hate mail from ultranationalists.

In his last article in the Agos newspaper, which he founded, Mr. Dink expressed
his fear of the threats but, according to security officials, did not request
protection. Mr. Pamuk, the novelist Elif Safak, who was also tried under Article
301, and others were provided security this week, news reports said.

More than 50,000 people poured into Istanbul streets on Tuesday to protest the
killing, in the largest public commemoration in the city since the death of
President Turgut Ozal in 1993. Many political analysts and friends of Mr. Dink
considered the huge outpouring to be an opportunity to introduce political
efforts to improve relations between Armenia and Turkey.

Such efforts were given a head start this week when the Foreign Ministry
extended invitations to the spiritual leaders of Armenians around the world and
to the Armenian deputy foreign minister, Arman Kirakossian, whose attendance at
the funeral was the first time that a ranking Armenian official had come to
Turkey since the two countries froze diplomatic relations in 1993 and closed
their border.

Mr. Kirakossian, impressed by the size and the diversity of the crowd that
attended three days of public protests and the funeral, said Armenia was
unconditionally ready to revive diplomatic relations, the semiofficial Anatolian
Agency reported.

His statement was partly echoed in Mr. Gul's carefully worded statement in
Ankara. ''Today, we improve our relations with all our neighbors on the basis of
mutual trust and respect,'' Mr. Gul said. ''Of course we wish to improve
relations also with Armenia.''

Diplomatic ties were severed during a dispute over Nagorno Karabakh, a region
that Armenia claims but that Turkey recognizes as part of Azerbaijan. But the
true heart of the dispute is over the Armenian genocide, in which more than one
million Armenians died from 1915 to 1918.

Turkey's stance on Nagorno Karabakh has been that a governmental history
commission should be formed to analyze the issues. Armenia has expressed a
willingness to take part in a discussion but has insisted that the border be
reopened to trade first.

Ogun Samast, the 17-year-old suspect in Mr. Dink's death, was formally arrested
Wednesday. His lawyer, Levent Yildirim, assigned by the Istanbul Bar
Association, told reporters that his client regretted killing Mr. Dink.

Yasin Hayal, an ultranationalist who had spent 11 months in jail for the bombing
of a McDonald's restaurant in Trabzon in 2004, was also formally arrested
Wednesday with three other suspects who had been detained and investigated for
suspected links with the killing, NTV reported.

As he was escorted into the prosecutor's office in Istanbul, Mr. Hayal hurled
threats about Mr. Pamuk.

''Orhan Pamuk should be careful!'' he yelled at cameras.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 31, 2007



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the future
of relations between Turkey and Armenia following the funeral for Hrant Dink, a
Turkish-Armenian newspaper editor killed in Istanbul on Jan. 19, misidentified
the issue between the two countries that Turkey has said should be examined by a
governmental history commission. It is the 1915 Armenian genocide -- not the
political status of Nagorno-Karabakh, a region that Armenia claims but that
Turkey recognizes as part of Azerbaijan.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ogun Samast, in cap, in Istanbul yesterday before he was
officially charged with the killing of Hrant Dink, a Turkish-Armenian
journalist. (Photo by Hocine Zaourar/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); LEGISLATION
(78%); WRITERS (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); AWARDS
& PRIZES (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (75%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (73%); POLITICS (73%); WAR CRIMES (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (66%); NOBEL PRIZES (66%); CIVIC &
SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (54%) Law and Legislation; Assassinations and Assassination
Attempts; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom of the Press

PERSON: ABDULLAH GUL (90%) Sebnem Arsu; Abdullah (Min) Gul; Hrant Dink

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (90%); ANKARA, TURKEY (78%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (97%); TURKEY (96%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              564 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Breaking the Clinch

BYLINE: By DAVID BROOKS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 757 words


Iraq is at the beginning of a civil war fought using the tactics of genocide,
and it has all the conditions to get much worse. As a Newsweek correspondent,
Christian Caryl, wrote recently from Baghdad, ''What's clear is that we're far
closer to the beginning of this cycle of violence than to its end.'' As John
Burns of The Times said on ''Charlie Rose'' last night, ''Friends of mine who
are Iraqis -- Shiite, Sunni, Kurd -- all foresee a civil war on a scale with
bloodshed that would absolutely dwarf what we're seeing now.''

Iraq already has the warlord structures that caused mass murder in Rwanda,
Bosnia, Sierra Leone and elsewhere. Violent, stupid men who would be the dregs
of society under normal conditions rise amid the trauma, chaos and stress and
become revered leaders.

They command squads of young men who leave the moral universe and have no future
in a peacetime world. They kill for fun, faith and profit -- because they find
it more rewarding to massacre and loot than to farm or labor. They are
manipulated by political leaders with a savage zero-sum mind-set, who know they
must kill or be killed, and who are instituting strategic ethnic cleansing
campaigns to expand their turf.

Worse, Iraq already has the psychological conditions that have undergirded the
great bloodbaths of recent years. Iraqi minds, according to the most sensitive
reporting, have already been rewired by the experiences of trauma and extreme
stress.

Some people become hyperaggressive and turn into perfect killers. Others endure
a phased mental shutdown that looks like severe depression. They lose their
memory and become passive and fatalistic. They become perfect victims.

Amid the turmoil, the complexity of life falls away, and things are reduced to
stark polarities: Sunni-Shiite or Shiite-Sunni, human-subhuman. Once this mental
descent has begun, it is possible to kill without compunction.

In Rwanda, for example, the journalist Jean Hatzfeld interviewed a Hutu man who
had killed his Tutsi neighbor. ''At the fatal instant,'' the man recalled, ''I
did not see in him what he had been before.  His features were indeed similar to
those of the person I knew, but nothing firmly reminded me that I had lived
beside him for a long time.''

The weakness of the Bush surge plan is that it relies on the Maliki government
to somehow be above this vortex. But there are no impartial institutions in
Iraq, ready to foster reconciliation. As ABC's Jonathan Karl notes in The Weekly
Standard, the Shiite finance ministries now close banks that may finance Sunni
investments. The Saadrist health ministries dismiss Sunni doctors. The sectarian
vortex is not fomented by extremists who are appendages to society. The vortex
is through and through.

The Democratic approach, as articulated by Senator Jim Webb -- simply get out of
Iraq ''in short order'' -- is a howl of pain that takes no note of the long-term
political and humanitarian consequences. Does the party that still talks piously
about ending bloodshed in Darfur really want to walk away from a genocide the
U.S. is partly responsible for? Are U.S. troops going to be pulled back to
secure bases to watch passively while rivers of Iraqi blood lap at their gates?
How many decades will Americans be fighting to quell the cycle of regional
violence set loose by a transnational Sunni-Shiite explosion?

I for one have become disillusioned with dreams of transforming Iraqi society
from the top down. But it's not too late to steer the situation in a less bad
direction. Increased American forces can do good -- they are still, as David
Ignatius says, the biggest militia on the block -- provided they are directed
toward realistic goals.

There is one option that does approach Iraqi reality from the bottom up. That
option recognizes that Iraq is broken and that its people are fleeing their
homes to survive. It calls for a ''soft partition'' of Iraq in order to bring
political institutions into accord with the social facts -- a central government
to handle oil revenues and manage the currency, etc., but a country divided into
separate sectarian areas to reduce contact and conflict. When the various groups
in Bosnia finally separated, it became possible to negotiate a cold (if
miserable) peace.

Soft partition has been advocated in different ways by Joe Biden and Les Gelb,
by Michael O'Hanlon and Edward Joseph, by Pauline Baker at the Fund for Peace,
and in a more extreme version, by Peter Galbraith.

On Sunday, I'll give further publicity to their recommendations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WRITERS (72%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); PSYCHOLOGY (69%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES
(62%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (60%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: CHARLIE ROSE (55%) David Brooks; George W (Pres) Bush; Nuri Kamal Al-
(Prime Min) Maliki

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); RWANDA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              567 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rules Dispute Imperils Khmer Rouge Trial

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 25


The Cambodian judges were on one side and the foreign judges on the other this
week in a dispute that captures a decade of difficulties in bringing to trial
the last surviving leaders of the murderous Khmer Rouge.

If they cannot agree on procedural rules soon, analysts and officials at the
tribunal say, some foreign judges may walk out. That would cast a deeper shadow
over a process that some critics say is already so compromised as to be of
doubtful value.

Seventeen Cambodians and 12 foreigners took office as judges and prosecutors in
July, inaugurating a United Nations-sponsored process that mixes Cambodian law
with international standards of justice. It is an awkward formula made more
questionable by the meager qualifications of the Cambodian judges, who are seen
as poorly trained and subject to political manipulation.

Pragmatists say that a flawed trial is better than none and that there is no
choice but to proceed with the tribunal you have rather than the tribunal you
may wish to have.

Almost three decades have passed since the Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia, from 1975
to 1979, causing 1.7 million deaths through killings, torture, starvation and
overwork.

The potential defendants are aging and some have died, notably the Khmer Rouge
leader, Pol Pot, in 1998. The targets of the trial are top leaders and ''those
most responsible'' for the crimes and is expected to focus on at most a dozen
defendants. Among the handful of names often mentioned, only one is in custody,
with the rest living freely in Cambodia.

The foreign co-prosecutor, a Canadian named Robert Petit, has been pursuing the
evidence vigorously but has not said where it is leading him. In an interview,
he said he was ready to propose his first indictments once the judges formalized
the rules at a plenary session tentatively set for March. A trial might then
begin by the end of the year.

Cambodia and the United Nations agreed on the structure of the mixed tribunal in
2003 after years of negotiations that involved technical and political
differences. Those differences remained at the heart of the disagreements that
have stalled the trial since November, say experts on the tribunal.

A rules committee of nine judges is trying to resolve the differences. Sean
Visoth, the tribunal's Cambodian coordinator, said, ''If there is no compromise
and there is no plenary, the international judges will walk away.''

The delay has revived a concern that Prime Minister Hun Sen may not in fact want
the trial to proceed and may be throwing up the latest in a long series of
roadblocks that have stalled it over the years. Among other things, he is
believed to be under pressure from China, which does not want to see a trial
that would be likely to demonstrate its close ties to the Khmer Rouge
government.

The core disputes appear to involve a long-running issue: the independence of
the trial from Cambodian political manipulation.

On the Cambodian side, an important issue is control, said the American
ambassador to Cambodia, Joseph A. Mussomeli. ''The government in general tries
to keep tight control over the judiciary and anything that could have negative
consequences,'' he said.

The first concern is the scope of indictments in a country where the politics of
the present remain tangled in the past. Some former middle-ranking Khmer Rouge
are prominent in the current government, including Mr. Hun Sen -- although
experts say he is not culpable. Other potential defendants may have powerful
patrons trying to protect them.

One point of contention among the judges, said people close to the negotiations,
is a provision that would in effect allow an indictment to proceed without the
agreement of the Cambodian side. That provision is one of several balancing acts
in the tribunal's super-majority system that at most junctures allows foreign
and Cambodian judges to cast what amount to vetoes over one another's decisions.

The Cambodian side is also seeking to limit the right of defendants to be
represented in court by foreign lawyers, which it says is a violation of
Cambodian legal sovereignty. Foreign analysts say the Cambodian concern is that
aggressive foreign lawyers would be independent of any political guidance and
could send the case in unpredictable directions.

A British lawyer, Rupert Skilbeck, who will coordinate the lawyers' work, said
defendants would be placed at a disadvantage if they could not select their own
lawyers.

''It's important that the trials are very fair, because if they're seen as show
trials, then there will be no justice,'' he said in November.

Mr. Mussomeli said the Cambodian government, accustomed to controlling the
judiciary, might be reacting defensively to Mr. Petit, who has taken on his job
as prosecutor with an energy and independence that is unfamiliar here.

In the interview, Mr. Petit sought to calm these concerns, saying he was aware
that the tribunal could be derailed by an overaggressive prosecution. ''We have
to apply the law in the context of Cambodia,'' he said. ''I'm not stupid. You
have to exercise discretion.''

Mr. Petit has been involved in tribunals in Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Kosovo and
East Timor, and he said he understood that in cases like these it was not
possible to follow the law blindly, without reference to its context. ''We all
have a sense of our responsibilities,'' he said. ''Our primary responsibility is
to deliver justice to the victims of these crimes.'' That will not be possible,
he said, if the process is shut down for any reason.

''Having a right and exercising it with good judgment are two different
things,'' he said.

He said he did not know how many cases he would forward to the next level of the
tribunal, the investigating judges, who are to issue indictments. ''In this
particular tribunal there are very specific expectations,'' he said. ''Everyone
'knows' what happened. We've got the evidence there; you just have to pick it up
and carry it into court -- well, it doesn't work that way.''

''We have to grasp events of great magnitude that happened 30 years ago and be
legally and morally convinced that we have cases against individual people,'' he
said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The window of a museum outside Phnom Penh, Cambodia, showing the
skulls of Khmer Rouge victims. (Photo by Mak Remissa/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); JUDGES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); INTERVIEWS (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) Khmer Rouge (Cambodia); United Nations

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Pol Pot (1925-98)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); CHINA (79%)

REGION: Cambodia; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              569 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Screamers

BYLINE: By JEANNETTE CATSOULIS

SECTION: Section E; PT1; Column 2; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Film in
Review; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 318 words



Opens today in New York, Chicago and Boston
Directed by Carla Garapedian
In English and Armenian, with English subtitles
89 minutes

  Like Atom Egoyan's 2002 fiction film ''Ararat,'' the documentary ''Screamers''
takes as its jumping-off point the 1915 massacre of Armenians by the Ottoman
Turks. Unlike Mr. Egoyan, however, the director Carla Garapedian has a wider
agenda: to show how continued refusal to acknowledge the genocide, by the United
States and Britain as well as by Turkey, has given governments all over the
world courage to instigate their own versions of ethnic cleansing.

The relationship between denial of the Armenian tragedy and later atrocities
like the Holocaust, Rwanda and present-day Darfur remains far from proven, but
''Screamers'' loses no power as a result of its shaky argument. Focusing on the
alternative metal band System of a Down, whose members are descended from
Armenian survivors, this invigorating and articulate film unfolds at the
sensitive intersection of entertainment and politics. Interviewing fans, family
members and a wide range of public figures, Ms. Garapedian traces the historical
path of genocide and reveals the continuing success of the band's attempts to
raise awareness about global suffering.

Part rockumentary, part howl of outrage, ''Screamers'' would have benefited from
less concert film and more historical background. Though the decibel level
occasionally threatens to drown out the movie's quieter voices, the harrowing
reminiscences of the lead singer Serj Tankian's grandfather, one of the few
remaining Armenian eyewitnesses, make the suffering personal. ''This band just
started to make you ask questions,'' Mr. Tankian tells his audience. That would
seem a good place to start.   JEANNETTE CATSOULIS

''Screamers'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It has strong language and disturbing images of genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
FILM DIRECTORS (90%); MOVIE RATINGS (77%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (77%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (73%); HOLOCAUST
(71%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (68%) Motion Pictures; Reviews

PERSON: Jeannette Catsoulis; Carla Garapedian

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (90%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (73%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (90%); ILLINOIS, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (92%); UNITED STATES (90%); TURKEY (90%); RWANDA (76%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              570 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Novelist Under Threat

BYLINE: By JULIE BOSMAN; Compiled by Peter Edidin

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Arts, Briefly; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 188 words


The Turkish novelist Elif Shafak, below, has sharply curtailed her book tour in
the United States because of fears for her safety, her publisher said yesterday.
Ms. Shafak was scheduled to promote her new novel, ''The Bastard of Istanbul,''
in six cities, including Chicago, Los Angeles and Seattle, but has canceled
everything but a visit to New York on Feb. 5. Ms. Shafak has been sued by a
right-wing Turkish attorney, Kemal Kerincsiz, who said her new novel's
characters were guilty of ''insulting Turkishness'' by referring to the
''millions'' of Armenians ''massacred'' by Turks. Ms. Shafak was placed under
police protection in Turkey, where she lives part time, after the murder of
Hrant Dink, a newspaper editor who was prosecuted for challenging the official
Turkish version of the 1915 Armenian genocide. Paul Slovak, the publisher of
Viking, said that while Ms. Shafak had received no specific threats in the
United States, she had been attacked as an ''enemy of the state'' on
ultra-nationalist Web sites. ''It's a situation where you want to be as careful
as you can and not take any chances,'' he said.   JULIE BOSMAN

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (94%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WRITERS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); LITERATURE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (71%) Books and Literature; Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Suits and Litigation

PERSON: Julie Bosman; Elif Shafak; Kemal Kerincsiz

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (73%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (95%); ARMENIA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              572 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Charles Taylor Trial Put Off

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 54 words


The war crimes trial of Charles Taylor, the former Liberian warlord turned
president, was postponed until June 4 to give his defense more time to prepare,
the court said. The United Nations-backed Sierra Leone Court, in The Hague for
this trial, had set April 2 for the trial. Mr. Taylor has been in custody since
last February.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Charles Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (93%); LIBERIA (93%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Liberia; Hague (Netherlands); Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              573 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 27, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is Dividing Iraq Our Best Way Out?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 634 words



To the Editor:

In ''Breaking the Clinch'' (column, Jan. 25), David Brooks recognizes what most
commentators still do not: that the source of civil disorder in Iraq is not
religion, politics or ethnicity. It is psychology.

When social order breaks down, the most brutal elements in society emerge and
can be exploited by ''charismatic'' leaders to turn neighbor against neighbor in
a seemingly endless cycle of atrocity and revenge.

But Mr. Brooks doesn't draw the obvious conclusion from his insight: that our
staying in Iraq, surge or no surge, is never going to ameliorate the violence.
The best we can do is get out. And after withdrawal, concentrate on confining
the violence within Iraq by diplomatic means.

Eventually, the death squads and suicide bombers will exhaust themselves, and
then we should support the emergence of social order by providing aid for
reconstruction.

Alfred B. Lewis, M.D.
New York, Jan. 26, 2007

The writer is emeritus professor of clinical psychiatry, Weill Medical College
of Cornell University.

To the Editor:

I believe that David Brooks is helping to lead mainstream opinion to the only
solution to the Iraq war that all Americans might embrace.

There will not be the military victory that the president still believes is
possible. There will not be the political reconciliation that many Democrats are
calling for.

Iraq is irretrievably broken, in part by the mismanaged American occupation
following the invasion. Our troops should risk their lives only to separate the
warring tribes and prevent the ultimate genocide.

An American policy of soft partition of the Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds combined
with international guarantees for a limited central government is the only way
forward.

Irwin Jones
Sarasota, Fla., Jan. 25, 2007

To the Editor:

The call by David Brooks and others for a ''soft partition'' of Iraq that would
roughly divide the country into ethnic and sectarian enclaves faces two
insurmountable obstacles.

Except for the relatively homogenous Kurd-dominated north, Iraq's most populous
cities and provinces are so heavily integrated between Sunnis and Shiites that
even a soft partition of the country would take an impossible degree of
logistical and motivational support among Iraqis.

Any attempt to divide the country along ethnic and sectarian lines would revisit
some of the most shameful episodes of the 20th century: forced displacement and
relocation of people on a huge scale and the ''ethnic cleansing'' of Iraqi
neighborhoods, towns, cities and provinces.

Stability and prosperity are achievable in Iraq only through creating and
maintaining a durable Iraqi national identity that cannot be sundered by
competing sectarian and ethnic identities.

Richard Maher
Providence, R.I., Jan. 25, 2007

To the Editor:

David Brooks claims that the Democrats are not acting in a humanitarian fashion
when they request that we simply withdraw our troops quickly. He says that the
United States would be responsible for endless Sunni-Shiite violence.

Yet during the eight-year war between Iraq and Iran in the 1980s, the United
States and other Western countries covertly sold arms to both countries. This
fueled many Sunni and Shiite war casualties.

If we are going to remain in Iraq, we need to be told what it is that we hope to
accomplish and how the extra soldiers will meet this goal.

Jack Fruchter
Lawrence, N.Y., Jan. 25, 2007

To the Editor:

David Brooks asks, ''Does the party that still talks piously about ending
bloodshed in Darfur really want to walk away from a genocide the U.S. is partly
responsible for?''

The difference is that in Darfur, we would come with clean hands and, one hopes,
be welcomed. In Iraq, our hands are bloody, so our continued presence there only
intensifies the carnage.

Irving Feiner
Nyack, N.Y., Jan. 25, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ETHNICITY (89%); POLITICS (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); PSYCHOLOGY (77%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); FOREIGN POLICY (74%); WRITERS (73%); RELIGION (72%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS
(67%); PSYCHIATRY (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (67%); GENOCIDE (64%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (54%) United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: CORNELL UNIVERSITY (55%)

PERSON: David Brooks; Alfred B (Dr) Lewis; Richard Maher; Irving Feiner; Jack
Fruchter; Irwin Jones

CITY: PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (79%); SARASOTA, FL, USA (73%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              581 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Congo Warlord To Face Global Justice

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 87 words


The International Criminal Court ordered Thomas Lubanga, left, the former leader
of a rebel militia that operated in Congo's volatile eastern Ituri district, to
be tried on charges that he recruited child soldiers and sent them into battle,
making him the first suspect to stand trial at the permanent war crimes court,
which was established in 2002. If convicted, Mr. Lubanga, who was arrested in
Congo in 2005 and sent to The Hague court last year, could be imprisoned for
life. He is the only suspect in the court's custody.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CHILD
SOLDIERS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); ARRESTS
(86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%) Children and Youth; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Thomas Lubanga

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (93%); NETHERLANDS (91%); EUROPE
(90%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire); Hague (Netherlands); Ituri (Congo)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              583 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 83 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the future of
relations between Turkey and Armenia following the funeral for Hrant Dink, a
Turkish-Armenian newspaper editor killed in Istanbul on Jan. 19, misidentified
the issue between the two countries that Turkey has said should be examined by a
governmental history commission. It is the 1915 Armenian genocide -- not the
political status of Nagorno-Karabakh, a region that Armenia claims but that
Turkey recognizes as part of Azerbaijan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (87%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (86%);
ASSASSINATION (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%); WAR CRIMES (85%) Correction
Stories; Armenians; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations; Freedom of
Speech and Expression; Freedom of the Press; Law and Legislation  ; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Hrant Dink; Abdullah (Prime Min) Gul

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (88%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (96%); TURKEY (96%); AZERBAIJAN (76%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              584 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Judge Ends 20-Year Case To Deport 2 Tied to Terrorists

BYLINE: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 30


Chastising the government with poetry and blunt language, an immigration judge
on Tuesday ended 20-year-old deportation proceedings against two of eight men
who had been accused of ties to a Palestinian organization classified as a
terrorist group.

The judge, Bruce J. Einhorn, of Immigration Court here, faulted the government
for repeated delays in producing evidence that the two, who with the others
became known as the L.A. Eight, should be deported as a threat to the United
States.

The case has been monitored by civil libertarians, who see it as an example of
overreaching in terror cases.

Officials had accused the men, seven Palestinians and a Kenyan, of supporting
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a branch of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization that the government classifies as a terrorist group.

The eight denied being members and accused the government, which never filed
criminal charges against them, of political persecution.

The two men, Khader Musa Hamide and Michel Ibrahim Shehadeh, are the sole
remaining defendants and the only ones who were legal permanent residents when
the case began.

One of the others returned to the Palestinian areas. The other five, who had
been charged with violating temporary visas, were given legal permanent
residency. One became a United States citizen during the proceedings, which
included appeals to the Supreme Court.

''I certainly hope it is the end of the road,'' said David Cole, a lawyer with
the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York, which represented the two men
along with the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California and the
National Lawyers Guild.

Mr. Hamide, 52, a coffee and tea wholesaler who has lived in the country for 35
years, said the ruling relieved him.

''This is a dark cloud that has hung over our lives for 20 years,'' he said.
''This was over expression of political views that may not be popular but we
have a right to make.''

Virginia Kice, a spokeswoman for Immigrations and Customs Enforcement, said,
''I.C.E. finds the judge's decision troubling as a matter of fact and law, and
the agency is considering its legal options.''

Judge Einhorn began his ruling with a quotation from the poet William Knox's
''Songs of Israel,'' a paean to mortality that begins, ''On why the spirit of
mortal be proud?''

''Since time began to tick,'' he continued, ''human beings have contemplated
their mortality with the certainty that they face a worldly end. Such certainty
must come to cases as well.''

At another point the judge criticized the government's nine-month delay in
responding to an order due on June 27, 2005. ''One could conceive, carry and
deliver a child during the course of the government's delay,'' he wrote.

In the end, he said, the government failed to prove that the men were
deportable.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); DEPORTATION (92%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION
(91%); TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); IMMIGRATION
LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); POETRY (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (78%); COFFEE & TEA (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); WRITERS (73%);
MISC FOOD WHOLESALERS (64%) Deportation; Palestinians; Terrorism; Immigration
and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: PALESTINE LIBERATION FRONT (83%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
(54%) Palestinian Liberation Organization; Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine

PERSON: bruce j (judge) einhorn; Khader Musa Hamide; Michael Ibrahim Shehadeh;
Randal C Archibold

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES (93%); ISRAEL
(92%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              586 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing New York: Manhattan: Councilman Seeks Divestment In Sudan

BYLINE: By RAY RIVERA; Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 120 words


A city councilman said yesterday that he planned to introduce a bill today
asking that the city and the state stop investing pension money in companies
that do business in Sudan, whose government has been accused of committing
genocide against civilians. The city has invested $725 million and the state $1
billion in such companies, the state and city comptrollers' offices said. The
bill, by Councilman Eric N. Gioia, left, is set to be co-sponsored by Councilman
David Yassky and Councilwoman Inez E. Dickens. It would identify companies that
provide revenue to the Sudanese government and fail to use their influence to
end the fighting. At least six states, including California, have passed similar
laws.    RAY RIVERA

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); DIVESTITURES (88%); GENOCIDE (87%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); WAR CRIMES (87%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (86%);
GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (86%); PERSONAL FINANCE (85%); PENSION &
RETIREMENT PLANS (85%) Law and Legislation; Pensions and Retirement Plans; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

PERSON: Eric N (Councilman) Gioia; Ray Rivera

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Sudan; New York City; Darfur (Sudan); New York State; New York City

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              590 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 2, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Venezuela: Chavez Attacks Bush, Continued

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 103 words


President Hugo Chavez said President Bush should be tried for ''war crimes'' in
relation to the Iraq war. He showed further disdain for Mr. Bush, saying he was
unfit to manage ''even a Little League baseball team,'' in reaction to Mr.
Bush's publicized concern about Mr. Chavez's new power to rule by decree. ''They
should be tried and thrown in prison for the rest of their days,'' Mr. Chavez
said of Mr. Bush and John D. Negroponte, who is designated for the No. 2
position in the State Department. Mr. Chavez also called Mr. Bush ''the devil,''
as he did in a speech at the United Nations in September.   SIMON ROMERO

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 3, 2007



CORRECTION: A report in the World Briefing column yesterday about criticism by
Venezuela's president, Hugo Chavez, of President Bush's handling of the Iraq war
described one comment incorrectly. Mr. Chavez did indeed call Mr. Bush ''the
devil,'' as he had done in a speech at the United Nations in September.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); IRAQ WAR (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);
YOUTH SPORTS (71%); BASEBALL (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%) United
States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: LITTLE LEAGUE BASEBALL (58%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (92%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (58%) Simon
Romero; Hugo (Pres) Chavez; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Venezuela

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              601 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Gangs of Los Angeles: Roots, Branches and Bloods

BYLINE: By VIRGINIA HEFFERNAN

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1053 words


Vintage film of gang members' digging graves and attending funerals introduces
Cle Sloan's incisive documentary, ''Bastards of the Party,'' about the origins
of the murderous street gangs of Los Angeles.

''I'm banging for Athens,'' ''I'm banging for the Jungle,'' are typical
self-descriptions of the men Mr. Sloan knows. They mean, to put it plainly, what
neighborhood they're killing for.

Mr. Sloan joined the Bloods when he was 12, but now considers involvement in
gangs ''self-genocide.'' His film, which he produced with Antoine Fuqua, the
director of ''Training Day,'' sustains the courage of this indictment. It has
its premiere tonight on HBO.

Henry Louis Gates Jr., with his PBS series ''African-American Lives,''
chronicled the ancestry of several prominent black Americans. The programs
suggested that black history had often been too general (slavery, segregation,
civil rights) or too specific (the sacrifice or malevolence of a parent or a
grandparent) to give individuals a rich sense of their world-historical context.

Rigorous genealogies, the kind that Europeans have conducted for everything from
the average Jacques to systems of morals, are where narcissism and intellectual
life satisfyingly meet.

Now Mr. Sloan provides one such genealogy for the institution of the gang, and
it's immensely interesting. We misunderstand the gangs when we assume that they
have no history or purpose apart from brute violence, but we romanticize them
when we imagine that they're bands of brave vigilantes. Clear-eyed history --
shot through with archival film -- begins to set the record straight.

Mr. Sloan begins with a myth: that gangs like the Bloods and the Crips started
in 1972, when they formed in response to a dispute over a leather jacket. That's
rubbish. The film shows that gang animosity in Los Angeles dates to the 1940s
and '50s, when the police had set up an extortion racket on Central Avenue to
bilk the black music clubs.

As documented in The California Eagle, the major African-American Los Angeles
newspaper of the time, resentment stewed about the shakedowns; at the same time,
white gangs were jumping black kids who showed up at their schools and in their
neighborhoods. Black gangs like the Gladiators, Businessmen and Slausons formed
in response.

''Pretty soon, these black gangs kind of turned on each other,'' Mr. Sloan says.
''From 1969, '71, '72, we started blowing each other's brains out.'' He asks,
''How did we go from being brothers'' to killing one another?

That is the urgent question. Around the time of the Watts riots, the gangs
united to drive out the Los Angeles Police Department. Then the Black Panthers
formed, and in Los Angeles a Panthers group led by Bunchy Carter came into
conflict with the Us Organization, led by Ron Karenga.

As a former gang member says, playing the part of a young man making a decision:
'' 'Well, I'm a little more aggressive, I can fight a little better, I'll go
with Bunchy and them.' And the guys that couldn't fight so well, the guys that
wants to be more jazzy-jazzy, they went with Karenga.''

Clearly Mr. Sloan, and the people with speaking parts in this film -- all of
whom appear to be over 30 -- are at a time in their lives, and banging careers,
when they want to become more jazzy-jazzy. Mr. Sloan also calls this, the
Karenga way, being more ''abstract.''

At some point jazzy abstraction wasn't enough for the Us organization, and it
started fighting with the Panthers at the same time that the F.B.I. was busy
with an explicit strategy of ''neutralizing'' them. When Mr. Carter was shot and
killed, the Us Organization was said to be an accomplice in an F.B.I. trap.

Mr. Sloan now says this was a ''ghetto folktale,'' but it fractured the
movement. The Crips and the Bloods, the gangs that formed in the 1970s, are seen
by Mr. Sloan as the bastard children of the political organizations of the '60s.
''Out of the ashes of the Black Panther party came the gangs,'' he says. The
Crips had a sketchy plan for social reform and inventive forms of pageantry;
they also had a constitution.

Soon the high-minded ideology of the Crips gave way to street violence and petty
crime, which became their way of getting noticed and also of policing who was
with them or against them. Soon enough, something really was against them: the
Bloods.

Drugs made things lively for a while, and many oral historians in ''Bastards''
can't keep from grinning when crack comes up. Mr. Sloan remembers, somewhat
fondly, when his old friends all became rich. But with big money comes
Disneyland, automatic weapons, movies, road trips off the block. Big guns in
neighborhoods like Hollywood frightened the police, who declared war on the
gangs and sent many members to prison.

The film doesn't end before the fresh killing of a Blood, the son of an old
friend of Mr. Sloan's. Mr. Sloan wrestles with what he should do in response,
and whether it would be treason to leave the death unavenged.

He consults others who are trying to go jazzy-jazzy and leave violence behind,
and resolves, among other things, that he and his friends have to stop giving
their children street names: no more ''Little Bone,'' ''Little Babyface.'' No
more passing on resentments. And no more retaliatory killing. ''I'm denouncing
banging,'' Mr. Sloane says, at last.

The superb urban theorist Mike Davis, who provides the most authoritative
history here, is white and shaggy-haired, and he is given about 25 percent too
much screen time. He comes off as a bleeding heart, and he evinces by far the
most sentimentality for the gangs, which he lauds for promoting loyalty and
love, and which he maintains were created in response to racism, police
brutality and the end of industrial jobs.

You don't hear this from Mr. Sloan, who talks more about his banger brother, who
went to prison for life, and died young.Bastards of the PartyHBO, tonight at 10,
Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.Directed by Cle Sloan; Antoine Fuqua
and Mr. Sloan, producers; Jack Gulick, executive producer; Keith Salmon, editor;
cinematography by Haskell Wexler, Joan Churchill, Mark Woods and Phil Parmet;
original score by Joong-Han Chung; Mr. Salmon and Alex Demyanenko, co-producers.
For HBO: Jackie Glover, supervising producer; Sheila Nevins, executive producer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The director, Cle Sloan, right, joined the Bloods when he was
12. (Photo by HBO)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); GENEALOGY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GANGS (90%); HISTORY (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%); POLICE FORCES (76%);
EXTORTION (74%); RIOTS (73%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); SLAVERY (68%) Television; Reviews

PERSON: Virginia Heffernan; Cle Sloan

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (94%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              605 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The U.N. in Bosnia

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

In David Brooks's Jan. 28 column about Iraq, I was surprised to read a reference
to the evacuation of refugees from an area near Srebrenica, Bosnia, in 1995:
''The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees refused to participate, believing the
evacuation would just complete the ethnic cleansing.''

At the time, I was the special envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for the former Yugoslavia.

Two days before the tragic events unfolded in Srebrenica, I offered the Bosnian
prime minister assistance in organizing the urgent evacuation of the Muslim
population from Srebrenica.

Unfortunately, the Bosnian government did not accept. Throughout the war, the
high commissioner quietly helped families belonging to minorities to flee when
their lives were in danger, especially from the Banja Luka area.

As a result, the United Nations high commissioner was often accused of having
aided ethnic cleansing when in fact we were saving lives.Anne Willem
BijleveldGeneva, Feb. 2, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
GENOCIDE (87%); WAR CRIMES (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(73%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (65%) United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR
REFUGEES (92%) United Nations; United Nations High Commission for Refugees

PERSON: Anne Willem Bijleveld; David Brooks

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Iraq; Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              606 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 9, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civic Groups Seek to Amend Law on Insults To Turkish State

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Feb. 8


A group of civic organizations on Thursday submitted suggestions for rewording a
section of the Turkish penal code under which noted intellectuals and writers
had been charged with the crime of insulting the Turkish identity and the state.

But some critics of the law say it should be revoked, not amended.

After the killing last month of an Armenian-Turkish journalist, Hrant Dink, some
critics said the law, known as Article 301, was partly responsible. According to
this argument, Mr. Dink's conviction under the article for comments he made
about the genocide in which more than a million Armenians were killed by the
Ottoman Turk government from 1915 to 1918 made him a traitor in the eyes of many
Turks and put his life in jeopardy.

For Turkey, the Armenian issue is among the thorniest issues of free speech. The
courts have interpreted the use of the word genocide in reference to the
killings as an ''insult against the Turkish state'' under Article 301.

Last year, after harsh criticism by the European Union, the government said it
was receptive to changing the law but not abolishing it.

The proposal submitted on Thursday, signed by 10 civic organizations, tried to
make a distinction between illegal language and legal criticism. Instead of
outlawing ''insulting Turkishness'' it proposed new wording that would outlaw
''openly abasing and deriding'' the Turkish identity.

That was not enough for one civic group, the Turkish Chamber of Doctors, which
broke with the umbrella group and accused the government of trying to evade
responsibility for the law for fear of losing voters in November's general
elections. ''Changes are only a facade and can never prevent bitter
consequences, as we've witnessed with Mr. Dink's murder,'' said Gencay Gurun,
the group's general secretary.

Perihan Magden, a journalist who is one of a number of people given security
protection by the government after Mr. Dink's death, said the suggested changes
were too mild to make a difference.

''The fact that I have to live in my own country under police protection is a
government acknowledgment that something is wrong,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMINAL LAW (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(88%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (77%);
LEGISLATION (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%);
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%); MURDER (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (52%) Armenians; Law
and Legislation; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Freedom of the Press; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: Sebnem Arsu; Hrant Dink

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%); ARMENIA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              608 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Peru: President Questioned In 1986 Massacre

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 110 words


President Alan Garcia was questioned by a judge about his actions during the
killing of more than 100 suspected Maoist guerrillas during his first presidency
in the 1980s. Peru's Congress declined to bring criminal charges for the deaths
against Mr. Garcia in 1990 for the incident, in which Peruvian soldiers
suppressed a rebellion at El Fronton prison in 1986 and then transferred the
bodies of prisoners to anonymous graves on Lima's outskirts. Reuters reported
that Mr. Garcia was not a target of the judge's investigation. The questioning
of Mr. Garcia raises uneasy memories of his first term, which was haunted by
political and economic chaos.   SIMON ROMERO

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (87%); CORRECTIONS (87%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CIVIL WAR (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%) Politics and Government;
Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: Simon Romero; Alan (Pres) Garcia

CITY: LIMA, PERU (71%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%)

REGION: Peru

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              611 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

After So Many Deaths, Too Many Births

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: MAYANGE, Rwanda


CONVINCING women in the deeply impoverished Rwandan countryside that they should
have fewer children is a daunting task. ''They say we're not Christian,'' said
Jeannette Mukabalisa, a local health advocate, of the predominantly Catholic
population. ''They say, 'You're town people, we're traditional.' Children bring
these families prestige. For them, children come from God. So it's difficult,
very difficult.''

After the 1994 genocide, in which more than 800,000 Rwandans were slaughtered,
it seemed difficult to believe that overpopulation would ever be a problem. Yet
Rwanda has long had more people than its meager resources and small area can
support.

In a recent interview, President Paul Kagame said he was preparing a sweeping
population control program, to be unveiled in the coming months, that would aim
to cut Rwanda's birth rate by at least half.

''We recognize we are late on this,'' Mr. Kagame said.

After the genocide, officials were reluctant to promote population control
because they feared it would offend the survivors, who believed they had a right
to replenish what they had lost.

''Because of the genocide, many people didn't want to hear about birth
control,'' said Odette Nyiramilimo, a legislator who proposed a bill last year
that would have given incentives and detailed disincentives for families to
limit themselves to three children. Previous efforts had been opposed by
officials who told Ms. Nyiramilimo that education, not population, was the
problem.

But nearly half of Rwanda's legislators are female, and Ms. Nyiramilimo is among
several who have spent years pushing for a serious population control effort.

The country's population has quadrupled over the last half-century. Today Rwanda
has 8.8 million people; most are subsistence farmers. If current fertility rates
are not curbed -- Rwandan women bear an average of 6.1 children -- the
population will double by 2030. That would almost certainly doom Mr. Kagame's
ambitious plan to raise Rwanda from poverty over that same period.

''The last government's philosophy was that the country was too small for all
Rwandans,'' said Dr. Richard Sezibera, a close adviser to Mr. Kagame, referring
to the rulers who oversaw the genocide. ''We insisted that the country was big
enough to accommodate everybody. But many people took that to apply to the
unborn as well, and we're having to face that mind-set.''

Dr. Sezibera and President Kagame, like many members of the minority Tutsi group
that suffered the brunt of the genocide, were forced out of Rwanda decades ago
and grew up as refugees.

Officials who are designing the new population control program said it would
include a requirement that everyone who visits a hospital or health center for
any reason be counseled on family planning. Women of child-bearing age will be
offered free contraceptive devices including Norplant II, a small silicone pin
that is inserted beneath the skin and is effective for up to five years. All
schools will offer comprehensive sex education courses.

''The basis for this new campaign is already in place,'' said Laura Hoemeke,
director of the Twubakane Decentralization and Health Project, a community
initiative that includes family planning. Though the Bush administration has
often discouraged birth control, the United States government is financing this
program.

Political opposition to population control measures has melted away as it has
become clear that President Kagame now strongly favors them.

In a sign of the changing climate, a government-sponsored newspaper, New Times,
recently published a supplement with a front-page headline, ''Rapid Population
Growth: A Constraint on Resources.'' Below was a photo of an idyllic landscape
with the caption, ''This beautiful scenery will diminish if population is not
controlled.'' An accompanying editorial said that Rwanda's population ''is
already big enough'' and that ''drastic measures'' were needed to keep it from
growing.

Officials designing the population control campaign say they hope to produce a
plan that could become a model for other African countries, and perhaps persuade
a foreign philanthropy to pay its entire cost. They have already begun
consulting specialists from the United States and other countries.

Though Rwanda is predominantly Catholic, the church's leaders here are not
expected to oppose a campaign for population control. A number of priests, nuns
and lay workers participated in the 1994 genocide, which weakened the church's
moral authority, and has led it to avoid politics.

President Kagame said he thought the church might present a problem, but noted
that it had already showed a flexibility that might not have been expected on
issues like AIDS education and condom distribution. ''They do not come out and
preach, as we do, but they do not actively oppose what we are doing,'' he said.

According to Josh Ruxin, an American public health administrator based in
Rwanda, the rate of Rwandans living in extreme poverty declined from 60.4
percent to 56.6 percent from 2001 to 2006. Mr. Ruxin is helping to design the
new population control project. ''If Rwanda wants to be an Asian tiger,'' he
said, ''this is where it all starts.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Babies, Not Ghosts -- A crowd at a health campaign rally in
northern Rwanda. Population control has been controversial because survivors of
the genocide have felt it was a family's right to replenish what was lost.
(Photo by Laura Hoemeke/Twubakane Decentralization and Health Program)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FAMILY (90%); CHILDREN (89%); RURAL COMMUNITIES
(89%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (89%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (78%); BIRTHS &
BIRTH RATES (78%); WOMEN (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); POPULATION SIZE (77%);
FERTILITY RATES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); TRENDS
(74%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%); POPULATION ESTIMATES & PROJECTIONS (73%);
POLITICS (69%); FERTILITY & INFERTILITY (68%); REFUGEES (60%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(59%) Population; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Economic
Conditions and Trends; Politics and Government; Foreign Aid; United States
International Relations; Population

PERSON: Stephen Kinzer; Paul (Pres) Kagame

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              612 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Death By Dollars

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 766 words


So is your Fidelity account underwriting genocide in Sudan? Is your pension fund
helping finance the janjaweed militias that throw babies into bonfires in Darfur
and Chad?

The answer to both questions is complicated but may be yes, and that's one
reason a divestment campaign is gaining strength around America and abroad. Six
states (including California) have already begun divesting from companies active
in Sudan, and legislation is pending in 23 more states, including New York.

More than 30 universities, beginning with Harvard in 2005, have sold certain
Sudan-related investments. Five cities have divested, and New York is
considering doing so. A bill before Congress would bar certain companies active
in Sudan from receiving federal contracts.

Let's start by acknowledging that divestment and economic sanctions generally
fail. The closest thing to a success was the way they helped topple white rule
in South Africa in the 1980s, but even there one result was greater hardship for
ordinary blacks.

Elsewhere, divestment and economic sanctions have mostly been counterproductive.
Our Cuban embargo has hurt Cubans but cemented Fidel Castro in power; our
sanctions against Myanmar have inflicted tremendous pain on Burmese without
dislodging the brutal government.

So I'm against economic sanctions in almost every case. But Sudan is an
exception, a rare instance where narrowly focused divestment makes practical as
well as moral sense.

Partly that's because Sudan's economy depends on foreign oil companies, giving
the outside world leverage. And 70 percent of Sudan's oil revenue goes to
weaponry, like bayonets used to gouge out people's eyes.

The oil companies in Sudan aren't American; the biggest players are Chinese
companies. Pressure on them is also one way to get the attention of the Chinese
government, which is Sudan's main protector in the U.N. Security Council.

So in this case pressure on a small number of foreign companies could help get
Sudan's attention, and that of its protectors in China, without hurting ordinary
people. And Sudan has shown that it can be nudged and embarrassed into behaving
better: the best example is the way that pressure (including economic sanctions)
led Sudan's leaders to end their brutal war in southern Sudan in 2005.

Fortunately, the Darfur divestment campaign has been remarkably restrained in
choosing targets. Organizers are not seeking divestment from all of the more
than 400 foreign companies that operate in Sudan, but only from a few dozen that
are complicit in genocide without helping ordinary Sudanese. (See the guidelines
at www.SudanDivestment.org, developed largely by a recent U.C.L.A. graduate,
Adam Sterling.)

''People are surprised to find out that Royal Dutch Shell is not a targeted
company by us, even though they are an oil firm and operate in Sudan,'' notes
Mark Hanis, who runs the Genocide Intervention Network (which has a divestment
hot line, 1-800-GENOCIDE). That's because Shell sells gas in Sudan at a retail
level, rather than enriching the army through production, Mr. Hanis said, and
less than 5 percent of those sales are believed to be to the government.

More than other money managers, Fidelity has resisted the pressure and clung
firmly to Sudan-related investments. So Darfur campaigners are urging investors
to avoid Fidelity mutual funds: more information is at
www.FidelityOutofSudan.com.

The biggest U.S. investor in Class H shares of PetroChina, a Chinese oil concern
whose parent company is active in Sudan, is Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway.
I have huge respect for Mr. Buffett, and he may be thinking: My obligation is to
make money for shareholders, not to use their investments in a dubious attempt
to save the world. But surely if Berkshire Hathaway and Fidelity mutual funds
saw lucrative opportunities in selling bayonets to the janjaweed, they would
balk at that. We do have limits; the question is where we draw them.

In this case, the cost of divestment to fund managers or investors is
negligible, and there is a real prospect that the strategy will add enough
attention, embarrassment and pressure that Sudan will stop slaughtering Darfuris
-- just as it has stopped massacring people in southern Sudan.

It's not a sure thing. But remember that in Darfur and Chad, aid workers -- some
of them Americans -- are being killed, raped and beaten as they try to alleviate
the slaughter. So shouldn't we make the minimal sacrifice of divestment, rather
than blithely continue to invest in ways that provide grenades and guns to kill
aid workers and Darfuris alike?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DIVESTITURES (93%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); PENSION FUNDS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(78%); PERSONAL FINANCE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
PENDING LEGISLATION (76%); LEGISLATION (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%);
ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (74%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (69%); PUBLIC
CONTRACTING (69%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

COMPANY: ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC (60%)

TICKER: RDSA (LSE) (60%); RDSA (AMS) (60%); RDS.B (NYSE) (60%); RDS.A (NYSE)
(60%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES (60%);
NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (60%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (60%)

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (51%) Nicholas D Kristof

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHINA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); MYANMAR (92%); CHAD
(92%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              619 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 14, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing West: California: Plea Deal In Iraqi's Death

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 102 words


In a pretrial agreement, a marine pleaded guilty to conspiracy and kidnapping
charges but denied murdering an Iraqi civilian whom he and seven other
servicemen are accused of killing last April. The marine, Lance Cpl. Robert
Pennington of Mukilteo, Wash., left, also pleaded not guilty to murder, larceny
and housebreaking. Lance Corporal Pennington, 22, and seven others are accused
of dragging the Iraqi, Hashim Ibrahim Awad, from his home in Hamdania last April
and shooting him. Lance Corporal Pennington faces a maximum sentence of life in
prison, but a sentencing cap could be part of the pretrial agreement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOMICIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CONSPIRACY (90%); PLEA AGREEMENTS
(90%); SENTENCING (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%); MURDER (85%);
SENTENCING GUIDELINES (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); SHOOTINGS (85%); GENOCIDE
(82%) Kidnapping; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Robert B (Lance Cpl) Pennington; Hashim Ibrahim Awad

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES (90%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              624 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: War Criminal Gets 34 Years

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 106 words


The Bosnian State Court sentenced Gojko Jankovic, a former Bosnian Serb
paramilitary leader, to 34 years in prison for killing, torturing, raping and
expelling Muslims and Croats from the eastern town of Foca at the beginning of
Bosnia's 1992-95 war. The sentence is the longest the court has imposed since it
began dealing with war crimes in 2000. He surrendered to the international war
crimes tribunal in The Hague in 2005 after hiding for more than five years. The
tribunal transferred the case to the Bosnian State Court, which is meant to take
over low-key cases from the tribunal. Nine cases have been referred to the court
so far.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); TORTURE (90%); SENTENCING (90%); RELIGION (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); SEX
OFFENSES (88%); HOMICIDE (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); GENOCIDE
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences (Criminal); Torture; Sex Crimes;
Islam

PERSON: Gojko Jankovic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); CROATIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Croatia; Foca (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              637 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Rules That Schools in New Jersey Must Take Steps to Stop Harassment of Gay
Students

BYLINE: By TINA KELLEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 554 words


Students who are bullied by other students because of their sexual orientation
are protected by New Jersey's antidiscrimination law, and school districts must
take reasonable steps to stop such harassment, the state's Supreme Court
unanimously ruled yesterday.

''Students in the classroom are entitled to no less protection from the unlawful
discrimination and harassment than their adult counterparts in the workplace,''
according to the opinion, written by Chief Justice James R. Zazzali.

In the case in question, known as L. W. v. the Board of Education of the Toms
River Regional Schools, an anonymous student said that he was taunted with
antihomosexual epithets from the time he was in fourth grade until he was in
high school and that he was physically attacked twice in high school. Because of
the harassment, he contends, he eventually had to change schools.

District policy called for offending students to be punished after a third
offense, although they could be punished for being late to class by one minute
on the first offense.

In 1999, L. W.'s mother filed a complaint against the district with the state's
Division on Civil Rights, and various appeals ensued. The opinion issued
yesterday found that school districts must take actions ''reasonably calculated
to end the harassment.''

Under the ruling, such actions will have to be determined case by case,
considering how quickly school officials respond to harassment, its frequency
and severity, and the maturity of the children involved.

''We're pleased with the decision we got today,'' said Thomas E. Monahan, a
lawyer for the Toms River school board, ''because it establishes a standard for
student-on-student harassment that takes into account the age of the students
and the circumstances of the harassment.''

The case will now be sent to the Office of Administrative Law to determine if
the schools protected the student reasonably according to the standards at the
time.

In 2002, New Jersey passed antibullying legislation, while this case was in
court.

Lawrence S. Lustberg, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, which
participated in the case, called the ruling unique because it requires schools
to take particular actions to prevent bullying.

''The application of the Law Against Discrimination to bullying in general and
antigay or lesbian bullying in particular is yet another sign of the
progressiveness of this excellent court,'' he said.

Lee Moore, a spokesman for the attorney general's office, which represented the
State Division on Civil Rights, said, ''We applaud the court for issuing a
decision that recognizes the promise of the New Jersey Law Against
Discrimination to eradicate the 'cancer of discrimination.' ''

Eliza Byard, the deputy executive director of the Gay, Lesbian and Straight
Education Network, based in New York, said: ''Having a policy is not enough.
Schools must implement their policies to ensure that each student is free from
fear when entering a schoolhouse.''

She said that when antibullying policies are enforced, students are more likely
to stay in school and do well there.

According to her organization, which focuses on safe schools for all students,
New Jersey is one of nine states with laws that protect students from bullying
and harassment based on sexual orientation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); BULLYING (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); EDUCATION LAW (79%); STUDENT DISCIPLINE (79%); CHILDREN
(78%); LEGISLATION (78%); SCHOOL BOARDS (78%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (78%); SUPREME
COURTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); APPEALS (77%); VERDICTS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (74%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
(73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%); EXECUTIVES (71%); ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE (66%)
Education and Schools; Homosexuality; Decisions and Verdicts; Discrimination;
Education and Schools

PERSON: Tina Kelley

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (96%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: New Jersey; Toms River (NJ)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              638 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Soldier Weeps Describing Role In Rape and Killings in Iraq

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: FORT CAMPBELL, Ky., Feb 21


A soldier broke down and wept at his court-martial here on Wednesday as he
described how he and others had planned the rape of a 14-year-old Iraqi girl,
who was murdered along with her family.

Sgt. Paul E. Cortez, 24, was the second American soldier to plead guilty to
raping the girl and killing her and her family in Mahmudiya, south of Baghdad,
in March 2006, then burning the bodies to cover up the crime.

The confession, which he read, described how he, Specialist James P. Barker and
Steven D. Green, a private who was later discharged after a psychiatric
evaluation, had planned the attack.

''While we were playing cards Barker and Green started talking about having sex
with an Iraqi female. Barker and Green had already known '' Sergeant Cortez said
before breaking down. He bowed his head and remained silent, sniffling
occasionally, for a full minute before continuing.

''Barker and Green had already known what, um, house they wanted to go to. They
had been there before and knew only one male was in the house, and knew it would
be an easy target,'' he said.

The sergeant went on to describe how the men, before heading to the house,
changed their clothes so they would not be recognized as American soldiers.

Once at the house, Private Green, the suspected ringleader, took the girl's
mother, father and 7-year-old sister into a bedroom, Sergeant Cortez said, while
he and Specialist Barker took the teenager to the living room, where they took
turns raping her.

''She kept squirming and trying to keep her legs closed and saying stuff in
Arabic,'' said Sergeant Cortez, who was flanked by his civilian and military
lawyers.

He said that during the rape, ''I hear five or six gunshots that came from the
bedroom. After Barker was done, Green came out of the bedroom and said that he
had killed them all, that all of them were dead,'' Sergeant Cortez said.

When he began crying again, one of his lawyers asked the court for a recess,
which was granted.

Sergeant Cortez could face life in prison without possibility of parole for the
rape and four counts of murder. In all, four soldiers as well as the former
soldier, Mr. Green, were charged in the case, which outraged Iraqis and
heightened tensions in the war zone. The infantrymen were members of Company B
of the First Battalion, 502nd Infantry, 101st Airborne Division and were
assigned to a checkpoint considered one of the most dangerous in Iraq.

Specialist Barker pleaded guilty in November and was sentenced to 90 years in a
military prison. Mr. Green was discharged from the Army for a ''personality
disorder'' and is in a Kentucky prison awaiting civilian trial.

Specialist Barker and Sergeant Cortez both avoided the death penalty by pleading
guilty and are expected to testify against Mr. Green and others charged in the
crime.

Sergeant Cortez also pleaded guilty to arson and breaking into the girl's house
and to obstruction of justice for helping get rid of the murder weapon, an
AK-47, which was thrown into a canal. In addition, he admitted to drinking
whiskey before the attack, a violation of Army rules against alcohol in that
area of Iraq.

The other soldiers charged in the case are Pvt. Jesse V. Spielman and Pvt. Bryan
L. Howard.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (89%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); SENTENCING (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); GUILTY
PLEAS (89%); PRISONS (84%); LAWYERS (78%); ARMIES (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PAROLE (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); PSYCHIATRY (75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
TERRORISM (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); PERSONALITY DISORDERS (70%); GENOCIDE
(60%); MURDER (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sex
Crimes; Terrorism; Courts-Martial; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations

PERSON: Paul E (Sgt) Cortez

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: KENTUCKY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Mahmudiya (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              639 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 22, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abu Ghraib And Its Multiple Failures

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1143 words


The problem with the Fox thriller ''24'' is not that it justifies torture but
that it fosters the illusion that the American government is good at it.The
practices of Abu Ghraib suggest the opposite. The mystery of that shameful
episode was not the cruelty of American troops assigned there. After the initial
disbelief over the obscene snapshots, their smile-for-the-camera barbarity
turned out to be another painful reminder that the banality of evil has no
borders.

The real puzzle is why the administration, which argued that the war against
terror required extreme interrogation techniques -- the kind critics call
torture -- would then entrust such measures to untrained amateurs.

''Ghosts of Abu Ghraib,'' a documentary by Rory Kennedy on HBO tonight, looks up
and down the chain of command to examine how and why the abuse took place. It is
not a new line of inquiry; a 2005 PBS ''Frontline'' documentary went over the
same ground and also concluded that responsibility for the excesses trickled
upward all the way to Washington.

But the raw material never ceases to shock. How is it that a government that
took such bold steps to reinterpret the Geneva Conventions and update the rules
of combat did not pay closer attention to how its policy changes were carried
out on the ground? The Pentagon didn't even manage to shield the worst excesses
from public view.

The power of photography was yet another forgotten lesson of Vietnam, one
relatively easy for the military to have remembered. If school principals can
ban cellphones from the classroom, it seems strange -- or reckless -- that
generals did not apply the same common sense and forbid cameras inside
top-security cellblocks.

''If there were no photographs, there would be no Abu Ghraib, no
investigation,'' says Javal Davis, an M.P. interviewed on camera who was
court-martialed and sentenced to six months in prison on charges of prisoner
abuse. ''It would have been, 'O.K., whatever, everybody go home.' ''

Abu Ghraib was not an isolated blunder. It embodied another paradox of the Iraq
war: unwavering moral certainty undercut by what even President Bush now
concedes was inadequate planning and execution. The United States government
said that national security and the American way of life depended on success in
Iraq, yet it seemed to punt the strategy.

The HBO film raises those issues indirectly. It focuses on the way men and women
assigned to serve as prison guards at Abu Ghraib so quickly fell into behavior
that one soldier describes in the film as ''Lord of the Flies.''

The interviews with low-level soldiers who were court-martialed for prisoner
abuse are striking because some of the subjects are obviously intelligent,
well-meaning people. But sadly, their lapses are not really so difficult to
explain. The documentary is framed by clips from Dr. Stanley Milgram's infamous
''obedience'' studies in the 1960s, which showed how easily ordinary,
law-abiding citizens could be persuaded to inflict pain on strangers with what
they were led to believe were high-voltage electric shocks.

Ms. Kennedy addresses the question of whether disregarding international laws
protecting the rights of prisoners of war is ever justifiable.

''At the Justice Department we did not think the Geneva Conventions applied in
the war against Al Qaeda because they did not sign the Geneva Conventions, and
they don't follow any of the rules of warfare,'' says John Yoo, a law professor
at the University of California, Berkeley, and a former Justice Department
official who helped develop the administration's early legal response to the
terrorist threat. ''Al Qaeda, if you look at what happened on 9/11, has no
interest in following any of those rules.'' He adds, ''They don't take
prisoners, as far as we can tell. Instead they try to kidnap people and execute
them on the Web or on television.''

His views on the Geneva Conventions are challenged by several former military
officials and administration critics. But the viewers who may be most dismayed
by the film are those who agree with Mr. Yoo.

According to ''Ghosts'' the administration, convinced that intelligence
gathering was one of the most important weapons against terrorism, kept
pressuring military commanders to produce information about the insurgency, but
paid almost no attention to how it was done.

''How do we fight an enemy we cannot see?'' Mark Danner, the author of ''Torture
and Truth: America, Abu Ghraib and the War on Terror,'' says, voicing the
military's frustration. ''The only way to do that is to interrogate enough
people that we will get usable intelligence that will allow us to nip the
insurgency in the bud.'' Mr. Danner adds, ''And I think there was a degree of
panic about the lack of intelligence and the lack of knowledge about the
insurgency.''

Thousands of detainees were watched over by a few hundred soldiers, who didn't
know what was expected of them. ''It was never clear to me what was allowed and
what wasn't allowed in Iraq,'' Ken Davis, another M.P., recalls. ''No one ever
could make anything clear to me. When the questions were asked, it was like,
'Hey, I don't know.' ''

Military intelligence interrogators relied on untrained troops filling in as
prison guards to soften up suspects. '' 'This guy needs to have a bad night,' ''
Mr. Davis says he was told. '' 'Use your imagination.' ''

But it's hard not to see a method to the madness of sexual degradation.

''Is there any chance that these people were self-actuated, that they were, that
they just came up with this as their own idea?'' asks Scott Horton, chairman of
the New York City Bar Association's Committee on International Law. ''No,
there's no chance of that whatsoever, zero chance. What they are doing are very
precisely described techniques that were developed for use on Arab men in the
global war on terror, were implemented at Guantanamo and were then brought to
and used at Abu Ghraib.'' Though the administration might dispute such a
characterization of Guantanamo, many critics and analysts agree.

''Ghosts of Abu Ghraib'' will appall and sadden viewers worried about human
rights and international law. But it will be just as discouraging for those who
believe that the danger posed by Al Qaeda trumps even those humanitarian
concerns.

Abu Ghraib wasn't just a moral failure, it was a strategic setback in the war
against terror.Ghosts of Abu GhraibHBO, tonight at 9:30, Eastern and Pacific
times; 8:30, Central time.Directed and produced by Rory Kennedy; produced by Liz
Garbus; written and produced by Jack Youngelson; Tom Hurwitz, director of
photography; Sari Gilman, editor; original music by Miriam Cutler. Diana
Barrett, executive producer for the Fledgling Fund. A Moxie Firecracker Films
production. For HBO, Nancy Abraham, senior producer; Sheila Nevins, executive
producer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Top, an Abu Ghraib detainee in a ''stress position'' in 2003
above, Specialist Sabrina Harman next to a prisoner packed in ice and plastic.
(Photo by Associated Press)
 (Photo by Reuters/HBO Films)(pg. E7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (86%); PRISONS (86%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (86%); CORRECTIONS (85%);
NETWORK TELEVISION (78%); IRAQ WAR (77%); LAW OF WAR (75%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(75%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (74%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); PUBLIC TELEVISION
(72%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (70%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (70%); JAIL SENTENCING
(66%); SENTENCING (66%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (61%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (51%);
MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%) Television; Reviews

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) Alessandra Stanley; Rory Kennedy

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              640 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Displaced in Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Displaced Sudanese boys wait at a camp in Darfur. The
International Criminal Court in The Hague said yesterday that it would name the
first suspects to be charged with war crimes in Darfur on Tuesday. (Photo by
Mustafa Ozer/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (86%); GENOCIDE
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) Children and Youth; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) International Criminal Court

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (59%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); NETHERLANDS (59%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              641 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Failed Meeting On the Mideast

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 623 words


To the Editor:

''Charade in Jerusalem'' (editorial, Feb. 21) misses the point as to why the
Jerusalem summit meeting failed to make progress.

The failure was not a result of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's having
''indulged'' the ''inherent caution'' of Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert.
Rather, it was a failure because the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas,
undermined the very purpose of the get-together.

In signing the Mecca agreement with Hamas, Mr. Abbas failed to get the Islamic
group to accept the three preconditions to move forward -- recognizing Israel,
abandoning terrorism and accepting past agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians.

Ms. Rice's hope in proposing the Palestinian-Israeli summit meeting was that
Israel and the United States would offer concessions and assistance to Mr. Abbas
to strengthen him in the critical struggle against extremist Hamas. The Mecca
accord made this approach impossible.

With Fatah now in the government with Hamas, without a change in Hamas's
ideology, Mr. Abbas has less -- not more -- authority, and credit for any
concessions would go to the unity government. In other words, the Hamas-led
government would reap the benefits, the very opposite result from what was
intended.

Israel will continue to communicate with Mr. Abbas. But for now, the only
logical approach is to deny Hamas the economic assistance and diplomatic
recognition it desires to tighten its hold on the Palestinian people.Abraham H.
Foxman National Director Anti-Defamation League New York, Feb. 21, 2007To the
Editor:

You claim that ''Hamas's refusal to accept Israel's right to exist and its
people's right to live free from terrorism is undeniably the biggest single
obstacle to peace.'' I disagree. Rather, the issue is the occupation, a
seemingly unending, brutal occupation that has lasted for generations.

It was Israeli occupations that gave birth to Hamas and Hezbollah. There are
Palestinians still living in refugee camps, and many still live in surrounding
countries. Millions of people are affected. Most of the Palestinians today are
young and have lived their whole lives as less than second-class citizens in
their own land.

Imagine what it must be like to have grown up in Gaza or Jenin. Now contrast
that with growing up in Tel Aviv. That you don't recognize that as the ''biggest
single obstacle to peace'' is appalling.

Israel is fully capable of negotiating its rights with the Palestinians during
the negotiations that should occur for Palestinian independence. It is unfair
that the Palestinians should be forced by foreign powers and occupation forces
to give up negotiating points even before those negotiations have begun.Gary E.
Kaminski Buena Vista, Pa., Feb. 21, 2007To the Editor:

The Bush administration should not be blamed for not coming up with new ideas
that will solve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. No new or old idea will work
as long as the Palestinians continue to put all their efforts into violence
against Israel, willingly at the expense of their own lives and well-being.

The editorial does not present any new idea, either. The idea of having Israel
give concessions to the Palestinian Authority to shore up its ''moderate''
leaders is quite worn out and has proved only to result in Israeli deaths as
Palestinian terrorists, with their government's compliance, exploit every
opportunity of increased autonomy and freedom of movement to stage attacks.

A new idea that might ultimately work is holding the Palestinians truly
accountable for their actions, but for that to happen we have to remain
steadfast in our refusal to aid the Palestinian Authority in any way until its
priorities change.Beth GorodTeaneck, N.J., Feb. 21, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); HEZBOLLAH (76%); AL FATAH
(76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(76%); TERRORISM (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); RELIGION
(55%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (50%); REFUGEES (50%) Palestinians; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (90%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (77%); EHUD OLMERT (58%) Abraham H
Foxman; Mahmoud Abbas; Gary E Kaminski; Beth Gorod; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Israel; Jerusalem; Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              642 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Rally for Mujahedeen Amnesty

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some 25,000 Afghans, including thousands of former mujahedeen
fighters, rallied in Kabul yesterday in support of a proposed amnesty for war
crimes committed during the Soviet occupation and subsequent civil war.
President Hamid Karzai has not said whether he will sign the measure. (Photo by
David Guttenfelder/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); AMNESTY (86%); PARDONS
(86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%)
Demonstrations and Riots; Amnesties and Pardons; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (59%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (74%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (59%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kabul (Afghanistan); Russia

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              644 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

CANADIAN COURT LIMITS DETENTION IN TERROR CASES

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN; Linda Greenhouse contributed reporting from Washington,
and Christopher Mason from Ottawa.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA, Feb. 23


Canada's highest court on Friday unanimously struck down a law that allows the
Canadian government to detain foreign-born terrorism suspects indefinitely using
secret evidence and without charges while their deportations are being reviewed.

The detention measure, the security certificate system, has been described by
government lawyers as an important tool for combating international terrorism
and maintaining Canada's domestic security. Six men are now under threat of
deportation without an open hearing under the certificates.

''The overarching principle of fundamental justice that applies here is this:
before the state can detain people for significant periods of time, it must
accord them a fair judicial process,'' Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin wrote in
the ruling.

The three men who brought the case are likely to remain jailed or under strict
parole because the court suspended its decision for a year to allow Parliament
to introduce a law consistent with the ruling.

The decision reflected striking differences from the current legal climate in
the United States. In the Military Commissions Act of 2006, Congress stripped
the federal courts of authority to hear challenges, through petitions for writs
of habeas corpus, to the open-ended confinement of foreign terrorism suspects at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

A federal appeals court in Washington upheld the constitutionality of that law
this week, dismissing 13 cases brought on behalf of 63 Guantanamo detainees.
Their lawyers said they would file an appeal with the Supreme Court. In two
earlier decisions, the justices ruled in favor of Guantanamo detainees on
statutory grounds but did not address the deeper constitutional issues that this
case appears to present.

At a news conference in Montreal, a defendant, Adil Charkaoui, praised the
Canadian court's decision.

''The Supreme Court, by 9 to 0, has said no to Guantanamo North in Canada,''
said Mr. Charkaoui, who is under tightly controlled, electronically monitored
house arrest.

Stockwell Day, the Canadian minister of public safety, said Friday, ''It is our
intention to follow the Supreme Court ruling.''

He added, ''We are taking in stride what they did say and we will look at the
changes that are necessary.''

The decision is also the latest in a series of events that has seen Canada
reconsider some national security steps it took after the Sept. 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks. Last September, a judicial inquiry rebuked the police for
falsely accusing a Syrian-born Canadian, Maher Arar, of terrorist connections.
Those accusations, in 2002, led United States officials to fly Mr. Arar to
Syria, where he was jailed and tortured. Earlier this year, the Canadian
government reached a $9.75 million settlement with Mr. Arar and offered a formal
apology. The commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police also resigned for
reasons related to the affair.

Canada's Parliament is divided over whether to continue two antiterrorism
measures introduced in 2001 that are set to expire on March 1. The opposition
Liberal Party, which had brought in the law, does not want to continue its
special preventive arrest powers or the secret court hearings it permits, which
resemble grand jury hearings in the United States. Two other portions of that
law have been struck down by courts in Ontario.

''We've started to see the rollback,'' said Alex Neve, the secretary general of
Amnesty International Canada. ''Today the Supreme Court of Canada has said,
'Make sure you put human rights at the center of how you prevent terrorism.' ''

The security certificate system was introduced in a 1978 immigration law and has
been used 27 times, mostly before September 2001. It allows the government to
detain people indefinitely if the minister of public safety and the minister of
immigration conclude that they are a threat to national security. The
certificates, once signed, are reviewed by a federal judge who can rule to keep
any or all of the evidence secret.

While Amnesty International and other groups have long campaigned against the
certificates, the issue attracted relatively little attention for many years.
Historically the certificates were issued against people who were accused of
spying in Canada and who were swiftly deported.

The current cases, however, have become more prominent because they generally
involve people who have been jailed for years without charges, using secret
evidence and, in many cases, without bail.

The sparseness of evidence makes it difficult to assess if there is any
connection linking the men. The authorities say they have tied five of them in
various ways to Al Qaeda. A sixth was arrested in 1995 and has been out on bail
since 1998. He is charged with being a fund-raiser for the Tamil Tigers in Sri
Lanka.

Hassan Almrei, a Syrian arrested in Mississauga, Ontario, in 2001, is the only
one directly involved in this case who remains in jail.

A document from the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service charges that Mr.
Almrei, who entered Canada on false papers in 1999, forged documents for the
Sept. 11 attacks and is a member of ''an international network of extremist
groups and individuals who follow and support the Islamic extremist ideals
espoused by Osama bin Laden.'' He was also accused of sending money to Mr. bin
Laden's network through a honey and perfume business he ran in Saudi Arabia. The
government said that a computer belonging to Mr. Almrei contained images of Mr.
bin Laden, guns, a jet cockpit and a security badge.

Like most of the other suspects, Mr. Almrei remains under a certificate because
the government's efforts to deport him to Syria conflict with Canadian laws that
ban sending people to places where they are likely to be tortured.

Based on the limited information available, other security certificate cases
appear to be circumstantial. Mr. Charkaoui, a Moroccan who was arrested in 2002
and released on house arrest in 2005, is accused of having trained in
Afghanistan.

''I am innocent,'' he said Friday. ''I was never charged, I was never accused of
a crime. If the government has anything to accuse me of, well, there's the
criminal code.''

Much of the judgment provides a blueprint for Parliament on how to make security
certificates fit with Canada's charter of rights and freedoms. As part of that,
one of the court's suggestions seems to be adopted from Britain, whose legal
system provided the basis of Canada's. After the House of Lords struck down a
similar law in 2004, Britain adopted a system that allows security-cleared
lawyers to attend the hearings, review the evidence and represent the accused.

A provision of the ruling that is effective immediately requires people held
under certificates to receive a bail hearing within 48 hours.

For terrorism suspects in the United States, whose situation is most directly
analogous to that of the men in Canada, the legal situation is cloudy at best.
In the two years after Sept. 11, 2001, the government detained more than 5,000
foreign citizens.

Most were charged with offenses no more serious than overstaying a tourist visa,
and many were held for months, awaiting clearance by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, after they had agreed to leave the country. Not one was convicted
of a crime of terrorism.

Judge John Gleeson of Federal District Court in Brooklyn ruled last June on a
class-action lawsuit brought by eight detainees. All have left the country and
are seeking damages for what they argued was an illegitimate incarceration.
Judge Gleeson dismissed that portion of the lawsuit, ruling that the courts
should not ''encroach on the executive branch in a realm where it has particular
expertise'' and ''legitimate foreign policy considerations.''

Even if the plaintiffs could demonstrate that their right to constitutional due
process was violated, Judge Gleeson wrote, the officials they sued would be
entitled to immunity because any right to ''immediate or prompt removal'' had
not been ''clearly established'' at the time. The case, Turkmen v. Gonzales, is
now on appeal.

Dalia Hashad, the United States program director for Amnesty International, said
the Canadian decision should serve as ''a wake-up call that reminds us that
civilized people follow a simple and basic rule of law, that indefinite
detention is under no circumstances acceptable.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); DEPORTATION (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); SUPREME COURTS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); LITIGATION
(89%); APPEALS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
LAWYERS (78%); HABEAS CORPUS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); MILITARY
COURTS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); APPEALS COURTS
(78%); ARRESTS (78%); ELECTRONIC MONITOR SENTENCING (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
PETITIONS (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); POLICE FORCES (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); PAROLE (73%);
SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (73%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (58%) Terrorism; Decisions and
Verdicts; Deportation; Law and Legislation; Security and Warning Systems

PERSON: Ian Austen

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (79%); MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (79%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (79%); QUEBEC, CANADA (79%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Canada; Canada

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              648 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sharpton Learns His Forebears Were Thurmonds' Slaves

BYLINE: By FERNANDA SANTOS

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 784 words


On the eve of the Civil War, in segregated Florida, a white man died in debt at
age 40, leaving his wife, Julia Thurmond Sharpton, alone to raise their four
children and to honor his financial obligations.

Determined to offer a helping hand, Mrs. Sharpton's father-in-law, a plantation
owner in South Carolina, gave her a gift: four slaves, two adults and two
children, who would work to pay off the money owed.

In that transaction, the bloodlines of two emblematic figures of the next
century, each representing an opposite side of America's racial divide,
intersected. Mrs. Sharpton was a first cousin, twice removed, of Senator Strom
Thurmond of South Carolina, a longtime segregationist. And one of the slaves
given to her, Coleman Sharpton, was the paternal great-grandfather of the Rev.
Al Sharpton, one of the most vocal and recognizable civil rights leaders of our
time.

The connection, sealed in a slave contract signed in 1861, might have remained
unknown had it not been for a Web site's efforts to publicize its extensive
collection of African-American genealogy records, a reporter's curiosity and Mr.
Sharpton's willingness to let researchers dig into his family's past, a topic he
often avoids discussing in public.

The results of the investigation, pieced together from census documents, slave
narratives and birth and marriage registries, were unveiled yesterday in The
Daily News, with the front-page headline, ''Shock of My Life!''

''In the story of the Thurmonds and the Sharptons is the story of the shame and
the glory of America,'' Mr. Sharpton said at a news conference at the office of
The Daily News yesterday, with the older of his two daughters, Dominique,
standing behind him.

''The shame is that people were owned as property, and the shame is that I'm the
heir of those who were property to the Thurmond family,'' he said. ''The glory
is that Strom Thurmond ran for president in 1948 on a segregationist ticket; I
ran in '04 on a ticket for racial justice, and that shows what America can
become, if you're determined to beat'' discrimination.

Mr. Sharpton said he had not heard from the Thurmonds and had no immediate plans
of contacting them. ''This is not family,'' he said firmly. ''This is
property.''

While news of Mr. Sharpton's link to Mr. Thurmond might have tickled the
public's curiosity, its impact was tame when compared with the shock of four
years ago, when Essie Mae Washington-Williams, the daughter of the Thurmond
family's black maid, stepped forward to acknowledge that she was the senator's
daughter.

Ms. Washington-Williams, as well as Mr. Thurmond's other daughter and two sons,
did not return phone calls last night.

Mr. Sharpton was born in Brooklyn on Oct. 3, 1954, the son of Alfred Charles
Sharpton and Ada Richards. His parents divorced before he turned 10; he and his
father have since had a distant relationship, he said yesterday.

Ancestry.com approached The Daily News last month seeking to publicize its
African-American ancestry database, which it says contains 55 million historical
documents. A reporter asked Mr. Sharpton if he would agree to have the Web
site's researchers look into his family history. Mr. Sharpton said he had never
considered investigating his lineage and did not know that his father's side of
the family had roots in South Carolina.

The researchers tracked three generations of Mr. Sharpton's ancestors to the
pre-Civil War era, eventually uncovering the slave contract, also known as
indenture, in the Liberty County Courthouse in Bristol, Fla., about an hour west
of Tallahassee.

The contract registered the ownership transfer of Coleman Sharpton, along with a
woman and two boys, presumably his wife and sons, to Julia Thurmond Sharpton.

The familiar middle name spurred Megan Smolenyak, the Web site's chief family
historian, to ''play six degrees of separation,'' she said, reviewing Mrs.
Sharpton's own past and establishing a blood connection between her and Senator
Thurmond.

Coleman Sharpton took his surname from his owners, as was common practice among
slaves, Ms. Smolenyak said. After emancipation, he worked as a wood hauler, at
least until age 65, as recorded in the 1900 census.

''I cannot redo what happened to my great-grandfather, but I can make him say
that I'm glad my great-grandson redeemed what happened,'' Mr. Sharpton said.

''I would hope that this story will make America deal with the pains of its past
and present, the continued fight for social equity,'' he added. ''But I also
would hope that it would encourage obligation of many of us in the
African-American community that have ourselves not lived up to the dreams and
hopes of those who suffered before us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Al Sharpton yesterday at The Daily News's offices in
Manhattan discussing his family's historical connection to Strom Thurmond's.
(Photo by John Marshall Mantel for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENEALOGY (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); SLAVERY (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS
(78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); MARRIAGE (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (66%); CENSUS (53%)
Slavery; Blacks; Genealogy

ORGANIZATION: Ancestry.com Inc

PERSON: AL SHARPTON (92%) Fernando Santos; Al (Rev) Sharpton; Julia Thurmond
Sharpton; Strom (1902-2003) Thurmond; Coleman Sharpton

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              650 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Skull Memorials To Stay

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 60 words


The bones, mostly skulls, of Khmer Rouge victims that serve as the centerpieces
of several memorials should be preserved because they could serve as critical
evidence in future trials of surviving 1970s Khmer Rouge leaders, Prime Minister
Hun Sen said. He also renewed his objection to suggestions that the remains be
cremated according to Buddhist traditions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); RELIGION (84%); PRIME MINISTERS
(83%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (83%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (82%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Monuments and Memorials; Buddhism;
Cremation

ORGANIZATION: Khmer Rouge (Cambodia)

PERSON: Hun (Prime Min) Sen

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              651 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Declares Bosnia Killings Were Genocide

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 26


The International Court of Justice on Monday for the first time called the
massacre of Bosnian Muslims at Srebrenica in 1995 an act of genocide, but
determined that Serbia itself was not guilty of the enormous crime.

Nonetheless, it faulted Serbia, saying it ''could and should'' have prevented
the genocide and, in its aftermath, should have punished the Bosnian Serbs who
systematically killed close to 8,000 men and boys in July 1995.

The ruling resulted from a civil lawsuit Bosnia had brought against Serbia, the
first in which one country sued another for genocide.

The 15 international judges who held nine weeks of hearings and deliberated for
nearly 10 months relied in part on evidence presented in criminal cases heard by
the United Nations Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, which has found two
Bosnian Serb officers guilty of genocide for the Srebrenica massacre.

In the end, the lawsuit resolved Monday may have been the most complex case
handled in the 60-year history of the World Court, which the United Nations set
up to resolve legal disputes between states.

The ruling appeared to give some satisfaction -- and frustration -- to both
sides. It freed Serbia of the stigma of being a genocidal nation and absolved it
from having to pay war reparations, as demanded by Bosnia.

At the same time, Bosnia obtained what it said it wanted from the outset: a
recognition of Serbia's guilt.

During the war in Bosnia, from 1992 to 1995, the United Nations declared
Srebrenica a haven and promised to protect it. But in July 1995, Bosnian Serb
forces overwhelmed 370 lightly armed Dutch peacekeepers, seized control of the
enclave and killed almost every Bosnian Muslim man and boy captured there.

That massacre led to the ruling Monday, which also stressed that other
large-scale killings and abuse of Bosnian Muslims had taken place with the
financial and military support of Serbia during the 1990s war that broke up
Yugoslavia.

Judge Rosalyn Higgins, the court's president, read the ruling, which described
the close ties between Serbia and the Bosnian Serb forces. It said that the
leaders in Belgrade, and President Slobodan Milosevic above all, ''were fully
aware of the deep-seated hatred which reigned between the Bosnian Serbs and the
Muslims in the Srebrenica region,'' and that massacres were likely to occur. Yet
the Serbs did nothing to avert atrocities or prevent the killings, ''claiming
they were powerless, which hardly tallies with their known influence'' over the
Bosnian Serb forces, the ruling concluded.

Serbia thereby violated the United Nations Convention on Genocide to which it is
a party, the ruling found. The ruling, Judge Higgins noted, is binding and
final, without appeal. Failing to arrest and hand over the Bosnian Serb military
commander, Ratko Mladic, was a further violation, the court said.

The court said that other offenses committed against Bosnians might amount to
war crimes and crimes against humanity, but that it had no jurisdiction over
those issues. It did not list specific killings or the number of victims.
International organizations say more than 100,000 people died between 1992 and
1995, two-thirds of them Bosnian Muslims.

''This is a moral victory, certainly, but less of a legal victory,'' said Alain
Pellet, a spokesman for the Bosnian legal team. ''But violations by one state
against another have now been determined and many atrocities have been cited.
Genocide is not the only atrocity.''

After the ruling, the Serbian president, Boris Tadic, urged the Serbian
Parliament to condemn the Srebrenica massacre, but that may be difficult to
obtain because nationalist groups continue to deny it. He said it was ''very
important for Serbia and its citizens'' that Serbia was not found guilty of
genocide, but lamented that once again Serbia was mentioned in the context of
war crimes and genocide.

In a statement after the session, Judge Higgins noted that the findings did not
completely satisfy either side. ''That does not mean, of course, that the court
has been seeking a political compromise,'' she said.

All the same, the ruling, even if strictly based on the law, hews close to the
political wishes of Western countries that want to pull Serbia into a wider
Western European community, rather than see it isolated as a pariah state,
possibly accused of genocide, with its extreme nationalists growing in strength.

NATO last year invited Serbia to join its Partnership for Peace venture and some
European Union countries want to start membership talks with Belgrade, with some
demanding that it first locate and hand over General Mladic, charged with
genocide at the United Nations war crimes tribunal.

The court said Serbia had to abide by the Genocide Convention, requiring
punishment of those accused, and urged it to do so immediately. The court's
ruling might strengthen the hand of Serbians who want to rid themselves of the
burden of keeping General Mladic as a fugitive in Serbia.

But the last word on the role of the Serbian leadership in the Bosnian war has
not been said. Although Mr. Milosevic died last year before the end of his
four-year trial, other senior Serbian political and military leaders are still
facing trial at the tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

The tribunal has part of the war-time records of the Supreme Defense Council,
which included the former Yugoslavia's military and political leaders, including
Mr. Milosevic. Tribunal officials have said part of the minutes of the meetings
were blacked out and some whole sections were missing. But the minutes still
provided much information on how the Serb leaders ''ran their proxy army'' in
Bosnia, one tribunal official said.

Serbia made a deal with the tribunal that only its judges and lawyers could see
the records, the effect of which was that they were kept out of reach of the
lawsuit at the World Court. In their ruling Monday, the judges made the point
that they had been prevented from seeing them.

Lawyers for Bosnia had tried to convince the court that the pattern of
atrocities across many communities in Bosnia demonstrated the intention to
commit genocide, not only by killing, imprisoning and deporting the population,
but also by destroying evidence of their presence. Andras Riedlmayer, a
historian testifying for Bosnia, said the Serb campaign to purge 26
municipalities of Bosnia of non-Serbs had destroyed or damaged 958 mosques and
close to 300 Roman Catholic churches and monasteries.

But the judges ruled that demonstrating a pattern of conduct or of atrocities
was ''too broad'' to qualify for the definition of genocide. The crime of
genocide required showing convincingly there was a specific plan or the specific
intention to destroy the group or part of it, they ruled.

In essence, they did not answer the question often asked in The Hague: when does
ethnic cleansing become genocide?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Outside the Peace Palace at the Hague, survivors of the war in
the former Yugoslavia protested the verdict yesterday on the Srebrenica
massacre. (Photo by Ed Oudenaarden/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A1)

 Judge Rosalyn Higgins said the result did not satisfy either side. (Photo by
Bas Czerwinski/Associated Press)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); RELIGION (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); MEN (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts; Islam

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (83%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Ratko Mladic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%);
NETHERLANDS (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Hague (Netherlands); Srebrenica (Bosnia); Serbia
and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              653 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slavery Is Not Dead. It's Not Even Past.

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 715 words


The Rev. Al Sharpton seemed subdued, quiet, reflective -- which was unusual.

Just when we thought the news couldn't get any weirder, we learned this week,
via The Daily News, that Mr. Sharpton's great-grandfather was a slave who was
owned by relatives of Senator Strom Thurmond, the longtime archsegregationist
who ran for president as a Dixiecrat in 1948.

''There's not enough troops in the Army,'' Mr. Thurmond told a screaming crowd
during that campaign, ''to force the Southern people to break down segregation
and admit the nigra race into our theaters, into our swimming pools, into our
schools and into our homes.''

Mr. Sharpton seemed a little shaken by the revelation. ''You're always kind of
thinking that your ancestors were slaves,'' he said. ''But this was my
grandfather's father. I knew my grandfather. It's eerie when it becomes so
personal.''

The days of slavery are closer than we tend to think, and they were crueler than
we tend to realize. Mr. Sharpton's great-grandfather, Coleman Sharpton, was sent
with his wife and two children from South Carolina to Florida so a woman named
Julia Thurmond Sharpton could send them out as laborers to pay off debts left by
her late husband.

Julia Sharpton was a first cousin, twice removed, of Strom Thurmond.

''They were sent there solely for that reason,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''To make
money to pay her debt. It was just so clear that they were nothing but property.
The complete dehumanization -- I don't think I fully understood it until this
hit home.''

There's a great deal that Americans don't fully understand about slavery. It's
such an uncomfortable subject that the temptation is to relegate it to the
distant past and move on. But the long tentacles of that evil institution are
still with us. Slavery was the foundation of the thriving consumer society that
we have today and the wellspring of the racism that still poisons so many white
attitudes and black lives.

The sheer size of the phenomenon of slavery, which was woven into the very being
of the early Americas, is not well known today. The historian David Brion Davis,
in his book ''Inhuman Bondage,'' tells us:

''By 1820 nearly 8.7 million slaves had departed from Africa for the New World,
as opposed to only 2.6 million whites, many of them convicts or indentured
servants, who had left Europe. Thus by 1820 African slaves constituted almost 77
percent of the enormous population that had sailed toward the Americas, and from
1760 to 1820 this emigrating flow included 5.6 African slaves for every
European.''

For most of the time between the Revolutionary War and the Civil War, the United
States was governed by presidents who owned slaves.

One of the points Mr. Davis stressed was that the commodities produced in such
tremendous volume by slaves -- sugar, tobacco, coffee, chocolate, cotton -- were
crucial to the formation of the world's first global mass market.

''From the very beginnings,'' wrote Mr. Davis, ''America was part black, and
indebted to the appalling sacrifices of millions of individual blacks who
cleared the forests and tilled the soil. Yet even the ardent opponents of
slaveholding could seldom if ever acknowledge this basic fact.''

Instead of reaping rewards for this seminal role in the creation of a rich and
powerful nation, blacks have been relentlessly vilified by a profoundly racist
society and frozen out of most of the nation's bounty. Consigned to the bottom
of the caste heap after emancipation, and denied some of the most basic human
rights, blacks became the convenient depository of whatever blame and negative
stereotypes whites chose to cast their way.

The abject state ruthlessly imposed upon blacks for so long became, perversely,
proof of their inferiority. Blacks gave whites of all classes someone to look
down upon.

Slavery, like the past, as Faulkner reminded us, is not dead. It's not even
past. It's not something that you can wish away.

The other night Reverend Sharpton flew into Miami to attend a conference. At the
airport someone asked for his autograph.

''It was the first time in my life that I thought about why my name is
Sharpton,'' he said. ''I mean this whole thing is as personal as why your name
is what it is. You're named after someone who owned your great-grandparents.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (77%); RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (75%); CHILDREN (74%); PERSONAL DEBT (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%);
HISTORY (61%)

PERSON: AL SHARPTON (92%) Bob Herbert; Strom (1902-2003) Thurmond; Al (Rev)
Sharpton

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (65%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              654 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: Serbs Apologize To War Victims

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 86 words


The Serbian entity of the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republika
Srpska, officially apologized to victims of the 1992-1995 civil war, two days
after international judges in The Hague ruled that Bosnian Serb forces had
committed genocide in the killing of nearly 8,000 Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995.
''The government of the Republika Srpska expresses its deepest regret for the
crimes committed against non-Serbs and condemns all persons who took part in
these crimes,'' the statement said.   NICHOLAS WOOD

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); RELIGION (86%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (84%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Islam

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%) International Criminal Court of
Justice

PERSON: Nicholas Wood

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); SERBIA (93%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands);
Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              662 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the New Warfare, Women Are Targets

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 249 words


To the Editor:

Re ''2 Face Trials at The Hague Over Atrocities in Darfur'' (news article, Feb.
28):

On Feb. 27, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court made as
many references to rape and sexual violence as to murder in the evidence
presented on war crimes in Darfur.

The fact that sexual violence features so prominently is a sign of the changing
nature of warfare. Women's and children's bodies have become the battleground.
Serious attention by the prosecutor is welcome, but much more must be done to
end the targeting of women and children, and there are limits to what
international tribunals, which address only the worst offenders, can do.

Women's limited access to peace processes means that they have not been in a
position to make response to sexual violence a priority. The fact that the
international security system and national institutions have for so long failed
to prevent this atrocity indicates a level of tolerance for gender inequality
and injustice.

This can no longer be accepted. In a new initiative -- United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict -- 10 United Nations system entities have
committed to do their part to exert more effective efforts toward prevention,
empowerment, justice and care.

Justice for women means their experience of war -- and their contribution to
peace -- must be a central part of all conflict resolution efforts.Noeleen
Heyzer Exec. Dir., United NationsDevelopment Fund for WomenNew York, Feb. 28,
2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); WOMEN (77%);
CHILD ABUSE (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); GENDER EQUALITY
(71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (69%) Sex Crimes;
Children and Youth; Women; Child Abuse and Neglect; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (82%)

PERSON: Noeleen Heyzer

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); NETHERLANDS (88%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              668 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking Genocide to Court

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 431 words


Genocide moves swiftly, kills promiscuously and keeps finding new perpetrators,
despite the world's repeated vows of ''never again.''

In the face of such rampaging horror, carefully considered court verdicts, like
last week's World Court ruling on the 1995 Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia, and
patiently assembled dossiers, like the one that International Criminal Court
prosecutors have now filed against two accused masterminds of Darfur's ongoing
slaughter, seem frustratingly inadequate.

Yet short of the international military interventions that never seem to come in
time, the incremental enforcement of international law is one of the most
important tools available for establishing accountability and deterring future
genocides.

Genocide became an international crime almost 60 years ago. But no country was
ever prosecuted for it until Bosnia accused Serbia of direct responsibility for
the murder of nearly 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica. The World Court,
which rules on disputes between nations, concluded that genocide did take place,
and that while the Serbian government of that period had not directly ordered
the murders, it ''could and should'' have acted to stop them, as the United
Nations Convention on Genocide requires.

That nuanced distinction, based on evidence collected by the special tribunal
that tried Slobodan Milosevic, the former Serbian leader, and other individuals
accused of Balkan war crimes, spared Serbia from costly financial reparations.
But it also established the official complicity of the former Serbian
government.

That is something the current Serbian government now needs to acknowledge.
Belgrade should also heed the court's formal order to turn over Ratko Mladic,
the Bosnian Serb general who directed the Srebrenica genocide.

The Darfur cases are being pursued in the International Criminal Court, which
prosecutes individuals for grave violations of international law. The first two
suspects sought for trial are Ahmad Harun, formerly Sudan's minister in charge
of Darfur security, and Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman, a janjaweed militia
commander. Mr. Harun is accused of inciting, financing and arming militia
fighters to conduct genocidal attacks. Mr. Rahman is charged with directing one
such attack that resulted in hundreds of deaths, systematic rapes and summary
executions.

Court rulings can never compensate the survivors of these horrors. But by
strengthening the reach and authority of international law, these cases should
give pause to those tempted to unleash future genocides -- and to those who
stand by.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); LITIGATION
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); EVIDENCE (77%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (66%); MURDER (58%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Editorials

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)
International Criminal Court of Justice

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SUDAN (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%)

REGION: Srebrenica (Bosnia); Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Sudan; Darfur
(Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              669 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Apology for Sex Slavery, Japan's Prime Minister Says

BYLINE: By MARTIN FACKLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, March 5


Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said Monday that Japan would refuse to comply if the
United States Congress demanded an apology for his nation's use of foreign women
as sexual slaves during World War II.

Japan has already lobbied against a resolution, under consideration in the House
of Representatives, that would call on Tokyo to take clearer responsibility for
its enslavement of some 200,000 mostly Korean and Chinese women known
euphemistically here as ''comfort women.''

Japan has apologized before and issued a major report in 1993. But there are
widespread concerns that Mr. Abe and other conservative Japanese lawmakers may
try to water down or reverse such admissions of guilt as part of a broader push
to revise their nation's wartime history.

Speaking in Parliament, Mr. Abe reiterated the position of conservative scholars
here that Japanese officials and soldiers did not have a hand in forcing women
into brothels, instead blaming any coercion on contractors used by Japan's
military.

Mr. Abe rejected testimony before a House committee by surviving victims, who
said they had been kidnapped by Japanese soldiers to serve in military brothels.
He said ''testimony to the effect that there had been a hunt for comfort women
is a complete fabrication.''

He also criticized the proposed House resolution, which blames Japanese
authorities for the coercion, saying it ''was not based in objective fact, and
does not consider the Japanese government's measures so far.''

Political analysts said ignoring the House resolution, which is nonbinding, was
not likely to drive a wedge between Tokyo and Washington, its most important
ally. The fear among Japanese diplomats is that Mr. Abe or other Japanese
politicians will overreact and make claims that reinforce the perception in the
United States and elsewhere that Japan remains unrepentant for its wartime
aggression, analysts said.

''It just looks bad for the prime minister to be getting involved in these sorts
of historical details,'' said Minoru Morita, a political analyst who runs an
independent research institute in Tokyo. ''Plus, his argument isn't going to
sway world opinion anyway. Even if the military wasn't pointing guns at the
women, they still could have been coerced.''

Apparently in a nod to such concerns, Mr. Abe appeared to pull back from a
comment last week denying that the women had been forced at all to work in
brothels. On Monday, he told Parliament he supported the 1993 government
statement, which acknowledged that the military had at least an indirect role in
forcing the women into sexual slavery.

That government had also apologized to the women and set up a fund to pay them
compensation, which is set to expire this month.

''There probably was not anyone who followed that path because they wanted to
follow it,'' Mr. Abe said, speaking of the women's entry into military brothels.
''In the broad sense, there was coercion.''

With that limited concession, Mr. Abe appeared to be trying to defuse a growing
diplomatic row with Asian neighbors over last week's denial, which outraged
officials and women's groups across the region.

As opinion polls show his approval falling among Japanese voters, Mr. Abe can
ill afford to be seen as provoking China and South Korea, much less undermining
ties with the United States, political analysts and opposition lawmakers said.

''If Japan doesn't apologize and repent for its past violations of human rights,
won't it lose international trust?'' a lawmaker from the opposition Democratic
Party, Toshio Ogawa, asked Mr. Abe during Monday's parliamentary debate.

Mr. Morita and others said that vowing to ignore the possible House resolution
appeared to be an attempt by Mr. Abe to appease his conservative base even as he
supported the 1993 statement.

But Mr. Abe's claims that Japan had no official role in its military brothels
carried another potential public relations risk, they said: in making such
denials, he was in effect dismissing as liars the aging women now coming forward
with tearful testimony of their ordeals.

One was Lee Yong-soo, 78, from South Korea, who testified in the House last
month that she had been kidnapped by Japanese soldiers at age 16 and raped
repeatedly at an army brothel. In a news conference last week in Tokyo, she said
Japanese soldiers had dragged her from her home, covering her mouth so she could
not call to her mother.

''I want Japan and the Japanese prime minister to apologize,'' she said. ''As a
victim who was forcibly taken, as someone who lived through those events, I'm a
living witness.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); WORLD WAR II (91%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (91%); PROSTITUTION (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); SLAVERY (90%);
POLITICS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); CONSERVATISM (77%); WOMEN (77%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); ARMED FORCES (73%); LOBBYING (73%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (72%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (70%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (69%) World
War II (1939-45); United States International Relations; Women; World War II
(1939-45)

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (92%) Martin Fackler; Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (92%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Japan; China; South Korea; North Korea

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              670 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecutor Berates Ex-Leader of Kosovo at Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 5


The chief prosecutor of the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal on Monday called
Kosovo's former prime minister a warlord and a mobster in uniform who helped
commit ''ugly, cruel and violent crimes.'' Speaking at the start of his trial
here, she also said that prosecution witnesses often were terrified to appear in
court.

The prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, was speaking at the trial of former Prime
Minister Ramush Haradinaj and two Kosovo Liberation Army fighters, Idriz Balaj
and Lahi Brahimaj. The three face 37 counts of atrocities against Serbs and
their suspected supporters in Kosovo in 1998.

''These men, this warlord with his lieutenant and his jailer, have blood on
their hands,'' Ms. Del Ponte told a three-judge panel.

She emphasized that prosecution witnesses had been intimidated and threatened,
causing a grave problem for the prosecution. One witness was threatened just
last weekend, she said.

All three defendants have pleaded not guilty. They face a maximum sentence of
life in prison.

Prosecutors say Mr. Haradinaj was a ruthless commander in the Kosovo Liberation
Army and that his forces resorted to murder, rape and torture to drive Serbs out
of the Dukagjin area between March 1 and Sept. 30, 1998.

After the 1998-99 war between the K.L.A. and Serbian forces, Mr. Haradinaj rose
through the political ranks and served for 100 days as prime minister of United
Nations-administered Kosovo. He resigned as soon as he was indicted in March
2005, and surrendered to the United Nations court while declaring his innocence.

He nonetheless has considerable support among Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority,
who say he is being put on trial for defending his people against Serbian
atrocities.

But Ms. Del Ponte disputed that. ''There is nothing noble or heroic about the
crimes in this case,'' she said. ''They were brutal and bloody murders.''

Another prosecutor, David Re, said both sides committed crimes, pointing to
Slobodan Milosevic, the former leader of Serbia who died while on trial for war
crimes in Kosovo and elsewhere.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: From left: Lahi Brahimaj, Idriz Balaj and Ramush Haradinaj, the
former prime minister of Kosovo, in 2005. The men face 37 counts of atrocities
against Serbs and their supporters in Kosovo in 1998. (Pool photo by Ed
Oudenaarden)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); ORGANIZED CRIME (90%); VIOLENT CRIME (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
TORTURE (73%); JUDGES (72%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (91%); UNITED NATIONS (82%) Kosovo
Liberation Army; United Nations

PERSON: Carla Del Ponte; Ramush Haradinaj; Idriz Balaj; Lahi Brahimaj

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              671 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mixed Ruling on Genocide Still Puts Pressure on Serbia

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 2


The recent ruling by the United Nations' highest court that found fault with
Serbia under the Genocide Convention complicates Serbia's diplomatic
rehabilitation, several legal experts said.

They said the decision by the International Court of Justice would bind
diplomats of the European Union and NATO, whose ties with Serbia have been
growing. That is so, the experts said, even though the court did not find that
Serbia was directly responsible for the genocide of close to 8,000 Bosnian
Muslims in 1995, but found that it ''could and should'' have prevented the
killings as the Genocide Convention requires.

''Holding Serbia in violation of the Genocide Convention creates new
pressures,'' said Antonio Cassese, a former president of the war crimes tribunal
in The Hague and now a law professor in Italy. ''There is great moral weight
attached to this. It can pose all sorts of obstacles for Belgrade, unless it
acts quickly and makes arrests'' of the key war crimes suspects who have long
been at large, though they are charged with genocide.

The judges ordered Serbia to hand over not only ''individuals accused of
genocide,'' but also those accused of other crimes whose trials are pending at
the United Nations tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, in The Hague.

The tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, immediately sent a letter to
the 27-nation European Union about the decision.

In their ruling on Feb. 26, the 15 judges of what is often called the World
Court said that by failing to hand over individuals accused of genocide, notably
the Bosnian Serb leaders Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, Serbia was violating
the 1948 Genocide Convention, which requires the arrest and punishment of
perpetrators.

Legal experts said the ruling had important effects reaching beyond Serbia,
because any country sheltering Mr. Mladic or Mr. Karadzic would now be
considered in violation of the convention.

''This is a huge issue with other international repercussions,'' said David
Scheffer, a law professor at Northwestern University in Chicago. ''It confirms
that all states have an obligation'' to take action against people accused of
genocide, he said, ''and part of that is apprehending them.''

The decision will affect other fugitives, he said, such as those accused in the
Rwanda genocide who are in hiding or on the run from the United Nations Rwanda
tribunal. Other lawyers said it may have an application in the violence in
Darfur, which the United States has called genocide.

The ruling came in response to a civil lawsuit that Bosnia had brought against
Serbia, the first time one nation sued another over claims of genocide. It was
the most complex case in the 60-year history of the court, which the United
Nations set up to rule on disputes between nations. The tribunals for Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, in contrast, are criminal courts trying individuals.

The judges ruled that Bosnian Serb troops committed genocide against Muslims in
1995 in Srebrenica. Serbia's links with the Bosnian Serb troops were close and
firmly established, the court said, but it ruled 13 to 2 that it did not have
proof to justify finding Serbia directly liable for genocide.

A minority of four judges found Serbia guilty of complicity in the genocide.

The majority nonetheless faulted Serbia for not using its considerable influence
to prevent the genocide.

The findings, variously described by international law experts as timid,
ambiguous or a tactful compromise, have caused anger in Bosnia and relief in
Serbia, which was absolved of having to pay the war reparations that Bosnia had
demanded. Bosnian Muslims, who were a majority of the victims of the 1992-1995
war driven by Serbia, called the ruling a disgrace. Serbs in Bosnia expressed
anguish at seeing their forces explicitly accused of genocide.

At the same time, the court strengthened the hand of Ms. Del Ponte, the chief
prosecutor of the Yugoslavia war crimes tribunal, who has unceasingly called for
the arrest of Mr. Mladic, Mr. Karadzic and three other Bosnian Serb leaders.

On Thursday, the prosecutor sent a letter to Angela Merkel, the German
chancellor, who currently holds the rotating presidency of the European Union,
referring to the court decisions. She asked Germany to ensured that the union
did not resume talks about closer ties with Belgrade.

''I have strong evidence that Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic remain in
Serbia, under protection,'' the letter said. It was the task of the European
Union ''to keep up the pressure'' on Serbia to deliver its five remaining
fugitives, she wrote.

In the past, the European Union has been firm in saying it could not start
membership talks with Serbia until it hands over the fugitives, but recently a
number of countries, including Britain, Italy and Spain, have favored a more
flexible attitude. They say membership talks would support the moderates in the
Belgrade government and that Serbia's cooperation is needed to resolve the
future status of its province, Kosovo. Last year, NATO invited Serbia to join
its Partnership for Peace venture.

The prosecutor is known to fear that the tribunal, whose mandate ends in 2010,
may close down before trying the fugitives.

Joel Hubrecht, a researcher at the Institute for Advanced Legal Studies in
Paris, said Serbia, having ignored calls from the Security Council for the
fugitives, may also ignore the World Court.

Still, the ruling associates Serbia's present government with the scourge of
genocide, even if it happened under the past government of Slobodan Milosevic.

''It is not just the Milosevic regime that was held in violation; the new Serbia
is now held in violation as well,'' said Phon van den Biesen, a Dutch lawyer and
a leader of the Bosnian legal team. ''Until it corrects this by making arrests,
this is bound to have an adverse effect on decisions around Europe, and in the
European Parliament.''

Mr. Scheffer of Northwestern agreed. ''There is no question Serbia has been
stigmatized,'' he said. ''It's going to be a challenge for the government to
deal with that.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A United Nations court says that Serbia violates the genocide
law by harboring those accused of it, notably Ratko Mladic, top, and Radovan
Karadzic, both seen in 1995. (Photo by Emil Vas/Reuters)
 (Photo by Oleg Stjepanovic/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CIVIL
PROCEDURE (78%); LAWYERS (75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (68%); RELIGION (56%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Geneva Conventions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (58%)
International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Antonio Cassese; Ratko Mladic; Radovan Karadzic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
RWANDA (93%); EUROPE (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(88%); SUDAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia); Bosnia and
Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              673 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 7, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Sudan: Trial For 3 For Actions In Darfur

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 109 words


Sudan said that it would try three Sudanese for suspected crimes in the Darfur
region, including Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman, a member of the country's
security forces who is being sought by the International Criminal Court in The
Hague. Details about the charges or alleged crimes were not available, but the
official news agency SUNA said the trial would start today in El Geneina, in
West Darfur. It said the three men were in custody. Sudan's president, Omar
Hassan al-Bashir, has said his country will never hand over its citizens to an
international court and has defended his judicial system, saying it is honest
and qualified to try any Sudanese.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
WAR CRIMES (88%); GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al- Rahman; Omar Hassan (Pres) Al-Bashir

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              676 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2007 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Denial Reopens Wounds of Japan's Ex-Sex Slaves

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1468 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, March 7


Wu Hsiu-mei said she was 23 and working as a maid in a hotel in 1940 when her
Taiwanese boss handed her over to Japanese officers. She and some 15 other women
were sent to Guangdong Province in southern China to become sex slaves.

Inside a hotel there was a so-called comfort station, managed by a Taiwanese but
serving only the Japanese military, Ms. Wu said. Forced to have sex with more
than 20 Japanese a day for almost a year, she said, she had multiple abortions
and became sterile.

The long festering issue of Japan's war-era sex slaves gained new prominence
last week when Prime Minister Shinzo Abe denied the military's role in coercing
the women into servitude. The denial by Mr. Abe, Japan's first prime minister
born after the war, drew official protests from China, Taiwan, South Korea and
the Philippines, some of the countries from which the sex slaves were taken.

The furor highlighted yet again Japan's unresolved history in a region where it
has been ceding influence to China. The controversy has also drawn in the United
States, which has strongly resisted entering the history disputes that have
roiled East Asia in recent years.

Ms. Wu told her story on Wednesday outside the Japanese Consulate here, where
she and two others who had been sex slaves, known euphemistically as comfort
women, were protesting Tokyo's refusal to admit responsibility for the abuse
that historians say they and as many as 200,000 other women suffered.

All three -- Ms. Wu, who is now 90; a 78-year-old South Korean from Seoul; and
an 84-year-old Dutch-Australian from Adelaide -- were participating in an
international conference for Japan's former sex slaves here. Now, just days
after Mr. Abe's remarks, the three were united in their fury.

''I was taken away by force by Japanese officers, and a Japanese military doctor
forced me to undress to examine me before I was taken away,'' said Ms. Wu, who
landed here in Sydney on Tuesday night after a daylong flight from Taipei. ''How
can Abe lie to the world like that?''

Mr. Abe, a nationalist who had built his career partly on playing down Japan's
wartime past, made his comments in response to a confluence of events, beginning
with the Democratic victory in the American Congressional elections last fall.
That gave impetus to a proposed nonbinding resolution in the House that would
call on Japan to unequivocally acknowledge and apologize for its brutal
mistreatment of the women.

Even as Mr. Abe's closest allies pressed him to soften a 1993 government
statement that acknowledged the military's role in forcing the women into sexual
slavery, three former victims testified in Congress last month.

On Monday, Mr. Abe said he would preserve the 1993 statement but denied its
central admission of the military's role, saying there had been no ''coercion,
like the authorities breaking into houses and kidnapping'' women.

He said private dealers had coerced the women, adding that the House resolution
was ''not based on objective facts'' and that Japan would not apologize even if
it was passed.

The resolution calls for Japan to ''formally acknowledge, apologize and accept
historical responsibility in a clear and unequivocal manner for its Imperial
Armed Forces' coercion of young women into sexual slavery.''

''Prime Minister Abe is in effect saying that the women are lying,''
Representative Mike Honda, the California Democrat who is spearheading the
legislation, said in a telephone interview. ''I find it hard to believe that he
is correct given the evidence uncovered by Japanese historians and the testimony
of the comfort women.''

Japanese historians, using the diaries and testimony of military officials as
well as official documents from the United States and other countries, have been
able to show that the military was directly or indirectly involved in coercing,
deceiving, luring and sometimes kidnapping young women throughout Japan's Asian
colonies and occupied territories.

They estimate that up to 200,000 women served in comfort stations that were
often an intrinsic part of military operations.

Yet although Mr. Abe admitted coercion by private dealers, some of his closest
allies in the governing Liberal Democratic Party have dismissed the women as
prostitutes who volunteered to work in the comfort stations. They say no
official Japanese government documents show the military's role in recruiting
the women.

According to historians, the military established the stations to boost morale
among its troops, but also to prevent rapes of local women and the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases among soldiers.

Japan's deep fear of rampaging soldiers also led it to establish brothels with
Japanese prostitutes across Japan for American soldiers during the first months
of the postwar occupation, a fact that complicates American involvement in the
current debate.

In 1995 a private fund was set up to compensate the women, but many refused to
accept any money because they saw the measure as a way for the government to
avoid taking direct responsibility. Only 285 women have accepted money from the
fund, which will be terminated at the end of this month.

The most direct testimony of the military's role has come from the women
themselves.

''An apology is the most important thing we want -- an apology that comes from
the government, not only a personal one -- because this would give us back our
dignity,'' said Jan Ruff O'Herne, 84, who testified to a Congressional panel
last month.

Ms. Ruff was living with her family in Java, in what was then the Dutch East
Indies, when Japan invaded in 1942. She spent the first two years in a prison
camp, she said, but Japanese officers arrived one day in 1944. They forced
single girls and women to line up and eventually picked 10 of them, including
Ms. Ruff, who was 21.

''On the first night, it was a high-ranking officer,'' Ms. Ruff said. ''It was
so well organized. A military doctor came to our house regularly to examine us
against venereal diseases, and I tell you, before I was examined the doctor
raped me first. That's how well organized it was.''

In Japan's colonies, historians say, the military worked closely with, or
sometimes completely relied on, local people to obtain women.

In Pyongyang, now the capital of North Korea, Gil Won-ok said, she lined up
outside a Japanese military base to look for work in her early teens. A Korean
man, she said, approached her with the promise of factory work, but she
eventually found herself in a comfort station in northeast China.

After she caught syphilis and developed tumors, Ms. Gil said, a Japanese
military doctor removed her uterus.

''I've felt dead inside since I was 15,'' said Ms. Gil, who was 16 when the war
ended.

Like many comfort women, Ms. Gil was unable to bear children and never married,
though she did adopt a son. She now lives in a home with three other former
comfort women in Seoul.

Ms. Wu married twice, each time hiding her background. Somehow the husbands
found out, and the marriages ended unhappily. Her adopted daughter is now angry
with Ms. Wu for having spoken in public about her past, she said.

As for Ms. Ruff, she returned to the prison camp in Java after her release from
the comfort station. Her parents swore her to silence. A Roman Catholic priest
told Ms. Ruff, who had thought of becoming a nun: ''My dear child, under these
circumstances it is wise that you do not become a nun.''

It was at the camp that she met her future husband, Tom Ruff, one of the British
soldiers who had been deployed to guard the camp after Japan's defeat. She told
him her story once before they were married -- long before they had two
daughters and migrated to Australia.

''But I needed to talk about it,'' Ms. Ruff said, sitting at the kitchen table
in her daughter Carol's home here. ''I could never talk to my husband about it.
I loved Tom and I wanted to marry and I wanted a house. I wanted a family, I
wanted children, but I didn't want sex. He had to be very patient with me. He
was a good husband. But because we couldn't talk about it, it made it all so
hard.''

''You could talk to Dad about it,'' said her daughter Carol, 55.

''No, this is what I keep saying,'' Ms. Ruff said. ''I just told him the story
once. It was never talked about again. For that generation the story was too
big. My mum couldn't cope with it. My dad couldn't cope with it. Tom couldn't
cope with it. They just shut it up. But nowadays you'll get counseling
immediately.''

''It's a wonderful thing,'' Carol said.

''You don't know how hard it was to carry this enormous burden inside you, that
you would like to scream out to the world and yet you cannot,'' Ms. Ruff said.
''But I remember telling Carol, 'One day I'm going to tell my story, and people
will be interested.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 10, 2007



CORRECTION: A picture caption with an article on Thursday about women forced
into sexual slavery by Japan during World War II misstated in some copies when a
picture of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was taken. It was on Feb. 7, not on
Wednesday.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Japanese students visiting South Korea view photos of Korean
women who were sex slaves of Japan's army. (Photo by Ahn Young-joon/Associated
Press)(pg. A1)
Close allies are urging Mr. Abe to ease the government's 1993 admission of
wartime sexual slavery. (Photo by Issei Kato/Reuters)
Among the victims of Japanese sexual slavery addressing a conference in Sydney
were, from left, Wu Hsiu-mei of Taiwan
Jan Ruff O'Herne, an Australian formerly from Java
and Gil Won-ok, a South Korean. At right, demonstrators near Parliament in Tokyo
with placards denouncing remarks last week by Japan's prime minister, Shinzo
Abe, below, denying the role of the country's military in coercing the women
into their plight. (Photo by Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters)
 (Photographs by Tony Sernack for The New York Times)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (76%); HISTORY (75%); ELECTIONS (72%); ABORTION (70%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (68%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (66%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (63%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (61%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (60%); GENOCIDE (55%) World War II (1939-45); United States
International Relations; Women; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Sex Crimes; World War II (1939-45)

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (92%) Norimitsu Onishi; Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe

CITY: SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (90%); TOKYO, JAPAN (88%); TAIPEI, TAIWAN (79%); SEOUL,
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); ADELAIDE, AUSTRALIA (75%)

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (94%); GUANGDONG, CHINA (92%); NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA
(79%)

COUNTRY: TAIWAN (95%); JAPAN (95%); CHINA (94%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%);
AUSTRALIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PHILIPPINES (92%); EASTERN ASIA (79%);
ASIA (79%)

REGION: China; South Korea; Taiwan; Philippines; Japan

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              680 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 10, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 42 words


An article in Science Times on Tuesday, about a study that calls into question
the distinction between torture and ''cruel, degrading and inhumane treatment,''
misstated the surname of a spokesman for the Justice Department. He is Erik
Ablin, not Amblin.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (85%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (85%); TERRORISM (84%) Terrorism; Correction Stories; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture

ORGANIZATION: Justice Department

PERSON: Erik Ablin

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              687 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Years of Strife and Lost Hope Scar Young Palestinian Lives

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; A GENERATION LOST: The Second
Intifada; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3266 words

DATELINE: NABLUS, West Bank


Their worried parents call them the lost generation of Palestine: its most
radical, most accepting of violence and most despairing.

They are the children of the second intifada, which began in 2000, growing up in
a territory riven by infighting, seared by violence, occupied by Israel, largely
cut off from the world and segmented by barriers and checkpoints.

To hear these young people talk is to listen in on budding nihilism and a loss
of hope.

''Ever since we were little, we see guns and tanks, and little kids wanting
little guns to fight against Israel,'' said Raed Debie, 24, a student at An
Najah University here.

Issa Khalil, 25, broke in, agitated. ''We never see anything good in our
lives,'' he said. He was arrested for throwing stones in the first intifada, the
civil disobedience that began in the late 1980s and led to the 1993 Oslo accords
with Israel. He was arrested again in the second uprising as the agreement
faltered.

''And for what?'' he asked. ''I wasted 14 years of my life. We all did. For five
years I haven't left Nablus. Here there's unemployment and no peace; it
retreats, we go backward.''

While generations of young Palestinians have grown up stateless, seething at
Israel as the visible agent of oppression, this generation is uniquely stymied.

Israeli checkpoints, barriers and closures, installed to protect Israelis from
Palestinian suicide bombers, have lowered these young people's horizons, shrunk
their notion of Palestine and taken away virtually any informal interaction with
outsiders, let alone with ordinary Israelis. The security measures have become
even tighter since the election to power a year ago of the Islamist group Hamas,
which preaches eternal ''resistance'' to Israeli occupation and rejects Israel's
right to permanent existence on this land.

During most of the 1980s and '90s, as many as 150,000 Palestinians came into
Israel daily to work, study and shop. While they were not treated as equals,
many learned Hebrew and established relationships.

Now, the only Israelis whom Palestinians see are armed -- soldiers and settlers.
The West Bank is cut into three parts by checkpoints; Gazan men under 30 are
virtually unable to leave their tiny, poor and overcrowded territory. Few talk
of peace, only of a lifetime of ''resistance.''

Many Israelis agree that the current generation of young Palestinians has been
thoroughly radicalized, but say that is the product of Palestinian political and
religious leaders who have sanctioned and promoted violence and terrorism
against Israel.

The Palestinian territories are an overwhelmingly youthful place -- 56.4 percent
of Palestinians are under 19, and in Gaza, 75.6 percent of the population is
under 30, according to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics.

Opinion polls show a generation more supportive of armed struggle and terrorism
than their parents, according to Waleed Ladadweh of the Palestinian Center for
Policy and Survey Research. The violence is directed not only toward Israel, but
also toward one another.

''We're pushed all the time to be more political, more militant, more religious,
more extreme,'' said Shadi el-Haj, a 20-year-old student at An Najah. ''We want
to be Palestinians, like the generation of the first intifada. But people push
you, 'Are you Fatah or Hamas?' All our problems start with, 'I'm Fatah, I'm
Hamas.' It wasn't like that before.''

During the first intifada the young were a symbol of the struggle for statehood,
leaders of a popular uprising. But in the brutal struggle of the second
intifada, which has been taken over by the militias, many of them controlled
from leaders outside the territories, ''now the youth are irrelevant,'' said
Nader Said, a political scientist at Birzeit University in Ramallah.

More importantly, this generation has lost faith in political solutions. ''They
haven't lived one moment in a period of real hope for a real state,'' he said.
''And with this internal fighting, there is more and more a feeling that we
don't deserve a state, that we're inadequate, which kills the morale of the
young.''

Some 58 percent of those under 30, the center's polls show, expect a more
violent struggle with Israel over the next 5 to 10 years, and only 22 percent
believe that there will be a peaceful negotiated solution between Israel and the
Palestinians. About 48 percent believe such an agreement is impossible, and 20
percent more believe it will only come ''in a few generations.''

There are no comparable polling figures from the late 1980s, when the first
intifada broke out. But in 2000, according to polling done by the center, only
32 percent of Palestinians 18 to 30 believed there would be conflict and
violence with Israel in the next five to 10 years. About 21 percent thought
there would be more peace, while 16 percent thought there would be less. Those
older than 30 expected more peace and less conflict.

In 2000 only 7 percent of all Palestinians (and only 6 percent of those 18 to
30) identified themselves as favoring Hamas. Forty-six percent (and 47 percent
of those 18 to 30) favored Fatah. But today, even after a difficult year of
Hamas rule, the two factions are roughly equal. Among those 18 to 30, the spread
is wider, with 36 percent favoring Fatah and 27 percent Hamas.

Zakariya Zubeidi grew up imbued with what he sees as the heroism of the first
intifada, built on the conviction that sacrifice was bringing a state and a
better future. Now he runs Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades in the tough town of Jenin
and is wanted for carrying out attacks against Israelis.

''It was always our choice to be fuel for the struggle,'' he said. ''But our
problem now is that the car burns the youth as fuel but doesn't move. There's a
problem in the engine, in the head. These kids are willing to be fuel, but many
have been burned as waste.''

Mr. Zubeidi was a hero of the first intifada. ''When I was younger I thought,
'if I die, that's natural, it's for a cause,' '' he said. ''And today I think
differently. To die? For what? For these people who can't agree? That's what
this generation fears. It's lost, and its sacrifices are meaningless. Is the
Palestinian dream dying? In these circumstances, yes.''The Youngest Ones

In Gaza's Nuseirat refugee camp, in an apartment along the rutted main road
unpaved after the halt of American aid to the Palestinian Authority, Najwa and
Taher el-Assar brood about their three children, Mustafa, 6, Ahmed, 5, and
newborn Salma.

''The boys have become so violent in the way they think,'' Mrs. Assar said. ''In
a way, they're no longer children.'' She described how she and her husband
watched the news last summer of the shelling on a Gaza beach that left a family
dead, a tragedy Israel denied causing but could not explain. ''I feel that time
stopped,'' she said. ''And then days later, Mustafa says, 'I want to be fat,
Mommy.' And why? 'Because I want to put on a suicide belt and not have the
Israelis see it,' he said.

''I was shocked,'' Mrs. Assar said. ''But it's in the news, the environment, the
sound of the Apaches and the F-16s and the cannons. It all affects them, and
they get nervous. Ahmed is very violent with his brother. He has no patience, he
doesn't like to share, and I have to watch him all the time.''

For the Id al-Fitr festival, the boys asked for toy Kalashnikovs and Uzis, and
they know all about the crude rockets, the Qassams, that militants fire into
southern Israel. ''They classify the weapons, they want a particular gun,'' Mrs.
Assar said. ''And when you think of the violence, and what future will we have
here? It will be a very violent future.''

Mr. Assar broke in. ''The world is moving ahead, and we're moving backward,'' he
said. ''We're back to 1948.''

Mrs. Assar said softly: ''I feel there is no way I can protect them or hide
them. Normally people are happy with a new baby, but when I delivered Salma I
thought, 'Oh my God, a third child in this life.' It haunts me -- I think, 'What
if? What if? What if a rocket hits the house? What if the Israelis have another
''accident''? What if Mustafa is 19 and attracted to a group of militants and I
don't know, and I hear on TV that this person went to Israel and exploded
himself?' You live with this, 'What if?' But there's no inner peace. You get so
nervous you want to scream!''

Her husband said: ''We can't give them security and safety. They can't live as
normal children. When a kid realizes a parent can't supply security and safety,
what is the point of these parents?''

Mrs. Assar said: ''They understand our anxieties, even when we're silent.'' She
tries to explain Israeli sonic booms to the boys as the flatulence of a plane
that eats too much, she said. ''Yet I become more scared than they do. And they
feel it. I hug them to comfort them and I'm the one taking comfort from them!''

Mustafa and Ahmed played with new umbrellas, one printed with Disney characters
and one with cats and dogs. They ran in and out of the sitting room.

Then they came in, conspiratorial. Watch, they insisted, then pressed the
buttons on the umbrellas, which expanded suddenly and flew into the air.
''Qassams!'' they shouted gleefully. ''Qassams!''The Hothouse of Gaza

In another part of the refugee camp, four black-clad fighters gathered in
self-conscious secrecy, members of the Abu Rish brigades, a militant Gazan
offshoot of Fatah that opposed the Oslo accords with Israel and has moved closer
to Hamas.

Raed, 30, was arrested in the first intifada, when he was 16. He felt a hero at
the time, but the political result, the 1993 Oslo accords, ''were useless and
benefited Israel,'' he said. ''No one can resist with stones or build a nation
without violence.''

Like his comrades, he says he is fighting for the future of his own children,
but he has small hopes for them, and large fears. ''Hamas and Fatah are so
divided, the goal of Palestine disappears,'' he said. ''I talk about willing my
children to be martyrs for Allah, but I honestly wish for them to be safe and
healthy, that's all.''

There is bravado there, but also frustration. None of the fighters, who agreed
to talk if their last names were not published, believes a Palestinian state
will be established; none can imagine living next to Israel. All of them want to
leave and start again, somewhere.

Gaza is a poor, chaotic place of 1.5 million people, 70 percent of them refugees
or their descendants. Younger, more conservative and more religious than the
West Bank, Gaza is the heartland of Hamas, and the people of Gaza are even more
constrained by Israeli and Egyptian security restrictions on their travel. There
are fewer jobs than in the West Bank, and even more weapons.

With the economy of Gaza shutting down, much of the work available for young
people is either in the swollen and disorganized security forces or in the armed
militias or gangs, many of them built on clan loyalties, and some of which
engage more in racketeering than in fighting. Hamas and Islamic Jihad, with
considerable financial help from Iran and Syria, are known at least to pay their
people, even if Hamas cannot pay full salaries to all Palestinian Authority
employees.

Hassan, 21, ran out of money before finishing university, but cannot imagine
what he would do in Gaza with a degree. ''I look at the graduates here, and
their diplomas are useless,'' he said. ''That's why I'm in the resistance.''

According to the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group, about 19 percent of
those killed since 2000 have been 18 or under, whether in fighting against the
Israelis or among Palestinian factions.

Mirvat Massoud was 18, the first child in her family to go to university, when
she decided last November to blow herself up. The Israeli Army had taken over
Beit Hanun, in northern Gaza, and was interrogating its inhabitants, looking for
weapons, militants and those who fire Qassam rockets into Israel.

Inspired by a 2004 suicide attack carried out in Israel, by her cousin Nabil on
behalf of Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, Mirvat volunteered to become a suicide
bomber. She was close to Nabil, who had lived upstairs in the Jabaliya refugee
camp and was only a year older. The brigades declined her offer, however, saying
that one young ''martyr'' in a family was enough. They told her father, Amin
Massoud, a longtime Fatah member, who said he was shocked.

''I spoke to her of course,'' said Mr. Massoud, agitated, moving his hands
through the empty air. ''I said, 'Your education will be jihad. Going to school
is jihad. If you become a doctor, that's jihad.' But I don't know what drove her
-- too much faith inside her, I don't know.''

But the wall above Mirvat's desk is still covered with ''martyr posters'' from
the dead of Jabaliya camp, and her parents knew she was becoming more religious
and political. She was enraged by reports of a van of schoolchildren hit by
shrapnel in Beit Hanun, and she slipped away. She volunteered again,
successfully this time, for Islamic Jihad. She died, slightly wounding two
Israelis.

Far to the north, in Jenin, Suhaila Badawi, 20, knows every detail of Mirvat's
story. She sees Mirvat both as familiar and as a model, a symbol of bravery for
young Palestinian women and a tragedy, too.

''I wouldn't commit such an act, but I understand her completely and I admire
her,'' Ms. Badawi said about the suicide attack. ''She was a Palestinian like
me. I don't think she was misled.''

Khader Fayyad, 46, lives in Beit Hanun and works as an ambulance driver for the
Palestinian Red Crescent, dispatched to every horror.

''I call these kids the destroyed generation,'' Mr. Fayyad said. ''Nobody pays
attention to this generation, except to recruit them, and it's very dangerous.''

He is proud of 16-year-old Ayman, the brightest of his sons. But he feels unable
to provide him a valuable future.

Mr. Fayyad's own father died when he was 17. But it was a different time, he
said -- the peace talks, the Oslo accords, the return of responsibility to
Palestinians over their lives, Camp David. ''We were exposed to the world, to
politics, and yes, to Israelis,'' he said.

''Resistance and politics must go together,'' he said. ''Yasir Arafat knew how
to use one for the other. Now, there is no politics, no talks, so the sacrifices
of the youth are wasted and empty.''

Ayman, however, like most members of his generation, cannot imagine living in
peace next to an Israel that has ripped up his town, or becoming friends with an
Israeli who has rolled over his schoolyard in a tank.

''Israel should leave this land,'' he said angrily, then repeats what he has
been taught, that all of historic Palestine belongs to Muslims.

''The Jews should go back to where they came from, to Europe, Russia and
America,'' he said. ''They have no place here.''

Israel breaks all its agreements, Ayman says. ''How can you make peace with
them?'' he asks. ''Even the Koran says there will be war with them until the day
of judgment.''

Yet Mr. Fayyad has not given up all hope. He says he believes that this
generation is still malleable, immature. ''You can influence them through
realistic solutions,'' he said. ''If you delivered a real, two-state solution,
believe me, they would go into the streets and dance. But if nothing changes,
believe me also, they are lost -- lost to all of us.''Leaving

Where young Palestinians once dreamed of staying to build a new state, now many
are giving up and scheming to get out.

Moayyed Haj Hussein is 22, educated and well spoken. But after he failed to find
a job in six months, his mother pressed his brother-in-law to give him work in a
coffee shop near the Hawara checkpoint, which the Israeli Army uses to control
who comes in and out of Nablus.

The Assanabel cafe is a simple place, offering decent Turkish coffee, mint tea,
schwarma and sweets to the Palestinians who wait for hours to get through the
checkpoint. For Mr. Hussein, the cafe has become a kind of soft prison, giving
him some spending money but no prospect for a future.

He graduated with a degree in computer sciences seven months ago from An Najah
in Nablus, where he lives. But he sleeps here in Hawara because as a male under
30 with a Nablus ID card, it is very difficult to get permission to exit the
city to the south.

Mr. Hussein says he has never spoken to an ordinary Israeli. ''The only Israelis
I see here are either settlers or soldiers,'' he said. ''They all have guns.''

He hates waiting on people and washing dishes, and says he is still looking for
a decent job. But he is also looking to get out -- to the United States, if
possible, where his sister lives, but ''almost any place,'' he said, ''where I
can work and live a normal life.''

He is a Palestinian patriot, he insists. ''But there's no hope here,'' he said.
''You see the situation. It's useless to think it will improve. You see it; it
just gets worse.''

According to Nader Said's polls for Birzeit University, 35 percent of
Palestinians over the age of 18 want to emigrate. Nearly 50 percent of those
between 18 and 30 would leave if they could, said Mr. Said.

''That's a huge indicator,'' he said. ''In the worst of times here, when Israeli
troops were everywhere, the figure in the population was less than 20 percent.''

Palestinians talk about how they seem to be welcome in Cuba or China, now that
it is hard for them to gain permission to go work in the Persian Gulf or Jordan.
Others say it is possible upon arrival in some European countries to ask for
humanitarian asylum. But first they need a visa to get there.

Some travel agents in Gaza sell fictitious invitations from foreign hosts in
Cuba, China and elsewhere, along with fake visas and hotel bookings to go along
with real and expensive air tickets through Cairo.

Even the young fighters of the Abu Rish brigade have tried to leave. Muhammad
and Saado, both 27, sold their weapons, took bank loans and paid $2,000 for
visas and tickets from Cairo to Beijing on Austrian Airlines. They made it out
of Gaza through the Rafah crossing with Egypt, but the Egyptians put them on a
bus, locked the door and drove straight to the airport. For the four days before
their departure, they said, the Egyptians then locked them into a crammed
airport waiting room.

''A dog wouldn't use the toilet,'' Muhammad said. ''They charged us 150 Egyptian
pounds a day ($26.30) to use a seat, even the little kids. One Egyptian said,
'Even a dead body has to pay.' '' They bribed guards to bring them food and
water.

The day of their flight, a Friday, they were brought to the departure hall. But
an airlines security guard examined their documents and turned them away.
Presumably, the visas were fake. ''He looked at us as if we were evil,'' Saado
said. ''There was no respect for us. I hate the Israelis, but I hate the
Egyptians more.''

They were returned to the fetid waiting room, and a day later, when there was a
busload, they were shipped back, first to El Arish. There they waited for days
in an even more disgusting detention area, they said, until the Rafah crossing
opened.

''When we finally got back to Gaza, I kissed the soil,'' Muhammad said, laughing
at his humiliation. ''We said, 'Gaza is paradise!' ''

In his own quest to leave, Mr. Hussein, the cafe worker, has contacted the
American Consulate in East Jerusalem. But, he said, ''I can't get a permit to go
to Jerusalem to make an application.''

What about those who would accuse you of giving up your rights in your land?

Mr. Hussein turned away. ''I don't care,'' he finally said. ''I want to live
happily.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: KNOWING ONLY VIOLENCE -- Young men ducked during a clash with
Israeli soldiers in Nablus last month. Few have the chance to interact with
ordinary Israelis. (Photo by Emilio Morenatti/Associated Press)
A DREAM IN QUESTION -- Zakariya Zubeidi fought in the first intifada, in the
1980s, and now runs Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades in Jenin, where he is a refugee.
His wall is adorned with posters of friends who died fighting the Israelis.
(Photo by Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)
A SISTER LOST -- Naima Massoud, 17, holds a picture of her sister Mirvat in
their home at a refugee camp in Gaza. Mirvat volunteered twice to be a suicide
bomber before she was accepted for a mission last November. (Photo by Shawn
Baldwin for The New York Times)(pg. A12)
SAFETY AT A COST -- A boy saw an Israeli soldier on patrol near Al Aksa Mosque
in Jerusalem. Many Palestinian children are familiar with weaponry. (Photo by
Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)(pg. A13)
 A Palestinian youth threw stones at Israeli soldiers in Ramallah, West Bank,
last week. Parents fear the atmosphere of despair has made their children more
accepting of violence. (Photo by Uriel Sinai/Getty Images)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); HAMAS
(78%); POLLS & SURVEYS (74%); BOMBINGS (69%); CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE (68%); ARRESTS
(68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (64%); STATISTICS (60%);
RELIGION (50%) Palestinians; Children and Youth; Public Opinion; Bombs and
Explosives; Surveys and Series

ORGANIZATION: AL-AQSA MARTYRS BRIGADES (59%)

PERSON: Steven Erlanger

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%)

REGION: Israel; West Bank; Israel; Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              688 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slobodan Milosevic's Last Waltz

BYLINE: By Ruth Wedgwood.

Ruth Wedgwood is a professor of international law at the School of Advanced
International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1197 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EVEN from the grave, Slobodan Milosevic roils the international system. When he
was alive, his violence in the Balkans required NATO to intervene twice. He
swaggered on the stage of the Dayton peace negotiations. And even after he was
bundled off to a United Nations court to stand trial on charges of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, Mr. Milosevic tried to convert his criminal
defense into a political rant to be shown nightly on Serbian television. The
trial meandered for four years, and both the presiding judge and Mr. Milosevic
died before a final verdict could be returned.

Now the skeleton's waltz has turned one more time around the dance floor. This
round brings us the ruling of the International Court of Justice, in a civil
suit that should never have been brought if its result was to be so meager.

In 1993, Bosnia sued Serbia in the International Court of Justice, sometimes
known as the World Court, for planning, abetting and committing genocide in the
Bosnian conflict. Bosnia argued that the Serbian militias' sniping and
bombardment of civilian enclaves, torture and assassination of detainees, and
ultimately, slaughter of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica,
amounted to genocide.

Last month, the court dismissed Bosnia's case on almost all counts. The judges
sitting in Andrew Carnegie's peace palace in The Hague held that the Serbian
campaign of violence and ethnic cleansing against Bosnian Muslims could not
constitute genocide. The only actionable instance of genocide, said the court,
was the wholesale execution of prisoners at Srebrenica in 1995, and even there,
Serbia was not adequately implicated in the crime's commission.

This is a remarkable result. It's true that Srebrenica woke the West from its
stupor and brought NATO military action. But the ethnic conflagration had
already raged for three years, with countless acts of nationalist violence aimed
at expelling Muslims from the north, south and east of Bosnia. Yet the
International Court of Justice shrinks from recognition, failing to explain why
the deliberate slaughter of civilians in the riverside town of Brcko in 1992, or
the torture and execution of Muslim civilians in Foca, were legally different in
kind from the Srebrenica murders.

The court does lay one misdemeanor at Serbia's doorstep: Belgrade failed to take
steps to ''prevent'' the genocide at Srebrenica. For this, the court says, no
damages are due. But that passive fault fails to account for Belgrade's robust
program of financing, equipping and supporting criminal militias like Arkan's
Tigers and the Gray Wolves, as well as the forces that specialized in leveling
Muslim villages.

The court's judgment has broad implications. It amounts to a posthumous
acquittal of Mr. Milosevic for genocide in Bosnia. Though he planned to divide
the country in two, in a scheme devised with Croatia's president, Franjo
Tudjman, and engineered the strategy of violent ethnic cleansing, the court
concluded that this did not amount to a campaign to destroy the ethnic group of
Bosnian Muslims in whole or in part, for he was just pushing their reduced
numbers somewhere else. As a law student might suppose, it will take years of
study to understand how that could be true.

Worse yet, by saying that only the Srebrenica massacre amounted to genocide, the
International Court of Justice limits the charges that can be effectively
brought against the Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, if
Belgrade at last allows them to be arrested.

It is hard to say why the court did not step back from these dire consequences.
But there were both technical missteps and political snares in its judgment.

First, the World Court rejected the standard of vicarious liability used in the
United Nations criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. In applying the
Geneva Conventions to the Bosnian fighting, the criminal court early concluded
that Belgrade's support was enough to make major portions of the conflict into
an international war.

But the International Court of Justice chides the United Nations criminal court
for offering an opinion on an issue of ''general'' international law like state
responsibility and, despite more than 10 years of settled criminal case law,
rejects the criminal court's conclusion. This sibling rivalry between
international courts has been gently called ''fragmentation.'' It does not bode
well for any coherent jurisprudence.

The World Court also insists that unless Belgrade gave ''direct orders'' for
particular operations or the Bosnian Serbs were ''completely dependent'' on
Belgrade, there is no liability at all. This will be a surprise to scholars of
ordinary tort law, who are accustomed to supposing that responsibility for
wrongdoing can be shared.

Though the court claims to be acting on the basis of a 1986 decision in a case
pitting the United States against Nicaragua, the law has moved on since then.
Indeed, the court's lackadaisical standard is at odds with United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1373, passed in the wake of Sept. 11, which says
that no state has a right to provide any intelligence, logistics or financing to
terrorist activities.

Second, the International Court of Justice applies the demands of criminal proof
to a civil case. The judges insist that even for civil liability, proof against
Belgrade has to be ''fully conclusive'' and ''incontrovertible,'' with a level
of certainty ''beyond any doubt.'' This standard is well known when the jail
door will shut, but it exceeds the demands of civil liability. And in trying to
meet this standard, the court declines to draw any adverse inference against
Belgrade, even though the documents it turned over to the court were heavily
redacted.

Third, the International Court of Justice has a small jurisdictional
embarrassment. After the NATO military intervention in Kosovo, Serbia went to
the United Nations war crimes prosecutor to complain about NATO's war fighting
methods. The prosecutor concluded that there was no basis for a criminal
investigation of NATO. Serbia then sued various NATO states in the International
Court of Justice. These suits were dismissed on the ground that Yugoslavia was
no longer a member of the United Nations and hence had no plaintiff's right of
access to the court.

But reasons cut both ways, argued Belgrade, and disqualification as a plaintiff
could also protect Serbia as a defendant in Bosnia's civil action. Lingering
doubts about jurisdiction may have diminished the court's willingness to make
more rigorous findings of liability in the Bosnian genocide case.

To be sure, the International Court of Justice has held that the Genocide
Convention requires Serbia to surrender criminal suspects like Mr. Karadzic and
General Mladic, who are wanted by the United Nations war crimes tribunal. But
this is a redundant finding, for the legal authority of the Security Council
already requires that surrender. It is not a substitute for clarity about
Serbia's role.

It is all to the good that Serbia may soon rejoin Europe. But it does not
facilitate that reunion to disguise what happened in the past.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Keith Negley)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (93%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%); JUDGES (77%); LITIGATION (77%); VERDICTS (77%);
MISDEMEANORS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); PEACE PROCESS (73%); ACQUITTAL
(72%); RELIGION (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (93%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%); UNITED NATIONS (58%) International Court of
Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Ruth (Prof) Wedgwood; Slobodan Milosevic; Radovan Karadzic; Ratko Mladic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (56%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Srebrenica (Bosnia)  ; Bosnia and
Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              694 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scrutiny Increases for a Group Advocating for Muslims in U.S.

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR; David Johnston contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1673 words


With violence across the Middle East fixing Islam smack at the center of the
American political debate, an organization partly financed by donors closely
identified with wealthy Persian Gulf governments has emerged as the most vocal
advocate for American Muslims -- and an object of wide suspicion.

The group, the Council on American-Islamic Relations, defines its mission as
spreading the understanding of Islam and protecting civil liberties. Its
officers appear frequently on television and are often quoted in newspapers, and
its director has met with President Bush. Some 500,000 people receive the
group's daily e-mail newsletter.

Yet a debate rages behind the scenes in Washington about the group, commonly
known as CAIR, its financing and its motives. A small band of critics have made
a determined but unsuccessful effort to link it to Hamas and Hezbollah, which
have been designated as terrorist organizations by the State Department, and
have gone so far as calling the group an American front for the two.

In the latest confrontation yesterday, CAIR held a panel discussion on Islam and
the West in a Capitol meeting room despite demands by House Republicans that
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat, not allow the event. The Republicans called
its members ''terrorist apologists.''

Caley Gray, a spokesman for Representative Bill Pascrell Jr., a New Jersey
Democrat who helped book the room, rejected that label in a phone interview and
said CAIR held similar meetings when Congress was controlled by Republicans.
Still, Mr. Gray called back to specify that Mr. Pascrell did not endorse all of
the group's positions.

Last fall, Senator Barbara Boxer of California issued a routine Certificate of
Appreciation to the organization representative in Sacramento, but she quickly
revoked it when critics assailed her on the Web under headlines like ''Senators
for Terror.''

''There are things there I don't want to be associated with,'' Ms. Boxer said
later of the revocation, explaining that her California office had not vetted
the group sufficiently.

CAIR and its supporters say its accusers are a small band of people who hate
Muslims and deal in half-truths. Ms. Boxer's decision to revoke the Sacramento
commendation provoked an outcry from organizations that vouch for the group's
advocacy, including the American Civil Liberties Union and the California
Council of Churches.

''They have been a leading organization that has advocated for civil rights and
civil liberties in the face of fear and intolerance, in the face of religious
and ethnic profiling,'' said Maya Harris, the executive director of the A.C.L.U.
of Northern California.

Government officials in Washington said they were not aware of any criminal
investigation of the group. More than one described the standards used by
critics to link CAIR to terrorism as akin to McCarthyism, essentially guilt by
association.

''Of all the groups, there is probably more suspicion about CAIR, but when you
ask people for cold hard facts, you get blank stares,'' said Michael Rolince, a
retired F.B.I. official who directed counterterrorism in the Washington field
office from 2002 to 2005.

Outreach to all Muslims via groups they support is an important aspect of
ensuring that extremists cannot get a foothold here as they have in Europe, Mr.
Rolince said.

The cloud kicked up by the constant scrutiny is such that spokesmen at several
federal agencies refused to comment about the group and some spoke only on the
condition of anonymity.

After a brief interview, Ms. Boxer declined to answer additional questions about
the commendation to the Sacramento representative, Basim Elkarra. A spokeswoman,
Natalie Ravitz, said in an e-mail message that the senator had decided ''to put
this entire incident behind her.''

Joe Kaufman, who Ms. Boxer's office said first drew her attention to CAIR's
reputation, is the founder of a Web site that tracks what he calls the group's
extremism, cairwatch.com. Other critics include the Investigative Project, a
conservative group that tries to identify terrorist organizations, and the
Middle East Forum, a conservative research center that says its goal is to
promote American interests in the region.

''You can't fight a war on terrorism directly when you are acting with a terror
front,'' said Mr. Kaufman, who advocates shutting down the organization.

Founded in 1994, CAIR had eight chapters at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks,
said Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the group, but has grown to some 30
chapters as American Muslims have felt unjustly scrutinized ever since.

Broadly summarized, critics accuse CAIR of pursuing an extreme Islamist
political agenda and say at least five figures with ties to the group or its
leadership have either been convicted or deported for links to terrorist groups.
They include Mousa Abu Marzook, a Hamas leader deported in 1997 after the United
States failed to produce any evidence directly linking him to any attacks.

There were no charges linked to CAIR in any of the cases involved, and law
enforcement officials said that in the current climate, any hint of suspicious
behavior would have resulted in a racketeering charge.

The group's officials say the accusations are rooted in its refusal to endorse
the American government's blanket condemnations of Hezbollah and Hamas, although
it has criticized Hamas for civilian deaths.

Several federal officials said CAIR's Washington office frequently issued
controversial statements that made it hard for senior government figures to be
associated with the group, particularly since some pro-Israeli lobbyists have
created what one official called a ''cottage industry'' of attacking the group
and anyone dealing with it.

Last summer, the group urged a halt to weapons shipments to Israel as civilian
casualties in Lebanon swelled. In September, it held a dinner for former
President Mohamed Khatami of Iran at a time when much of official Washington had
ostracized that Islamic republic. In November, the group sponsored a panel
discussion by two prominent academics who argue that the pro-Israeli lobby
exercises detrimental influence on United States policy on the Middle East.

''Traditionally within the government there is only one point of view that is
acceptable, which is the pro-Israel line,'' said Nihad Awad, a founder of CAIR
and its executive director. ''Another enlightened perspective on the conflict is
not there, and it causes some discomfort.''

When Mr. Bush visited a Washington mosque in 2001, Mr. Awad was among the Muslim
leaders he met. But Dana M. Perino, a White House spokeswoman, said Mr. Awad had
not been invited to any recent iftars, annual dinners to break the fast during
the holy month of Ramadan. She offered no explanation.

This year, when Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales met with the leaders of
half a dozen Muslim and Arab-American organizations in his office, no
representative from CAIR was invited.

When Karen P. Hughes, the close adviser to Mr. Bush and under secretary of state
for public diplomacy and public affairs, started interacting with the group, she
was criticized as dealing with ''Wahhabis,'' shorthand for Saudi-inspired
religious extremists, a State Department spokesman said.

CAIR has raised some suspicion by accepting large donations from individuals or
foundations closely identified with Arab governments. It has an annual operating
budget of around $3 million, and the group said it solicited major donations for
special projects, like $500,000 from Prince Alwaleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia
to help distribute the Koran and other books about Islam in the United States,
some of which generated controversy.

The donations are a source of contention within CAIR itself. Several branch
directors said they had avoided foreign financing and had criticized the
national office for it.

Officials at other Arab-American and Muslim organizations said there was a
decided split between how the national office operated and how the branches did.
The branch offices, which raise their own money and operate largely as
franchises, concentrate on local civil rights problems and hence develop close
working relationships with law enforcement.

When the Southern California chapter threw itself a birthday party last
November, nearly 2,000 people packed the Anaheim Hilton's ballroom to hear
guests of honor praise the organization, including J. Stephen Tidwell, the
director of the F.B.I.'s Los Angeles office.

''I am very excited to be here,'' Mr. Tidwell told a reporter covering the
fund-raiser for an Arab-American television news channel, calling CAIR ''an
important bridge for the F.B.I. into the Muslim, Arab-American community.''

The Washington office, the officials at the other Arab-American and Muslim
groups said, tends to fight more image battles because its main staff members
have backgrounds in public relations. Still, they said, CAIR's contrarian image
helps with fund-raising both in the American Muslim community and among Arab
governments because both believe that the federal government is biased against
them.

Some Muslims, particularly the secular, find CAIR overly influenced by Saudi
religious interpretations, criticizing it for stating in news releases, for
example, that all Muslim women are required to veil their hair when the matter
is openly debated.

But they still support its civil rights work and endorse the idea of anyone
working to make American Islam a more integral part of society. One
Arab-American advocate compared CAIR to ''the tough cousin who curses at anyone
who speaks badly about the family.''

Some activists and academics view the controversy surrounding the group as
typical of why Washington fails so often in the Middle East, while extremism
mushrooms.

''How far are we going to keep going in this endless circle: 'You are a
terrorist!' 'No, you are a terrorist!'? '' said Souleiman Ghali, one of the
founders of a moderate San Francisco mosque. ''People are paying a price for
that.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Basim Elkarra of the Council on American-Islamic Relations with
Certificate of Appreciation from Senator Barbara Boxer that she revoked. (Photo
by Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. A17)Chart: ''Chronology of a Souring
Relationship''When Senator Barbara Boxer gave an award to a Muslim advocate and
then took it back, relations between Ms. Boxer and the Council on
American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) became strained.NOV. 11, 2006Ms. Boxer gives a
Certificate of Achievement for ''outstanding service'' to Basim Elkarra, the
executive director of CAIR's Sacramento Valley office. DEC. 18CAIR issues a news
release about Mr. Elkarra's receipt of the award. Joe Kaufman publishes an
article called ''Senators for Terror'' on frontpagemag.com, claiming that both
CAIR and Mr. Elkarra are connected to Islamic extremism.DEC. 21Mr. Elkarra is
informed by reporters calling from Washington that the award has been
rescinded.DEC. 22Mr. Kaufman issues a news release that ''appreciates'' Ms.
Boxer's decision to rescind the award.JAN. 5, 2007CAIR's chairman, Parvez Ahmed,
writes on his blog that Ms. Boxer ''got caught up in our nation's rising tide of
Islamophobia.'' JAN. 8Ms. Boxer issues a news release explaining her reasons for
rescinding the award.JAN. 23Representatives of CAIR from California meet with
Ms. Boxer in Washington. ''They didn't ask one question about our response to
the allegations, to our response to the myths and lies about CAIR, which I found
strange,'' said Omar Zaki, a public relations consultant who attended the
meetings.JAN. 24CAIR issues a news release saying all issues resulting from the
award controversy have been resolved. Ms. Boxer, however, refuses to restore the
award.FEB. 23A spokeswoman for Ms. Boxer says in an e-mail message to a
reporter, '' Senator Boxer made the decision a few weeks ago to put this entire
incident behind her and to decline any further interviews on the
matter.''(Sources by Council on American-Islamic Relations
Senator Barbara Boxer
frontpagemag.com
 americansagainsthate.org)(pg. A17)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); TERRORISM (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); HEZBOLLAH
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CHURCH & STATE (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARAB AMERICANS (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING
(75%); RACIAL PROFILING (72%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (50%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (50%) Terrorism; Arab-Americans; Islam; Company and
Organization Profiles; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%); HEZBOLLAH (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%)
Council on American-Islamic Relations; American Civil Liberties Union;
California Council of Churches; Hamas; Hezbollah

PERSON: BARBARA BOXER (93%); BILL PASCRELL JR (79%); NANCY PELOSI (58%) William
J Jr (Rep) Pascrell; Barbara (Sen) Boxer; Neil Macfarquhar; Basim Elkarra

CITY: SACRAMENTO, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); INDIAN OCEAN (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              697 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SUSPECTED LEADER OF ATTACKS ON 9/11 IS SAID TO CONFESS

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1818 words


Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, long said to be the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks,
confessed to them at a military hearing held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, on
Saturday, according to a transcript released by the Pentagon yesterday. He also
acknowledged full or partial responsibility for more than 30 other terror
attacks or plots.

''I was responsible for the 9/11 operation, from A to Z,'' he said.

In a rambling statement, Mr. Mohammed, a chief aide to Osama bin Laden, said his
actions were part of a military campaign. ''I'm not happy that 3,000 been killed
in America,'' he said in broken English. ''I feel sorry even. I don't like to
kill children and the kids.'' [Excerpts, Page A23.]

He added, ''The language of war is victims.''

Though American officials had linked Mr. Mohammed to the attacks of Sept. 11,
2001, and to several others, his confession was the first time he spelled out in
his own words a panoply of global terror activities, ranging from plans to bomb
landmarks in New York City and London to assassination plots against former
Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton and Pope John Paul II. Some of the
plots he claimed to plan, including the attempt on Mr. Carter, had not
previously been publicly disclosed.

Mr. Mohammed indicated in the transcript that some of his earlier statements to
C.I.A. interrogators were the result of torture. But he said that his statements
at the tribunal on Saturday were not made under duress or pressure.

His actions, he said, were like those of other revolutionaries. Had the British
arrested George Washington during the Revolutionary War, Mr. Mohammed said,
''for sure they would consider him enemy combatant.''

The hearing also summarized some of the evidence the Pentagon says supports the
designation of Mr. Mohammed as an enemy combatant, including a computer hard
drive containing information about the Sept. 11 hijackers, letters from Mr. bin
Laden and the details of other plots. It was seized, the government says, when
Mr. Mohammed was captured.

Mr. Mohammed spoke before a combatant status review tribunal that has the narrow
task of determining whether President Bush had properly designated him an enemy
combatant. Mr. Mohammed's confession will almost certainly be used against him
if and when he is tried for war crimes by a military commission.

Parts of the transcript were redacted by the military, and there were
suggestions in it that Mr. Mohammed contended he was mistreated while in the
custody of the C.I.A. after his arrest in 2003. He was transferred to military
custody at Guantanamo Bay last year.

By tribunal rules, Mr. Mohammed was aided by a ''personal representative,'' not
a lawyer. His attempt to call two witnesses was denied. And the tribunal
indicated that it would consider classified evidence not made available to Mr.
Mohammed.

Combatant status review tribunals are informal hearings created in response to a
2004 decision by the United States Supreme Court to judge whether prisoners at
Guantanamo were properly designated as enemy combatants and subject to
indefinite detention. Unlike the military commissions that hear war crimes
charges, the combatant status review tribunals offer minimal procedural
protections and are not recognizably judicial.

In the past, the hearings have been partly open to the press. But a series of
recent hearings, involving some of the 14 so-called high-value detainees
transferred to Guantanamo from secret C.I.A. prisons last year, were closed. In
addition to the Mohammed transcript, the Pentagon yesterday also released
transcripts of the hearings of Abu Faraj al-Libbi and Ramzi bin al-Shibh, top
Qaeda operatives.

Mr. Libbi did not attend his hearing, and in a statement contained in the
transcript he said he would refuse to do so until he could be tried according to
accepted judicial principles in the United States. He said he had not been
granted a lawyer and could not introduce witnesses in his defense.

''If I am classified as an enemy combatant,'' he said in the statement, ''it is
possible that the United States will deem my witnesses are enemy combatants and
judicial or administration action may be taken against them. It is my opinion
the detainee is in a lose-lose situation.''

The tribunals in all three cases reserved judgment on the question of whether
the men were indeed properly classified as enemy combatants, but there is little
doubt that the president's designation will be affirmed.

The prisoners may appeal the conclusions of the tribunals to a federal appeals
court in Washington. While not contesting his own guilt, Mr. Mohammed asked the
United States government to ''be fair with people.'' He said that many people
who had been arrested as terrorists in the wake of 9/11 were innocent.

Mr. Mohammed's representative, an Air Force lieutenant colonel whose name was
not released, read a statement on Mr. Mohammed's behalf ''with the understanding
he may interject or add statements if he needs to.''

In the statement, Mr. Mohammed described himself as the ''military operational
commander for all foreign operations around the world'' for Al Qaeda.

He also took responsibility for the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center and
the 2002 bombing of a nightclub in Bali.

Mr. Mohammed also outlined a vast series of plots that were not completed. Among
his targets, he said, were office buildings in Chicago, Los Angeles and New
York; suspension bridges in New York; the New York Stock Exchange ''and other
financial targets after 9/11''; the Panama Canal; British landmarks including
Big Ben; buildings in Israel; American embassies in Indonesia, Australia and
Japan; Israeli embassies in India, Azerbaijan, the Philippines and Australia;
airliners around the world; and nuclear power plants in the United States.

He said he managed ''the cell for the production of biological weapons, such as
anthrax and others, and following up on dirty-bomb operations on American
soil.''

Mr. Mohammed also said that he had taken part in ''surveying and financing for
the assassination of several former American presidents, including President
Carter.'' He added that he was responsible for an assassination plot against
President Clinton in the Philippines in 1994.

But Mr. Mohammed interrupted his representative to clarify that he was not
solely responsible for a 1995 attempt on the life of Pope John Paul II during a
visit to the Philippines.

''I was not responsible,'' Mr. Mohammed said, ''but share.''

American officials and President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan have said that Mr.
Mohammed took part in killing Daniel Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street
Journal, in Pakistan in 2002. Though Mr. Mohammed referred to Mr. Pearl in
passing in the transcript, he did not confess to the killing. He did say that he
had plotted to assassinate President Musharraf.

At the end of the recitation, Mr. Mohammed was asked, ''Were those your words?''

''Yes,'' he answered.

Later, he said: ''What I wrote here, is not I'm making myself hero, when I said
I was responsible for this or that. But you are military man. You know very well
there are language for war.''

It is not clear how many of Mr. Mohammed's expansive claims were legitimate. In
2005, the Sept. 11 commission said that Mr. Mohammed was noted for his
extravagant ambitions, and, using his initials, described his vision as
''theater, a spectacle of destruction with KSM as the self-cast star, the
superterrorist.''

Mr. Mohammed declined to speak under oath, saying his religious beliefs
prohibited it. But he said he was telling the truth.

''To be or accept the tribunal as to be, I'll accept it,'' he said. ''That I'm
accepting American Constitution, American law or whatever you are doing here.
That is why religiously I cannot accept anything you do.''

He added: ''When I not take oath does not mean I'm lying.''

Mr. Mohammed, 41, is an ethnic Pakistani who grew up in Kuwait and graduated
from North Carolina State Agricultural and Technical State University in 1986.
He was captured on March 1, 2003, in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, and was held in the
secret C.I.A. prison system, where he is believed to have been subjected to
harsh interrogation.

In a long monologue that fills about four single-spaced pages of the transcript,
Mr. Mohammed said his motives were military ones.

''If America they want to invade Iraq they will not send for Saddam roses or
kisses, they send for a bombardment,'' he said. ''I consider myself, for what
you are doing, a religious thing as you consider us fundamentalist. So, we
derive from religious leading that we consider we and George Washington doing
the same thing.''

He pleaded on behalf of some of his fellow detainees. ''I'm asking you again to
be fair with many detainees which are not enemy combatant,'' Mr. Mohammed said.
''Because many of them have been unjustly arrested.''

The unclassified part of the hearing lasted for a little more than an hour,
according to the transcript.

Near the end, Mr. Mohammed summed up. ''The American have human right,'' he
said. ''So, enemy combatant itself, it flexible word.''

''War start from Adam when Cain killed Abel until now,'' he said.Taking
Responsibility for AttacksIn a statement to a military tribunal, Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed took responsibility for 31 terror attacks or attempts, including the
following:1. The 1993 World Trade Center bombing.2. The Sept. 11 attacks, ''from
A to Z.''3. A shoe-bomber operation to down two American planes.4. A 2002
shooting in Kuwait that killed an American marine.5. The Bali nightclub bombing
that killed more than 180 in 2002.6. Planning attacks against prominent American
skyscrapers like the Empire State Building.7. Planning to destroy American
military vessels and oil tankers.8. Planning to bomb the Panama Canal.9.
Planning to assassinate former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton.10.
Planning to bomb several New York landmarks, including the stock exchange and
suspension bridges.11. Planning to destroy several London landmarks, including
Heathrow Airport and Big Ben.12. Planning to destroy buildings in the Israeli
city of Eilat, using planes leaving Saudi Arabia.13. Planning to destroy Israeli
and American embassies around the world.14. Sending fighters into Israel to spy
on strategic targets.15. Bombing a hotel in Mombasa, Kenya, frequented by
Israelis.16. Launching a Russian-made surface-to-air missile at an El Al
airliner leaving Mombasa.17. Spying on nuclear power plants in the United
States.18. Planning to hit NATO headquarters in Brussels.19. Planning to bomb 12
American aircraft full of passengers.20. Shared responsibility for an
assassination attempt against Pope John Paul II in the Philippines.21. Planning
the assassination of President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan.22. Trying to
destroy an American oil company in Sumatra ''owned by the Jewish former
secretary of state, Henry Kissinger.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed after he was captured in March 2003.
(Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (89%); HIJACKING (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); COUPS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); WAR CRIMES (73%); NAVIES (73%); US
PRESIDENTS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); ARRESTS (68%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (66%) Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Torture; Airlines
and Airplanes; Hijacking; Bombs and Explosives; Assassinations and Attempted
Assassinations ; Terrorism; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (71%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (78%); JIMMY CARTER (74%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BILL
CLINTON (55%) Adam Liptak; Khalid Shaikh Mohammed; Jimmy Carter; Bill Clinton;
John Paul II (Pope) (1920-2005); George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (76%)

REGION: New York City; London (Eng); Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              698 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clinton Says Some G.I.'s in Iraq Would Remain if She Took Office

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON and PATRICK HEALY

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1543 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton foresees a ''remaining military as well as
political mission'' in Iraq, and says that if elected president, she would keep
a reduced military force there to fight Al Qaeda, deter Iranian aggression,
protect the Kurds and possibly support the Iraqi military.

In a half-hour interview on Tuesday in her Senate office, Mrs. Clinton said the
scaled-down American military force that she would maintain would stay off the
streets in Baghdad and would no longer try to protect Iraqis from sectarian
violence -- even if it descended into ethnic cleansing.

In outlining how she would handle Iraq as commander in chief, Mrs. Clinton
articulated a more nuanced position than the one she has provided at her
campaign events, where she has backed the goal of ''bringing the troops home.''

She said in the interview that there were ''remaining vital national security
interests in Iraq'' that would require a continuing deployment of American
troops.

The United States' security would be undermined if parts of Iraq turned into a
failed state ''that serves as a petri dish for insurgents and Al Qaeda,'' she
said. ''It is right in the heart of the oil region,'' she said. ''It is directly
in opposition to our interests, to the interests of regimes, to Israel's
interests.'' [Excerpts, Page A14.]

''So it will be up to me to try to figure out how to protect those national
security interests and continue to take our troops out of this urban warfare,
which I think is a loser,'' Mrs. Clinton added. She declined to estimate the
number of American troops she would keep in Iraq, saying she would draw on the
advice of military officers.

Mrs. Clinton's plans carry some political risk. Although she has been extremely
critical of the Bush administration's handling of the war, some liberal
Democrats are deeply suspicious of her intentions on Iraq, given that she voted
in 2002 to authorize the use of force there and, unlike some of her rivals for
the Democratic nomination, has not apologized for having done so.

Senator Clinton's proposal is also likely to stir up debate among military
specialists. Some counterinsurgency experts say the plan is unrealistic because
Iraqis are unlikely to provide useful tips about Al Qaeda if American troops end
their efforts to protect Iraqi neighborhoods.

But a former Pentagon official argued that such an approach would minimize
American casualties and thus make it easier politically to sustain a long-term
military presence that might prevent the fighting from spreading throughout the
region.

Mrs. Clinton has said she would vote for a proposed Democratic resolution on
Iraq now being debated on the floor of the Senate, which sets a goal of
withdrawing combat forces by March 31, 2008. Asked if her plan was consistent
with the resolution, Mrs. Clinton and her advisers said it was, noting that the
resolution also called for ''a limited number'' of troops to stay in Iraq to
protect the American Embassy and other personnel, train and equip Iraqi forces,
and conduct ''targeted counterterrorism operations.''

(Senator Barack Obama, a rival of Mrs. Clinton, has said that if elected
president, he might keep a small number of troops in Iraq.)

With many Democratic primary voters favoring a total withdrawal, Senator Clinton
appears to be trying to balance her political interests with the need to retain
some flexibility. Like other Democratic candidates, she has called for engaging
Iran and Syria in talks and called on President Bush to reverse his troop
buildup.

But while Mrs. Clinton has criticized Mr. Bush's troop reinforcements as an
escalation of war, she said in the interview, ''We're doing it, and it's
unlikely we can stop it.''

''I'm going to root for it if it has any chance of success,'' she said of Mr.
Bush's plan, ''but I think it's more likely that the anti-American violence and
sectarian violence just moves from place to place to place, like the old Whac a
Mole. Clear some neighborhoods in Baghdad, then face Ramadi. Clear Ramadi, then
maybe it's back in Falluja.''

Mrs. Clinton made it clear that she believed the next president is likely to
face an Iraq that is still plagued by sectarian fighting and occupied by a
sizable number of American troops. The likely problems, she said, include
continued political disagreements in Baghdad, die-hard Sunni insurgents, Al
Qaeda operatives, Turkish anxiety over the Kurds and the effort to ''prevent
Iran from crossing the border and having too much influence inside of Iraq.''

''The choices that one would face are neither good nor unlimited,'' she said.
''And from the vantage point of where I sit now, I can tell you, in the absence
of a very vigorous diplomatic effort on the political front and on the regional
and international front, I think it is unlikely there will be a stable situation
that will be inherited.''

On the campaign trail, Mrs. Clinton has repeatedly vowed to bring the war to a
close if the fighting were still going on when she took office as president.
''If we in Congress don't end this war before January 2009, as president, I
will,'' she has said.

In the interview, she suggested that it was likely that the fighting among the
Iraqis would continue for some time. In broad terms, her strategy is to abandon
the American military effort to stop the sectarian violence and to focus instead
on trying to prevent the strife from spreading throughout the region by
shrinking and rearranging American troop deployments within Iraq.

The idea of repositioning American forces to minimize American casualties,
discourage Iranian, Syrian and Turkish intervention, and forestall the Kurds'
declaring independence is not a new one. It has been advocated by Dov S.
Zakheim, who served as the Pentagon's comptroller under former Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld. Mr. Zakheim has estimated that no more than 75,000 troops
would be required, compared to the approximately 160,000 troops the United
States will have in Iraq when the additional brigades in Mr. Bush's plan are
deployed.

While Mrs. Clinton declined to estimate the size of a residual American troop
presence, she indicated that troops might be based north of Baghdad and in
western Anbar Province.

''It would be far fewer troops,'' she said. ''But what we can do is to almost
take a line sort of north of -- between Baghdad and Kirkuk, and basically put
our troops into that region, the ones that are going to remain for our
antiterrorism mission, for our northern support mission, for our ability to
respond to the Iranians, and to continue to provide support, if called for, for
the Iraqis.''

Mrs. Clinton described a mission with serious constraints.

''We would not be doing patrols,'' she added. ''We would not be kicking in
doors. We would not be trying to insert ourselves in the middle between the
various Shiite and Sunni factions. I do not think that's a smart or achievable
mission for American forces.''

One question raised by counterinsurgency experts is whether the more limited
military mission Mrs. Clinton is advocating would lead to a further escalation
in the sectarian fighting, because it would shift the entire burden for
protecting civilians to the nascent Iraqi Security Forces. A National
Intelligence Estimate issued in January said those forces would be hard-pressed
to take on significantly increased responsibilities in the next 12 to 18 months.

''Coalition capabilities, including force levels,resources and operations,
remain an essential stabilizing element in Iraq,'' the estimate noted, referring
to the American-led forces.

Mrs. Clinton said the intelligence estimate was based on a ''faulty premise''
because it did not take into account the sort of ''phased redeployment'' plan
she was advocating. But she acknowledged that under her strategy American troops
would remain virtual bystanders if Shiites and Sunnis killed each other in
sectarian attacks. ''That may be inevitable,'' she said. ''And it certainly may
be the only way to concentrate the attention of the parties.''

Asked if Americans would endure having troops in Iraq who do nothing to stop
sectarian attacks there, she replied: ''Look, I think the American people are
done with Iraq. I think they are at a point where, whether they thought it was a
good idea or not, they have seen misjudgment and blunder after blunder, and
their attitude is, What is this getting us? What is this doing for us?''

''No one wants to sit by and see mass killing,'' she added. ''It's going on
every day! Thousands of people are dying every month in Iraq. Our presence there
is not stopping it. And there is no potential opportunity I can imagine where it
could. This is an Iraqi problem; we cannot save the Iraqis from themselves. If
we had a different attitude going in there, if we had stopped the looting
immediately, if we had asserted our authority -- you can go down the lines, if,
if, if -- ''If Elected . . .

This is the first in a series of interviews with the 2008 presidential
candidates in both parties about how they would handle the issues they would
confront as president. Future articles will look at the positions of the other
candidates on Iraq and on other national security and domestic policy matters.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

SERIES: IF ELECTED : Iraq

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton at a presidential forum yesterday
in Washington, sponsored by the International Association of Fire Fighters.
(Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES
(78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); LIBERALISM
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (70%) Surveys and Series; Election Issues; Presidential Election of
2008; United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE FIGHTERS (59%)
Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (93%) Michael R Gordon; Patrick Healy; Hillary
Rodham (Sen) Clinton

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iran; Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              700 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 770 words


INTERNATIONAL A3-15Senate Rejects Timetable On Pulling Troops From IraqThe
Senate rejected a Democratic resolution aimed at withdrawing most American
combat troops from Iraq in 2008, but a similar measure advanced in the House,
and Democratic leaders vowed to keep pressing President Bush to change course in
Iraq.   A1Gunmen ambushed a convoy carrying the mayor of the Shiite area in
Baghdad known as Sadr City, seriously wounding him and complicating American
efforts to rein in a powerful Shiite militia there.   A8A New Face of Al QaedaAn
Islamic militant with solid terrorism credentials has formed a new organization
in Lebanon, intent on training fighters for attacks across the world and
becoming the new face of Al Qaeda, officials said.   A1China Approves Property
LawAfter more than a quarter-century of market-oriented economic policies and
record-setting growth, China enacted its first law to protect private property
explicitly.

A1Palestinian Factions UniteThe Hamas-led Palestinian government, boycotted by
the West since its election more than a year ago because of Hamas's support of
terrorism, announced a unity coalition with the more moderate Fatah movement in
hopes of ending the boycott.   A6Candidate Off Ballot in NigeriaAtiku Abubakar,
the leading opposition candidate in Nigeria's presidential election, has been
omitted from the official list of candidates, which was released by the
Independent National Electoral Commission.  A3 NATIONAL A16-21McCain Faces
Questions Early in Presidential BidSenator John McCain of Arizona worked hard to
make himself the inevitable 2008 Republican presidential nominee. But he was
instead faced with a sense among Republicans that his campaign had faltered and
that his political identity had been blurred.   A1Rove's Role in Attorney
FiringsKarl Rove, the White House senior adviser, made an inquiry about firing
federal prosecutors in January 2005, prompting a Justice Department aide to
respond that Alberto Gonzales, who would be confirmed as attorney general weeks
later, favored replacing a group of ''underperforming'' United States Attorneys,
according to e-mails.   A1California Moves Primary DateGov. Arnold
Schwarzenegger moved California's presidential primary to February of next year
from June, placing the nation's most populous state at the congested front end
of the primary calendar.   A21Democrats Comment on GaysUnder pressure from gay
rights groups, two rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination, Senators
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Barack Obama, issued statements saying they believe
that homosexuality is not immoral.   A20EDUCATIONSchools Accept Loan
IncentivesDozens of colleges and universities have accepted a variety of
financial incentives from student loan companies to steer student business their
way, Attorney General Andrew M. Cuomo of New York announced.   A16NEW
YORK/REGION B1-8Lives Intersect Violently On a Busy City StreetYevgeniy
Marshalik and Nicholas T. Pekearo, the two unarmed auxiliary police officers
killed by a gunman who had just shot a bartender in a Greenwich Village
pizzeria, each brought an eccentric back story to his job, and to their
partnership on the street.  A1Their killer, David R. Garvin, was a former marine
whose life had been unstable for years. He had begun showing increasing signs of
paranoia, investigators said.  B1 New Jersey Pension ProblemsA prominent member
of the council that oversees investments by New Jersey's pension funds said the
state had been vastly underestimating how much money it should have to pay for
retirement benefits that have been promised to employees.  B3BUSINESS DAY C1-9
Surprise Bid for ExchangeThe Intercontinental Exchange, which mostly trades
energy contracts, surprised financial markets by making a $10 billion bid to
wrest the Chicago Board of Trade away from its planned merger partner, the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange.   C1Questions on Device RecallsFood and Drug
Administration inspectors found inaccuracies in how Davol Inc., a subsidiary of
C. R. Bard Inc., reported problems related to its recalled Kugel hernia patch,
suggesting that some medical manufacturers do not monitor product safety as
rigorously as they should.   C1Business Digest C2 OBITUARIES C10Bowie KuhnThe
commissioner of baseball during a tumultuous 15-year period when the game
experienced dramatic growth accompanied by unprecedented labor strife, he was
80. C10EDITORIAL A22-23Editorials: Phony fraud charges; relighting snuffed
candles; a huge hole in airport security; a new, old leopard.Columns: Thomas L.
Friedman.Crossword    E27TV Listings   E28Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HAMAS (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); BOYCOTTS (88%); PRIMARY
ELECTIONS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (76%); AL FATAH (75%); AL-QAEDA (75%); LAWYERS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(73%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (72%); RELIGION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (67%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (67%); GAYS & LESBIANS (64%); STUDENT LOANS (63%); STUDENT
FINANCIAL AID (63%); LGBT RIGHTS (60%); ECONOMIC NEWS (53%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%); AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); ALBERTO GONZALES
(78%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%); ANDREW CUOMO (58%); ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER (57%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
NIGERIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              708 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeking a Solution To Darfur Genocide

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 594 words


To the Editor:

Re ''How Do You Solve a Crisis Like Darfur?'' (column, March 13):

Nicholas D. Kristof suggests that the top priority for Darfur should be a
negotiated peace settlement. President Omar al-Bashir has refused to allow a
United Nations peacekeeping force to augment African Union troops in Darfur, as
provided for by Security Council Resolution 1706. He has done so because of the
waning influence of the United States on Sudan and Sudan's close relationship
with China.

Diplomatic attempts of the kind that produced the short-lived May 2006 Darfur
agreement will fail. Because appalling crimes against humanity continue in
Darfur, a different, dramatic approach is needed.

President Bush should urgently begin a determined effort to convene the heads of
government of China, Britain, Norway, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Kenya and Nigeria --
countries that either helped achieve the North-South comprehensive peace
agreement or that have influence in Khartoum.

They should meet at a neutral site (Switzerland, for example) first among
themselves and afterward with President Bashir.Don PettersonBrentwood, N.H.,
March 15, 2007The writer was the United States ambassador to Sudan from 1992 to
1995.To the Editor:

Much of what was said by Nicholas D. Kristof about practical steps toward peace
in Darfur is useful. His focus on this outrage stands alone among so much of the
neglect of the rest of the media.

But the basic flaw in his otherwise sage analysis was the true willingness of
Khartoum to agree to a truly long-term and fair settlement. He also didn't
mention what should be done to bring justice to those who were and are today
committing genocide.

Shall 200,000 lives lost by the acts of the Sudanese authorities be forgotten by
us and them? We mostly have forgotten the Cambodian genocide and that its
perpetrators live still untouched by their guilt, or many in Rwanda, to say
nothing of Bosnia.

What of future leaders who find it safe to commit unspeakable acts of brutality
in some other time and place?

Finally, I believe that force, after another round of weak sanctions, may be the
only alternative. We have seen now nearly four years of dithering by all
involved, including the United States.

Mr. Kristof rejects United States armed forces given the present Iraq debacle,
but a multilateral force by the United Nations or NATO or of the willing,
including United States military logistical capacity and money to support the
total effort, may in the end be the only effective option.

Another sad casualty of Iraq may be the United States' unwillingness to stop
genocide! Harry C. Blaney IIIWashington, March 14, 2007The writer, a retired
Foreign Service officer, is a senior fellow at the Center for International
Policy.To the Editor:

While I agree with Nicholas D. Kristof that ''aggressive military measures would
be counterproductive'' in Darfur, we should at least provide tanks for their
protection and defense. These tanks will never shoot first, but they will keep
the brutal evil men from entering the villages to gang-rape the women and kill
the children.

Three to five tanks would be an overwhelming adversary for the janjaweed militia
on horseback. It's the least we can do to make sure that the killing of innocent
people stops.

At a minimum, we should protect and defend the women and children while we seek
a diplomatic, nonviolent solution. Thanks to Mr. Kristof for keeping us all
updated on this overwhelming crisis and being a leader for peace and education
in the world.Seth BlumNew York, March 13, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); WRITERS (78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (77%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); ARMED FORCES
(76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (75%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (58%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (67%); OMAR AL-BASHIR (58%) Nicholas D Kristof; Don
Petterson; Harry C III Blaney; Seth Blum; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (92%); AFRICA (92%); IRAQ
(92%); RWANDA (79%); KENYA (79%); NIGERIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              709 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Slow Emancipation

BYLINE: By Kwame Anthony Appiah.

Kwame Anthony Appiah, a philosopher at Princeton University, is the editor, with
Martin Bunzl, of ''Buying Freedom: The Ethics and Economics of Slave
Redemption,'' coming this fall. His last article for the magazine was a cover
essay on cosmopolitanism.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 3-18-07; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 2043 words


Once, when I was a child in Kumasi, Ghana, I asked my father, in a room full of
people, if one of the women there was really my aunt. She lived in one of the
family houses, and I'd always called her auntie. In memory, I see her lowering
her eyes as my father brushed the question aside, angrily. Later, when we were
alone, he told me that one must never inquire after people's ancestry in public.
There are many Ashanti proverbs about this. One says simply, Too much revealing
of origins spoils a town. And here's why my father changed the subject: my
''auntie'' was, as everyone else in the room would have known, the descendant of
a family slave.

My father was trying to avoid embarrassing her, although I don't think he
regarded her ancestry as an embarrassment himself. Unlike her ancestors, she
could not be sold; she could not be separated against her will from her
children; she was free to work wherever she could. Yet in the eyes of the
community -- and in her own eyes -- she was of lower status than the rest of us.
If she could not find a husband to provide for her (and a prosperous husband was
unlikely to marry a woman of her status), the safest place for her was with the
family to which her ancestors had belonged. So she stayed.

Beginning around 1700, Kumasi was the capital of the Ashanti empire as it rose
and fell. At some point in my education, I was taught that the empire had been
the center of a great trading system, with roads radiating from Kumasi in every
direction, connecting us with the Atlantic trading system along the coast and
with the trans-Saharan trade to the north. Gold, everyone knew, was one of the
commodities we exported: the empire of Ashanti covered most of what was once
called the Gold Coast.

What I don't remember hearing much about was the role of the slave trade in the
growth of Ashanti. More than a million slaves were sent to the Americas through
the British, Danish and Dutch forts along the Gold Coast, mostly in the course
of the 18th century. Next Sunday marks the 200th anniversary of the British
Parliament's vote to ban the empire's North Atlantic slave trade. Following that
vote, the Ashanti had to rethink the whole basis of their economy. But while the
export of slaves had helped Ashanti consolidate power, it was arguably the
importation of slaves from farther east -- sold to the Gold Coast states by the
Portuguese, starting in the 15th century -- that made the empire possible in the
first place. The rise of settled states in West Africa, as in much of the New
World, seems often to have depended on the rise of plantation agriculture, and
plantation agriculture depended on involuntary labor. Just as in the New World,
moreover, the legacy of slavery has proved curiously durable. Indeed, to
understand the nature of that legacy here, it helps to look at the experience of
slavery on the African side of the middle passage.

When I was growing up, people used to visit us regularly from a village called
Nyaduom, in the forest to the south of Kumasi. The village had belonged, I was
told, to my father's family, and he inherited responsibility for it when he
became the head of the family. He had the right to appoint chiefs and queen
mothers for the village, and had some vague dominion over its land. A couple of
hundred years ago, it turns out, an ancestor of my father's, an illustrious
Ashanti general named Akroma-Ampim, had, with the permission of the king,
settled the area with war captives and set up a plantation. In the slaving
empire of Ashanti, as the Ghanaian historian Akosua Perbi tells us, there were
different designations for different kinds of forced laborers -- war captives
(who could, if they were lucky, be redeemed by the payment of ransom), people
held as security for their families' debts, people bought at the slave markets
elsewhere and family servants with a status akin to feudal serfs -- and each had
a distinct status. Not all slaves were created equal. Still, to use our
generalizing term, the inhabitants of Nyaduom had been slaves for generations.

And these days? Slavery hasn't been legal in Ashanti for roughly a century. (The
final rules for abolition were made in 1908: they allowed slaves to be redeemed
for a fixed fee, required men to emancipate female slaves with whom they had
children, made cruelty a basis for emancipation and declared that children born
to slaves after a certain date would no longer be slaves themselves.) The people
of Nyaduom are now ''ethnically'' Ashanti if they are anything. Their ancestors
were not, however, and their status as the descendants of captives was one of
hereditary inferiority to free Ashanti. For the villagers, these customs
outweighed anything on the statute books. They regularly brought us fruits and
coffee that they had grown, as well as the occasional chicken, turkey or sheep.
And they acted as if my father had duties that gave him authority over them.

That wasn't exactly his view. Though he met and talked to them, he always tried
to persuade them that they had to settle their disputes for themselves. He was
willing to help, he told them, but they no longer belonged to him. They shrugged
off his protests. They were the descendants of Chief Akroma-Ampim's captives; my
father was the descendant of Chief Akroma-Ampim. What could change that?

They weren't the only ones to see themselves that way. Whenever I visit Kumasi,
I get to chat with a man who worked for my father's predecessor as head of the
family and who'd had, as a result, many dealings with Nyaduom. Last year, I
asked him about Nyaduom and he answered me only after reminding me that it was
not his hometown. Only recently has it occurred to me why he has always been so
emphatic about this point: his family, unlike most of those in the village,
never belonged to anyone. Generations after slavery has gone, the lowly status
of these slave ancestors still matters. It matters that he is not one of them.

When I think about how the world of the Ashanti remains etched and scored by
slavery, an odd question arises: What is it about slavery that makes it morally
objectionable? European and American abolitionists in the 19th century tended to
focus, reasonably enough, on its cruelty: on the horrors that began with capture
and separation from one's family, continued in the cramped and putrid quarters
below the decks of the middle passage and went on in plantations ruled by the
lash. William Wilberforce, the evangelist and Tory member of Parliament who was
as responsible as anyone for the passage of the 1807 Abolition of the Slave
Trade Act, was not an enthusiast for democracy when it came to expanding the
franchise, and he railed against the ''mad-headed professors of liberty and
equality.'' It was the torments of slavery's victims that moved him so. (He was
also a founding member of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals.) Once freed slaves had been properly Christianized, he believed, ''they
will sustain with patience the sufferings of their actual lot.'' In the United
States, abolitionists mainly shared his perspective, naturally emphasizing the
abundant horrors of plantation slavery.

Slavery's more sophisticated defenders had a response. They agreed that cruelty
was wrong, but, they maintained, these horrors were abuses of the slavery
system, not inherent features of it.

What if their paternalist fantasies had come true, and a world of kindly slave
masters had developed? Would slavery be acceptable? Of course not. Even a
well-treated slave is diminished by his status. As a social or legal
institution, slavery has built into it a denial of the social basis of
self-respect: it defines the slave as lower in status by denying that she could
have personal aims worthy of consideration and rejecting the enslaved person's
right to manage his or her own affairs. When you're a slave, someone else is in
charge of your life. What keeps the wound from healing is that this
subordination is something you inherited from your parents and will pass along
to your children.

And to their children, and their children's children. Although the sale of
slaves is now illegal, and demands for unpaid work are officially unenforceable,
there are still slave descendants who work in the households of prosperous
Ashanti without remuneration. (There are also some people who are sent by
families that cannot afford to feed them, people who are properly servants,
though their compensation is not monetary, and the families to which they go
tend to treat them like the poor relation in a Victorian novel.) The status of
these home workers, it seems to me, is like that of children. They are in the
care of the families they work for, which have obligations to maintain and
support them, but their labor and their lives are pretty much governed by the
people in whose households they live. In principle, they are free to leave
whenever they choose. In practice, they often have nowhere to go. Never having
been paid, they have no savings. Often they have a very basic education, so
their only skill is domestic work, a market in which there is a great deal of
competition. Even without the legal apparatus of Jim Crow, liberated slaves can
find themselves effectively recaptured.

None of this is peculiar to Africa, of course. The etymology of the English word
''slave'' reflects the large-scale forced servitude of Slavs into the Middle
Ages; in modern Arabic, the word ''abd,'' a classical designation for a slave,
is used to refer to dark-skinned people. Because people almost always think of
slaves as belonging to a kind -- a race, a tribe, a class, a family -- that is
suited to enslavement, the slave status tends to survive the abandonment of the
formal institutions of slavery.

This isn't to diminish the achievements of abolition. The bicentennial of the
Slave Trade Act is eminently worth celebrating, and it's reassuring to know that
slavery is officially forbidden in every country on the planet. (The word may
yet prove father to the deed.) The United States National Slavery Museum is
scheduled to open in Fredericksburg, Va., next year, while in Ghana, the
remaining coastal slaving forts do a brisk trade in moralized tourism.
Meanwhile, human rights campaigners have taken aim at nonchattel forms of
slavery, like the millions of bonded laborers in South Asia whose employers
force them to work in order to pay off a debt, or ''peshgi.'' Groups like
Christian Solidarity International continue to support slave-redemption programs
in Sudan. The International Labor Organization of the United Nations monitors
trafficking networks that bring an estimated 1.2 million children into forced
servitude, from the cocoa fields of Ivory Coast to the brothels of Thailand.
Various intergovernmental groups have helped secure the release of some of them.

But the politics of abolition and redemption, now as then, go only so far. You
can legislate against the peshgi system, pass laws regulating working conditions
and, in a dozen ways, deny legal recognition to the slaveholder's claim to
manage the lives of his slaves. You cannot thereby command respect for them or
grant them self-respect, because these things are not within the power of the
market or a legislature. Nor can you guarantee that someone who has experienced
only slavery will be prepared to manage a life alone, even if he had the money
to do so. There's no neat toggle switch between slave and free.

The woman I asked my father about is not a slave. But she carries on something
crucial to the enslavement of her ancestors. Beyond the possibility of being
sold away and the impossibility of making your own decisions, slavery meant that
certain people were hereditarily inferior. You can abandon the slave markets and
demand that all who work are paid for their labor and free to leave it, but even
if you succeed, the stigma and the status won't give way so easily. That's why I
haven't told you her name. Emancipation is only the beginning of freedom.

Timeline of Abolition of Slavery in Selected Countries (Source: ''Inhuman
Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World,'' by David Brion Davis;
Oxford University Press, 2006)(Chart by Catalogtree)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by John Stanmeyer
 VII)Chart: ''GREAT EMANCIPATIONS''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (89%); FAMILY (89%); CHILDREN (78%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (70%); COASTAL AREAS (68%); IMPORT TRADE (67%); ANNIVERSARIES
(65%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (60%) Slavery; Ashanti (Ghana Tribe)

PERSON: Kwame Anthony Appiah

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (79%)

COUNTRY: GHANA (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); AFRICA (79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%);
PORTUGAL (66%); NETHERLANDS (52%)

REGION: Ghana

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              712 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Qaeda Operative Admits Role in 3 Attacks, Transcript Shows

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK; Margot Williams contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 711 words


A top operative of Al Qaeda has acknowledged his role in the bombings of two
American embassies in Africa in 1998 and in the attack on the destroyer Cole off
Yemen in 2000, according to a hearing transcript released yesterday by the
Pentagon.

The operative, Walid bin Attash, who is also known as Khallad, made his
statement, according to the transcript, to a combatant status review tribunal on
March 12 at the United States naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The tribunal will determine whether Mr. bin Attash has been properly designated
an enemy combatant, which would make him subject to indefinite military
detention. He may also be charged with war crimes before a separate tribunal
known as a military commission.

During the status review tribunal, an official whose name was not released asked
Mr. bin Attash to outline his role in the three attacks.

''Many roles,'' Mr. bin Attash said, according to the transcript and apparently
speaking through a translator. ''I participated in the buying or purchasing of
the explosives. I put together the plan for the operation a year and a half
prior to the operation. Buying the boat and recruiting the members that did the
operation.''

He added that he had been with Osama bin Laden in Kandahar, Afghanistan, at the
time of the attack on the Cole.

''And at the time of the embassy attacks?'' an unidentified member of the
tribunal asked.

''I was in Karachi meeting the operator, the guy that basically did the
operation a few hours before the operation took place,'' Mr. bin Attash replied.

There was no indication in the transcript that Mr. bin Attash, one of 14 ''high
value'' detainees transferred to Guantanamo from secret C.I.A. prisons last
year, was speaking under duress. In contrast to a hearing involving Khalid
Shaikh Mohammed released last week, there was no indication that Mr. bin Attash
claims he was mistreated while in C.I.A. custody.

The broad outlines of Mr. bin Attash's admissions were consistent with the
findings of the Sept. 11 commission and other sources, but it is possible that
Mr. bin Attash misstated or inflated his role.

The hearing last week lasted about a half-hour, according to the transcript. It
included a presentation of a two-page summary of unclassified evidence against
Mr. bin Attash. The tribunal indicated that it would also hear classified
evidence in a closed hearing.

The unclassified summary said that Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, who received
a life sentence from a federal court in New York in 2001 for his role in the
bombing of the embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, had received instructions from Mr. bin
Attash. It was not clear, however, whether the ''operator'' Mr. bin Attash
referred to last week was Mr. al-'Owhali. The embassy bombings killed 224
people.

The summary also said that statements, notebooks, forged documents and telephone
numbers linked Mr. bin Attash to the attack on the Cole. Seventeen American
sailors were killed in the attack and 39 wounded.

Under the rules of the status review tribunals, detainees are not entitled to
lawyers. They are aided instead by personal representatives provided by the
military. According to Mr. bin Attash's representative, an Air Force major whose
name was not released, Mr. bin Attash did not dispute the essence of the
charges.

Referring to an interview in February, the representative said, according to the
transcript: ''Facts of the operations are correct and his involvements are
correct, but the details are not correct. Detainee did not wish to correct the
details.''

Mr. bin Attash himself nonetheless addressed the tribunal to take issue with
some details.

For instance, the summary said that a notebook seized from another Qaeda
operative contained a phone number that was also stored in a phone belonging to
Mr. bin Attash, who was seized in Pakistan in 2003. Mr. bin Attash said he did
not have a phone at the time.

John Sifton, a senior researcher with Human Rights Watch, questioned why the
government had shifted tactics in responding to the embassy bombings. Four men
were convicted for their roles in those bombings in federal court in Manhattan
in 2001.

''What does it mean to treat something as a crime in 1998 but as part of armed
conflict in 2007?'' Mr. Sifton asked.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Terrorists blew a hole in the side of the destroyer Cole in
2000 while it was in the port of Aden, Yemen. (Photo by Hasan Jamali/Associated
Press)
 Walid bin Attash, shown in an undated photo, has been designated an enemy
combatant. (Photo by ABC News, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (91%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY VESSELS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); NAVIES (90%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); PRISONS (76%);
SENTENCING (76%); MILITARY COURTS (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); JAIL SENTENCING (74%)
Bombs and Explosives; Cole (USS); United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States
Foreign Service

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) Adam Liptak; Walid bin Attash; Osama Bin Laden

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%); NAIROBI, KENYA (73%); DAR ES SALAAM,
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); YEMEN (94%); CUBA (94%); KENYA (94%); AFRICA
(92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Yemen; Nairobi (Kenya); Yemen; Tanzania; Dar Es Salaam (Tanzania)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              713 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Confronts Legacy of Slave Trade

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The way history has long been taught here, Britain's abolition of the slave
trade on March 25, 1807, allowed it to claim the moral high ground in the
struggle to end slavery in the New World. Two centuries later, if a series of
exhibitions planned for this year leave their mark, perceptions may be about to
change.

Rather than dwelling on William Wilberforce, the feisty abolitionist who drove
the reform through the British Parliament and is the subject of the film
''Amazing Grace,'' these shows are highlighting a far uglier back story:
Britain's deep engagement in the slave trade in earlier centuries and the
fundamental role this played in forging the nation's wealth and power.

With the support of the government and a $20 million grant from the Heritage
Lottery Fund, national museums and community groups across Britain have begun
re-examining what a new exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London
calls these ''Uncomfortable Truths.''

The mood may be ripe for such a reassessment. After years of waxing nostalgic
about its lost empire, Britain is now daring to look more critically at its
imperial record. At the same time there is fresh curiosity about the history and
culture of the Caribbean, African, Arab and Asian immigrants who are changing
the face of Britain.

There is also new transparency. Although Prime Minister Tony Blair fell short of
an apology, in November he went further than any previous official by expressing
''deep sorrow'' for Britain's role in the slave trade. ''It is hard to believe
what would now be a crime against humanity was legal at the time,'' he noted.

Penitence seems to weigh most heavily on the northwestern port city of
Liverpool, which in 1800 controlled 80 percent of the British slave trade and
over 40 percent of the European slave trade. The triangular trade, by which
African slaves were bartered for sugar, cotton and tobacco in the Americas, was
the foundation of Liverpool's enormous prosperity.

Today the city takes this past seriously. In 1994 the Merseyside Maritime Museum
opened a Transatlantic Slavery Gallery to tell the story of Liverpool and
slavery. This display will close in June to make way for Britain's first
International Slavery Museum, which will open on Aug. 23, named by the United
Nations as Slavery Remembrance Day.

David Fleming, the director of National Museums Liverpool, said the new museum
would portray and analyze ''the vitality and complexity of West Africa prior to
the coming of European slavers, the horrors of the Middle Passage, the fate of
the enslaved people in the Americas and of course the never-ending fight for
freedom.''

London and Bristol, two other major slave-trading cities, are also probing their
consciences this year. In October the Museum of Docklands in London will open a
permanent gallery called ''London, Sugar and Slavery,'' while the Bristol
Industrial Museum has opened a Transatlantic Slavery gallery exploring how the
city profited from the slave trade in the 17th and 18th centuries.

Opening the bicentennial commemoration is the show at the Victoria and Albert
Museum, ''Uncomfortable Truths: The Shadow of Slave Trading on Contemporary Art
and Design,'' which looks at the slave trade and its benefits to Britain through
the eyes of 11 contemporary artists from around the world.

In some cases -- like Romuald Hazoume's striking serpent made from jerrycans, in
the museum's courtyard -- the link between the art and this narrative is less
than obvious. Mr. Hazoume, a Benin-born artist, has also created a larger work,
''La Bouche du Roi,'' transforming 300 jerrycans into masks, which will tour
Britain, starting at the British Museum.

With other artists the idea of scattering contemporary works through the
Victoria and Albert's collection is more successful in subverting the museum's
post-imperial elegance. For instance, with a series called ''Naming the Money''
by Lubaina Himid, the show's curator, Zoe Whitley, has placed several life-size
painted cutouts of slaves in the British Galleries, a reminder of the link
between the slave trade and British wealth.

In the Norfolk House Music Room, a headless archer identified as Foster
Cunliffe, a grandson of a slave trader, is dressed in period costume made of
lively African textiles. And in the same room the American Fred Wilson displays
''Regina Atra,'' a replica of a royal crown, in this case made of lead and black
diamonds.

''I didn't want to have shackles and chains aesthetics,'' said Ms. Whitley, 27,
an American who is the museum's curator of contemporary programs. ''I wanted
something relevant to the Victoria and Albert.'' The show runs through June 17.

The National Portrait Gallery has organized a lecture series for the March
anniversary around the theme ''People, Portraits and Abolition.'' It has also
created its own trail through its collection, with panels explaining the role of
significant players in promoting -- and combating -- the slave trade since the
time of Elizabeth I. (This route can be followed on the gallery's Web site,
www.npg.org.uk/live/abo--tr--1.asp.)

The focus of ''The Business of Slavery'' at the British Museum, opening in May,
will be the commodities that sustained the slave trade, starting with Europe's
initial interest in West Africa's gold and ivory, then detailing the enormous
profits earned from the New World's tobacco, sugar, cotton and rum. This show
will also recall the role played by enslaved people in their own liberation,
notably in Haiti and Jamaica.

The National Maritime Museum at Greenwich has organized lectures related to
Britain's involvement in the slave trade as well as a new gallery called
''Atlantic Worlds,'' which will open in October with a display of
slavery-related objects. The Royal Naval Museum in Portsmouth has an exhibition
called ''Chasing Freedom: The Royal Navy and the Suppression of the
Transatlantic Slave Trade,'' which presents the navy's role in intercepting
foreign slave ships after 1807.

It is a measure of the new awareness of the slave trade's importance to Britain
that so many institutions feel a need to respond this year.

For instance English Heritage, which manages large numbers of stately homes, has
decided for the first time to research links between the slave trade and the
properties in its care. The Palace of Westminster, in contrast, will focus on
the March 25, 1807, reform in ''The British Slave Trade: Abolition, Parliament
and People,'' from May 23 through Sept. 23.

For a country where national commemorations invariably relate to royal jubilees
or sporting triumphs, this bicentennial represents an extraordinary reflection
on a chapter of history that, notwithstanding the courage of Wilberforce and
other abolitionists, remains a stain on Britain's name.

Along with spotlighting the past, the campaign also hopes to draw attention to
new forms of slavery, whether in remote parts of Africa, Latin America and the
Middle East or closer to home where immigrant women are forced into
prostitution. A photography exhibition at St. Paul's Cathedral through March 29,
''Slave Britain: The 21st Century Trade in Human Lives,'' holds up just such a
mirror to Britain today.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A painted cutout from Lubaina Himid's ''Naming the Money.''
(Photo by Alan Riding for The New York Times)(pg. E1)
Fred Wilson's ''Regina Atra,'' the British crown in black diamonds.
Yinka Shonibare's ''Sir Foster Cunliffe Playing,'' in African textiles.
(Photographs by Gary Lee/UPPA, Photoshot)
 Romuald Hazoume's serpent of jerrycans, in the courtyard of the Victoria and
Albert Museum, where ''Uncomfortable Truths'' looks at slavery. (Photo by
Victoria and Albert Museum)(pg. E5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(89%); HISTORY (78%); BRITISH MONARCHS (78%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); PAINTING
(77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); EXHIBITIONS (75%); BRITISH PRIME
MINISTERS (73%); GRANTS & GIFTS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); PRIME MINISTERS
(71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); LOTTERIES (68%); IMMIGRATION (65%)
Slavery; Slavery

ORGANIZATION: BRITISH MUSEUM (59%); NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY (59%) Victoria and
Albert Museum (London); International Slavery Museum (Liverpool, Eng); National
Portrait Gallery (London); British Museum; National Maritime Museum (Greenwich,
Eng); Palace of Westminster (Eng); Royal Naval Museum (Portsmouth, Eng); Museum
of Docklands (London); St Paul's Cathedral (London)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%) Alan Riding

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (96%); LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); ENGLAND (94%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%)

REGION: Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              724 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

But Who's Against the Next War?

BYLINE: By David Rieff.

David Rieff, a contributing writer, reports frequently on foreign policy for the
magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 3-25-07; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 960 words


To hear the Democrats vying for the 2008 presidential nomination tell it, their
foreign-policy views represent a sharp, even radical break with the course the
Bush administration has pursued since 9/11. Senator Hillary Clinton has
contrasted President Bush's unilateralism with what she has called her own
internationalism. Senator Barack Obama vowed to provide ''the kind of leadership
we need to re-establish our standing in the world and renew our allies'
respect.'' Former Senator John Edwards has emphasized his differences with the
administration's domestic policy, but he has also promised to abandon a foreign
policy ''based on ideology'' and to ''return America to its place of moral
leadership.''

Upon closer examination, however, the differences between these candidates and
President Bush hardly seem as consequential as all that. To be sure, all three
Democrats have denounced the administration's policies in Iraq, with Obama and
Edwards saying the war was a mistake and Clinton, though she has refused to
apologize for her vote authorizing the war, increasingly coming around to the
same position. But this has been a debate about the past rather than the future,
and even the Bush administration, Vice President Cheney excepted, has largely
climbed down from its rhetoric about what the United States can accomplish in
Iraq. Clinton, Edwards and Obama have bitterly assailed one another's Iraq
positions, but it often seems as if they are splitting rather small differences.
Senator Edwards has called for a complete withdrawal of our forces in 12 to 18
months; Senator Obama has called for ''phased redeployment'' of troops beginning
no later than May 1; and Senator Clinton has called for a pullout to begin
within 90 days but has been vague on how many American troops should leave Iraq
and under what circumstances.

But it is their positions on Iran's nuclear program, a subject that is almost
certain to bedevil whoever becomes president in 2009, that most strongly suggest
that the foreign-policy differences between Democratic and Republican policy
elites have been vastly overblown.

Earlier this year, Vice President Cheney insisted that the administration had
not ''taken any options off the table'' as Iran continued to defy United Nations
calls for it to abandon its nuclear ambitions. The response from Democrats was
not long in coming. Senator Clinton helped lead the charge, reminding the
president that he did not have the authority to go to war with Iran on the basis
of the Senate's authorization of the use of force in Iraq in 2002. But what
Senator Clinton did not say was at least as interesting as what she did say. And
what she did not say was that she opposed the use of force in Iran. To the
contrary, Senator Clinton used virtually the same formulation as Vice President
Cheney. When dealing with Iran, she insisted, ''no option can be taken off the
table.''

Speaking to a meeting of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (Aipac), a
lobbying group, on March 2, Senator Obama said pretty much the same: the Iranian
regime was ''a threat to all of us,'' and ''we should take no option, including
military action, off the table.'' John Edwards has been even more categorical.
In a January speech in Israel, he said, ''Under no circumstances can Iran be
allowed to have nuclear weapons.'' And he added, ''We need to keep all options
on the table.''

Members of the Bush administration can surely be excused for wondering why, when
he uses such language, Cheney is accused of saber-rattling, whereas when the
leading Democratic presidential candidates use the same language, there are
virtually no complaints within the Beltway or on the major editorial pages, and
there is widespread support from the Democratic Party's foreign-policy elite.
Indeed, the national-greatness conservatism advanced by neoconservative figures
like William Kristol, and in large measure adopted by the Bush administration as
it prepared for war in Iraq, finds its echo in a national-greatness liberalism
among leading Democrats. National-greatness liberalism, the argument goes, was
the foreign-policy signature of Democratic political predominance from Truman
forward; any step away, toward more modest ambitions, is seen as McGovernite
weakness destined for defeat.

In this context, and despite what many antiwar activists who voted Democratic in
2006 must have expected -- they continue to challenge all the candidates, but
especially Clinton, to sharpen their opposition to the Iraq war -- the three
front-running Democratic candidates seem to base their logic for a drawdown in
Iraq not on the desirability of bringing troops home but of being able to deploy
them elsewhere. They and their policy analogues (figures like Richard Holbrooke
and Ivo Daalder) argue that Iraq is a distraction in the global fight against
the jihadists and that leaving Iraq will free up forces to pursue that struggle
more effectively elsewhere.

Iran seems, to Democratic leaders, to epitomize the need for continued American
hegemony, though so does the wish to intervene more often on human rights
grounds, above all in Darfur, or to protect allies like Israel and Taiwan. More
broadly, however, the issue that is dividing the Democrats is that their leaders
believe a muscular foreign policy is what the age of terrorism demands, while
antiwar voters believe such a policy may only breed more disasters. The question
is whether the party can seriously hope to regain the White House when it is so
seriously divided against itself on what is, in the minds of many Americans, the
central issue of our time.

Iran's government: How much of a danger to the region and the world?    Source:
Pew Global Attitudes Project, Spring 2006 (Chart by Catalogtree)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Paolo Pellegrin
 Magnum Photos)Chart: ''FEARFUL ASYMMETRY''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
FOREIGN POLICY (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (89%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (86%);
ELECTIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TERRORISM
(72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (61%) Election Issues  ; United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Public Opinion;
Terrorism; Presidential Election of 2008; Atomic Weapons

ORGANIZATION: Pew Global Attitudes Project

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); JOHN EDWARDS (89%); BARACK OBAMA (89%); HILLARY
RODHAM CLINTON (79%); DICK CHENEY (78%) Hillary Rodham (Sen) Clinton; Barack
(Sen) Obama; John Edwards; George W (Pres) Bush; David Rieff

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%); TURKEY (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iran; Germany; Pakistan; Iran; Great Britain; Russia; Turkey; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              737 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Planned House Vote on Armenian Massacre Angers Turks

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU and BRIAN KNOWLTON; Sebnem Arsu reported from Istanbul,
and Brian Knowlton from Washington

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, March 29


A planned vote in Congress that would classify the widespread killings of
Armenians by the Ottoman Turkish government early in the 20th century as
genocide is threatening to make bilateral relations unusually tense.

The speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, backs the resolution and at first wanted
a vote in April. But under Turkish pressure, Bush administration figures have
lobbied for the Democrats in charge of Congress to drop the measure.

Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates sent
strong letters of protest to her and to Representative Tom Lantos, chairman of
the Foreign Affairs Committee, which has not set a date for the vote. ''That has
had an impact,'' said Lynne Weil, a Lantos spokeswoman, referring to the
letters. Copies were also sent to Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, the
House minority leader.

Turkey vehemently denies the genocide, in which 1.5 million Armenians died
during a period of several years, beginning in 1915. It contends that the deaths
occurred in the chaos of war, as the Ottoman Empire was falling apart, and that
many Turks were also killed when Armenians sided with Russian forces in the hope
of claiming territory in eastern Turkey.

But many Armenians have sought acknowledgment from nations around the world that
the deaths amounted to systematic genocide at Ottoman hands. So far, parliaments
of more than 15 countries have agreed. France and Switzerland went further and
called for criminal charges against those who deny it.

A vote in Congress would be purely symbolic, but Turks have warned that it would
be felt as a bitter slap, and could cause enormous public pressure on the
government in Ankara to chill its cooperation with Washington, which has strong
military ties to Turkey, a NATO member.

In an effort to highlight Turkey's opposition to a Congressional resolution,
many high-ranking Turkish officials have visited Washington in recent months.
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, one of them, says that the damage would be very
deep if the resolution passed.

''It is only natural that the Turkish public who closely follow the issue would
also react to this strongly,'' Mr. Gul said in a telephone interview this week.
''As the elected government of democratic Turkey, we would not be able to remain
indifferent. However, I am confident that common sense would prevail at the
Congress.''

In Turkey on Thursday, the government held an opening ceremony for a museum in a
restored Armenian church near the city of Van in eastern Turkey that dates from
the year 941 and is considered one of the most precious symbols of the Armenian
presence in Anatolia. The renovation was undertaken as a major step to mend ties
with Armenians.

Mr. Gates and Ms. Rice, in joint letters, spoke sympathetically of ''the
horrendous suffering that ethnic Armenians endured'' and called for more study
of the events. But they also noted that when the French National Assembly voted
last year, the Turkish military responded by deciding to ''cut all contacts with
the French military and terminated defense contracts under negotiation.''

The letters, dated March 7, are posted at
foreignaffairs.house.gov/110/Rice--Gates--7Mar07.pdf.

A similar reaction now by the Turkish government, the letters warned, ''could
harm American troops in the field'' and constrain the American military in any
number of ways.

Mr. Gates chose a meeting of the American-Turkish Council in Washington, a
business group that promotes American-Turkish cooperation on trade, security and
cultural matters, to make a major policy speech on Tuesday. Not only did he
describe Turkey as an ally that ''I have long believed to be undervalued and
underappreciated,'' but he made a point of arguing against the genocide
resolution.

''Our two nations should oppose measures and rhetoric that needlessly and
destructively antagonize each other,'' Mr. Gates said Tuesday.

Daniel Fried, the assistant secretary of state for European and Eurasian
affairs, warned in testimony to Congress in mid-March that Turkish wrath could
be so strong that Turkey might bar American access to Incirlik Air Base, in
eastern Turkey, through which 74 percent of United States military air cargo
destined for Iraq passes.

Turkey's Foreign Ministry also chided the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on
Thursday for supporting a resolution that would condemn the killing in January
of Hrant Dink, an editor who was a voice for ethnic Armenians in Turkey.

Asked about the warnings from the two administration officials, Representative
Adam Schiff of California, a lead sponsor of the House resolution, said, ''I
don't see how we can have the moral authority that we need to condemn the
genocide going on in Darfur, if we're unwilling to recognize other genocides
that have taken place.''

Similar Congressional votes have been deferred in the past after intense
lobbying. But with strong support for the resolution from Ms. Pelosi, and
lingering resentment in Congress over Turkey's refusal to let United States
forces use Turkish soil for the invasion of Iraq, the bill's prospects may have
grown.

''It has 183 sponsors,'' said Elizabeth Chouldjian of the Armenian National
Committee of America. ''It is very likely that if it came up for a vote right
now, it would pass.''

Fueled partly by anger over the Iraq war, a positive view of the United States
among Turks plunged from 52 percent in 2000 to a low of 12 percent last year,
according to a Pew Global Attitudes Survey.

In Istanbul, Etyen Mahcupyan, an intellectual of Armenian descent who succeeded
Mr. Dink at the weekly Agos, said that foreign pressure on Turkey would only
fuel extreme nationalism.

''Turkish people are just beginning to realize that there are things they were
not taught in schools, so we are curious and willing to talk about not only the
Armenian issue but also other things freely,'' Mr. Mahcupyan said. ''It is not
fair to expect a society to accept the truths of other societies without having
the chance to discuss them first.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 5, 2007



CORRECTION: A headline on Friday about a planned vote in Congress over the
widespread killing of Armenians by the Ottoman Turkish government early in the
20th century incorrectly described the killings, in which 1.5 million Armenians
died. It was genocide, not a ''massacre.''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Boats ferried officials yesterday toward an island on which a
ceremony was held for a museum in a restored Armenian church, near Van, Turkey.
(Photo by Umit Bektas/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LOBBYING (78%); BUILDING RENOVATION
(77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (50%) Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (89%); ROBERT M GATES (79%); NANCY PELOSI (78%); TOM
LANTOS (73%); JOHN BOEHNER (58%); ABDULLAH GUL (58%) Sebnem Arsu; Brian
Knowlton; George W (Pres) Bush; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice; Robert M (Sec) Gates;
Nancy (Speaker) Pelosi

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); ARMENIA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); FRANCE (90%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Turkey; France; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              738 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Day's Business: Watch the Cherry Blossoms

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Businessmen reserved places for their colleagues yesterday ahead
of an event to celebrate the cherry blossoms at the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo,
which honors the war dead of Japan but is also seen by some as a symbol of
Japan's past militarism. (Photo by Kimimasa Mayama/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) World War
II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Yasukuni Shrine
(Tokyo); Trees and Shrubs; Cherry Trees

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (89%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (90%); CHINA (79%)

REGION: Tokyo (Japan); China; Japan; South Korea

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              739 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing Manalapan: Township Settles Discrimination Lawsuit

BYLINE: Compiled by John Sullivan

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 110 words


Manalapan Township has agreed to pay $275,000 to settle a lawsuit filed in State
Superior Court by three black youths who said police officers searched them
without justification and berated them in 2003, the New Jersey chapter of the
American Civil Liberties Union announced yesterday. The three -- Diamond Yorker,
then 16, Randy Reina, then 17, and Sean Anderson, then 11 -- were standing on a
sidewalk with three white friends when officers searched them, while telling
their friends they could leave, Deborah Jacobs, the chapter's executive
director, said in a statement. The township did not admit wrongdoing and its
lawyers declined to comment yesterday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (88%); LAWYERS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
EXECUTIVES (85%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (58%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (74%)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              740 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 31, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Australian to Serve Nine Months in Terrorism Case

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba, March 30


David Hicks, the Australian high-school dropout whose detention became an
international issue, will serve nine more months in custody, most of it in
Australia, under the terms of a plea deal unsealed here Friday.

The sentence came at the end of a long day in Guantanamo's military commission
courtroom and followed the deliberations of an eight-member panel of military
officers. Having deliberated for two hours, the panel returned at 8 p.m. with a
sentence of seven years, the maximum it was permitted to impose under the deal
in which Mr. Hicks pleaded guilty on Monday.

But the deal also provided that he actually serve the lesser of nine months or
whatever sentence the panel arrived at. The balance of the seven years that
could have been imposed is considered suspended.

The agreement for just nine additional months of imprisonment was remarkable for
a detainee who, before the plea negotiations, had faced a potential life term
and had become an international symbol of many of the 385 detainees here.

The case had also become a point of friction between the United States and
Australia, and the Australian government's handling of it has become a volatile
election issue there. The deal disclosed Friday included a provision that seemed
aimed at easing the tensions: Mr. Hicks, who has been in American custody for
five years, is to be returned to Australia within 60 days to serve the balance
of the sentence there.

The sentencing followed a day of proceedings in the first case under a 2006 law
that authorized military commissions to try some detainees designated as enemy
combatants. Those proceedings included Mr. Hicks's amplifying on his guilty
plea, acknowledging that prosecutors had the evidence to prove that he had been
a trainee of Al Qaeda who, armed with an AK-47, was prepared to fight Americans
in the Afghanistan conflict of 2001.

During the hearing, the military judge disclosed an extraordinary series of
concessions Mr. Hicks had made to his American captors in negotiations for the
plea deal, in which he admitted material support to a terrorist organization.

The deal included a statement by Mr. Hicks that he ''has never been illegally
treated'' while a captive, despite claims of beatings he had made in the past.
It also included a promise not to pursue suits over the treatment he received
while in detention and ''not to communicate in any way with the media'' for a
year.

Critics said those requirements were a continuation of what they say has been a
pattern of illegal detention policies. ''It is a modern cutting out of his
tongue,'' said Michael Ratner, president of the Center for Constitutional
Rights, a legal advocacy group, based in New York, that is coordinating the
representation of detainees in many suits challenging Guantanamo detention.

Mr. Ratner and other critics said the provisions requiring Mr. Hicks's silence
and the recanting of his accusations of abuse raised questions of whether
officials would use their extensive prosecutorial powers in the military
commission process to muffle the public debate about detention policies.

A Pentagon spokesman, Cmdr. Jeffrey D. Gordon, dismissed the criticism.

''Hicks has made a number of allegations which have proven to be unsubstantiated
pertaining to his treatment while in detention,'' Commander Gordon said. ''And
it is entirely appropriate that someone who went to Afghanistan to fight
alongside Al Qaeda and the Taliban after 9/11 is held accountable for his
actions.''

Before the sentencing phase Monday, the military judge painstakingly read each
of 35 factual admissions Mr. Hicks had made in his plea deal. Scrubbed,
cleanshaven and wearing a charcoal suit, Mr. Hicks helped move his case toward a
conclusion with an amiable efficiency. ''Yes, sir,'' he answered repeatedly as
the judge, Col. Ralph H. Kohlmann of the Marines, asked whether he acknowledged
those confessions.

Mr. Hicks pleaded under legal rules that did not require him to admit the
charges against him but to admit instead that the prosecutors had enough
evidence to prove the charges. Still, during questioning that lasted two and a
half hours, the judge left him little ground for retreat from his admissions,
which included receiving Qaeda training in kidnapping and assassination
techniques and collecting intelligence on a former United States Embassy
building in Afghanistan.

''Are the factual allegations consistent,'' Colonel Kohlmann asked, ''with your
own recollections about what you did?''

''Yes, sir,'' Mr. Hicks answered again. In his suit, with a fresh haircut and a
tie, he looked, as one of a sizable contingent of Australian television
reporters noted, as if he had appeared for a job interview.

The admissions were in most respects identical to the charges lodged against
him. But some differences showed that Mr. Hicks had insisted on a few changes
during the last few days of closed-door negotiations.

One paragraph of the charges said, for example, that Mr. Hicks had watched
television footage of the Sept. 11 attacks at a friend's house in Pakistan and
had ''expressed his approval of the attacks.'' But the paragraph Mr. Hicks
agreed to said that the friend ''has said he interpreted his gestures as
approval of the attacks.''

The plea deal included a number of provisions that are not unusual in American
law enforcement. Among them is a promise by Mr. Hicks to cooperate with
investigators, although it is not clear what information he might have that
would be useful.

The deal also included a provision that he cannot profit from the eventual sale
of his story; profits from any such sale are to go to the Australian government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PLEA AGREEMENTS (91%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); GUILTY
PLEAS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%); HIGH SCHOOLS (78%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); JUDGES (72%);
NAVIES (72%); AL-QAEDA (63%) Terrorism; Plea Bargaining; United States
International Relations

PERSON: William Glaberson; David Hicks

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRALIA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Australia; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              742 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japan's Textbooks Reflect Revised History

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, March 31


In another sign that Japan is pressing ahead in revising its history of World
War II, new high school textbooks will no longer acknowledge that the Imperial
Army was responsible for a major atrocity in Okinawa, the government announced
late Friday.

The Ministry of Education ordered publishers to delete passages stating that the
Imperial Army ordered civilians to commit mass suicide during the Battle of
Okinawa, as the island was about to fall to American troops in the final months
of the war.

The decision was announced as part of the ministry's annual screening of
textbooks used in all public schools. The ministry also ordered changes to other
delicate issues to dovetail with government assertions, though the screening is
supposed to be free of political interference.

''I believe the screening system has been followed appropriately,'' said Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe, who has long campaigned to soften the treatment in
textbooks of Japan's wartime conduct.

The decision on the Battle of Okinawa, which came as a surprise because the
ministry had never objected to the description in the past, followed recent
denials by Mr. Abe that the military had coerced women into sexual slavery
during the war.

The results of the annual textbook screening are closely watched in China, South
Korea and other Asian countries. So the fresh denial of the military's
responsibility in the Battle of Okinawa and in sexual slavery -- long accepted
as historical facts -- is likely to deepen suspicions in Asia that Tokyo is
trying to whitewash its militarist past even as it tries to raise the profile of
its current forces.

Shortly after assuming office last fall, Mr. Abe transformed the Defense Agency
into a full ministry. He has said that his most important goal is to revise the
American-imposed, pacifist Constitution that forbids Japan from having a
full-fledged military with offensive abilities.

Some 200,000 Americans and Japanese died during the Battle of Okinawa, one of
the most brutal clashes of the war. It was the only battle on Japanese soil
involving civilians, but Okinawa was not just any part of Japan.

It was only in the late 19th century that Japan officially annexed Okinawa, a
kingdom that, to this day, has retained some of its own culture. During World
War II, when many Okinawans still spoke a different dialect, Japanese troops
treated the locals brutally. In its history of the war, the Okinawa Prefectural
Peace Memorial Museum presents Okinawa as being caught in the fighting between
America and Japan -- a starkly different view from the Yasukuni Shrine war
museum, which presents Japan as a liberator of Asia from Western powers.

During the 1945 battle, during which one quarter of the civilian population was
killed, the Japanese Army showed indifference to Okinawa's defense and safety.
Japanese soldiers used civilians as shields against the Americans, and persuaded
locals that victorious American soldiers would go on a rampage of killing and
raping. With the impending victory of American troops, civilians committed mass
suicide, urged on by fanatical Japanese soldiers.

''There were some people who were forced to commit suicide by the Japanese
Army,'' one old textbook explained. But in the revision ordered by the ministry,
it now reads, ''There were some people who were driven to mass suicide.''

Other changes are similar -- the change to a passive verb, the disappearance of
a subject -- and combine to erase the responsibility of the Japanese military.
In explaining its policy change, the ministry said that it ''is not clear that
the Japanese Army coerced or ordered the mass suicides.''

As with Mr. Abe's denial regarding sexual slavery, the ministry's new position
appeared to discount overwhelming evidence of coercion, particularly the
testimony of victims and survivors themselves.

''There are many Okinawans who have testified that the Japanese Army directed
them to commit suicide,'' Ryukyu Shimpo, one of the two major Okinawan
newspapers, said in an angry editorial. ''There are also people who have
testified that they were handed grenades by Japanese soldiers'' to blow
themselves up.

The editorial described the change as a politically influenced decision that
''went along with the government view.''

Mr. Abe, after helping to found the Group of Young Parliamentarians Concerned
About Japan's Future and History Education in 1997, long led a campaign to
reject what nationalists call a masochistic view of history that has robbed
postwar Japanese of their pride.

Yasuhiro Nakasone, a former prime minister who is a staunch ally of Mr. Abe,
recently denied what he wrote in 1978. In a memoir about his Imperial Navy
experiences in Indonesia, titled ''Commander of 3,000 Men at Age 23,'' he wrote
that some of his men ''started attacking local women or became addicted to
gambling.

''For them, I went to great pains, and had a comfort station built,'' Mr.
Nakasone wrote, using the euphemism for a military brothel.

But in a meeting with foreign journalists a week ago, Mr. Nakasone, now 88,
issued a flat denial. He said he had actually set up a ''recreation center,''
where his men played Japanese board games like go and shogi.

In a meeting on Saturday with Foreign Minister Taro Aso of Japan, South Korea's
foreign minister, Song Min-soon, criticized Mr. Abe's recent comments on sexual
slaves.

''The problems over perceptions of history are making it difficult to move South
Korean-Japanese relations forward,'' Mr. Song said.

Mr. Aso said Japan stuck by a 1993 statement acknowledging responsibility for
past sexual slavery, but said nothing about Mr. Abe's denial that the military
had coerced women, many of them Korean, into sexual slavery.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TEXTBOOKS (93%); WORLD WAR II (92%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
TEEN SUICIDE (78%); HISTORY (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (78%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (78%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); SLAVERY (74%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); SUICIDE (56%)
World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Education and Schools; Textbooks; Suicides and Suicide Attempts

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (79%) Norimitsu Onishi

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (73%)

STATE: KYUSHU, JAPAN (90%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); ASIA (93%); CHINA (79%); KOREA,
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Okinawa and Other Ryukyu Islands; Japan

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              749 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pelosi's Delegation Presses Syrian Leader on Militants

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Hugh Naylor contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1104 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, April 4


House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and her delegation said they had frank words with
President Bashar al-Assad and other senior Syrian officials here on Wednesday,
pressing the president over Syria's support for militant groups and insisting
that his government block militants seeking to cross into Iraq and join
insurgents there.

Delegation members said that they sought to persuade Mr. Assad to distance
himself from Iran, and its president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Iran has become
Syria's ally in the growing confrontation with the so-called quartet of moderate
Arab states, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates.

Tom Lantos, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he asked
Mr. Assad how someone ''of his intelligence and knowledge of the world could
have common cause with President Ahmadinejad of Iran, who has denied the
Holocaust and calls for the elimination of Israel.''

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, Ms. Pelosi announced that she had conveyed a
message to Mr. Assad from Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, that he was
ready to negotiate for peace.

Shortly afterward, however, Mr. Olmert's office issued a clarification of his
message, insisting that, ''although Israel is interested in peace with Syria,
that country continues to be part of the axis of evil and a force that
encourages terror in the entire Middle East.''

To begin serious peace negotiations, the Israeli statement said, Syria must end
its support of terrorism and its sponsorship of the Hamas and Islamic Jihad
organizations; refrain from providing weapons to Hezbollah and bringing about
the destabilizing of Lebanon; stop its support of terrorism in Iraq; and
relinquish the strategic ties it is building with the government in Iran.

Members of the delegation said that among the issues they took up in Damascus
was the case of the three Israeli soldiers being held by the Lebanese militant
group Hezbollah -- which is supported by Iran -- and the Palestinian group
Hamas.

In addition to Mr. Lantos, the delegation includes Representatives Henry A.
Waxman of California, Louise M. Slaughter of New York, Nick J. Rahall II of West
Virginia and Keith Ellison of Minnesota, all Democrats, as well as David L.
Hobson, Republican of Ohio.

The lawmakers said they also sought to emphasize Syria's importance in bringing
peace to Lebanon, Iraq and the Palestinian territories.

''We came in friendship, hope, and determined that the road to Damascus is a
road to peace,'' Ms. Pelosi told reporters after her meetings.

Her visit has been strongly criticized by the Bush administration and dismissed
by some in the Middle East as a domestic political play.

At the White House on Tuesday, President Bush told reporters that he saw little
point in talking to Syria now. ''Sending delegations hasn't worked,'' he said.
''It's just simply been counterproductive.''

Gordon D. Johndroe, a spokesman for the National Security Council, on Wednesday
seized upon Ms. Pelosi's comment on the ''road to peace,'' to say, in a briefing
on Air Force One: ''Unfortunately, that road is lined with the victims of Hamas
and Hezbollah, and the victims of terrorists who cross from Syria into Iraq.
It's lined with the victims in Lebanon, who are trying to fight for democracy
there. It's lined with human rights activists trying for freedom and democracy
in Syria.''

Ms. Pelosi's trip, initially sparked by an invitation from Mr. Assad himself and
encouraged by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, she said, is part of a continuing
attempt to sway Bush administration policy on Iraq and the rest of the Middle
East.

In November, the study group recommended that Washington open ties with Iran and
Syria to help stabilize the conflict in Iraq and cool other crises. This month,
a group of Republican lawmakers also visited Damascus, calling on Mr. Bush to
seek a dialogue with the Syrians.

The Bush administration has resisted the idea of opening such a dialogue, citing
its view that the country is a state sponsor of terrorism. It accuses the Syrian
government of providing militants with safe passage into Iraq and of interfering
in Lebanon's politics after its army was forced to leave there in 2005. Syria
denies the accusations.

Syrian officials have seized on the trip to show that their country's isolation
is waning.

European officials and diplomats have ignored United States objections to
meeting with Mr. Assad in recent months, citing many of the reasons Ms. Pelosi
has.

''Everyone knows there are different points of view between Syria and the United
States,'' said Walid al-Muallem, Syria's foreign minister. ''We are happy that
Mrs. Pelosi and her delegation had the courage and determination to bridge these
differences.''

Syria's government-controlled newspapers praised the visit as a milestone.
''Pelosi is in Damascus not because she loves this dear city, but because she is
aware that it is impossible to ignore Syria's role,'' an editorial in the daily
Al Thawrah said. ''Now what remains to be done is for the others who are also
aware of that to awaken from their sleep.''

Marwan al-Kabalan, a professor of political science and media at Damascus
University, said Ms. Pelosi's arrival here may take the pressure off diplomats
and other Western officials seeking to engage Syria.

''This will help give the impression that Syria is no longer isolated in the
world,'' he said. ''So now, you can't ask the Europeans or others not to visit
the Syrians like you used to before.''

Yet many Syrians were left wondering what really changed after Ms. Pelosi's
plane took off from Damascus Wednesday afternoon. Some analysts said they feared
that instead of a grand opening with the United States, Syria had become a pawn
in an domestic dispute between the Democrats and the Republicans.

Ms. Pelosi, who left for Saudi Arabia, took pains at the news conference to
insist that she was not contradicting the Bush administration's actual policies
in the Middle East.

''There is no division on policy between us and President Bush, be it on Israel,
Palestine or Syria,'' she told reporters before leaving Damascus International
Airport. ''As a mother I will exhaust every remedy for peace.''

Some local commentators used that comment as a springboard for criticism of Ms.
Pelosi.

''There was a feeling that this visit had more to do with domestic politics than
us,'' said one, Jihad Yaziji, editor in chief of ''The Syria Report,'' an online
magazine, who attended a dinner in honor of Ms. Pelosi on Tuesday night. ''If
she isn't going to be very different from Bush, then why did she come?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi spoke with President Bashar al-Assad
of Syria yesterday at the Presidential Palace in Damascus. After her meetings,
which included six other House members, she said, ''We came in friendship, hope,
and determined that the road to Damascus is a road to peace.'' (Photo by Hussein
Malla/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HAMAS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (74%); RELIGION (69%); PEACE PROCESS
(69%); ARMED FORCES (50%) United States International Relations; Terrorism;
United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%); HEZBOLLAH (82%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (82%) Hamas;
Islamic Jihad

PERSON: NANCY PELOSI (93%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (93%); EHUD OLMERT (79%); MAHMOUD
AHMADINEJAD (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (68%); TOM LANTOS (59%); HENRY WAXMAN (59%);
NICK J RAHALL II (54%); DAVID L HOBSON (54%); KEITH ELLISON (54%); LOUISE
MCINTOSH SLAUGHTER (54%) Hassan M Fattah; Nancy (Speaker) Pelosi; George W
(Pres) Bush; Bashar Al- (Pres) Assad; Ehud (Prime Min) Olmert; George W (Pres)
Bush

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (94%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); IRAQ (94%); SYRIA (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
UNITED STATES (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
LEBANON (92%); JORDAN (79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Syria; Iraq; Israel; Syria

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              751 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 44 words


A headline on Friday about a planned vote in Congress over the widespread
killing of Armenians by the Ottoman Turkish government early in the 20th century
incorrectly described the killings, in which 1.5 million Armenians died. It was
genocide, not a ''massacre.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%) Correction Stories; Armenians;
United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (55%) George W (Pres) Bush; Robert M (Sec) Gates; Nancy
(Speaker) Pelosi; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (92%); TURKEY (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Turkey; France

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              754 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: 15 Years For Wartime Rapes

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 163 words


The international war crimes tribunal sentenced a former Bosnian Serb
paramilitary commander, Dragan Zelenovic, left, to 15 years in prison for raping
Muslim women during the Serbian seizure of the town of Foca in 1992. One was
just 15 when she was illegally imprisoned and repeatedly raped. Another was gang
raped by 10 men, the court heard. Mr. Zelenovic, who was named in a landmark
indictment that for the first time charged rape and sexual enslavement as a
crime against humanity, was deported from Russia last June after being
discovered in Siberia under a false name. He pleaded guilty in January. The
judges convicted him of personally committing nine rapes in apartments and an
abandoned house in Foca and involvement in three others. ''The scars left by the
sexual assaults were deep and might never heal,'' the presiding judge, Alphons
Orie, said as the sentence was handed down. ''This perhaps more than anything
speaks about the gravity of the crimes in this case.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SEX
OFFENSES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); GUILTY PLEAS (88%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); GENOCIDE (88%); JUDGES (88%); SLAVERY (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); ASSAULT &
BATTERY (73%); PROPERTY VACANCIES (67%) Sentences (Criminal); Sex Crimes; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Dragan Zelenovic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); EUROPE (90%);
NETHERLANDS (89%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (69%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Hague (Netherlands); Foca (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              758 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Orders a Florida School to Allow a Gay Tolerance Club

BYLINE: By TERRY AGUAYO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, April 6


A south-central Florida high school accused of discrimination must officially
recognize a student club that works to promote tolerance of gay men and
lesbians, and grant it the same privileges as other school clubs, while a
lawsuit takes its course in federal court, a judge ordered Friday.

The lawsuit, filed in November by the American Civil Liberties Union, said
officials at Okeechobee High School refused to recognize the club, the
Gay-Straight Alliance, and banned its members from holding meetings on school
grounds.

Officials at the school in Okeechobee, about 90 miles south of Orlando, said the
club was ''sex-based'' and violated the school's abstinence-only education
policy.

But in a preliminary injunction granted on Friday, Judge K. Michael Moore of the
Federal District Court in Miami wrote that there was no evidence to suggest that
the club ''will not dedicate itself to the purposes, such as tolerance, that it
has outlined without involving obscene or explicit sexual material.''

Under the Equal Access Act, public schools that receive federal financial
assistance and have clubs that meet outside class time are required to grant
equal rights to every club. The injunction ''would ensure compliance with
federal law and help protect valued constitutional expressive liberties,'' Judge
Moore wrote.

Rob Rosenwald, an A.C.L.U. lawyer who represents the club's president, Yasmin
Gonzalez, said, ''The school has been sent a clear message that they need to
obey the law and open its doors to its gay and lesbian students immediately.''

Mr. Rosenwald said, ''They need to become part of the solution instead of the
problem.''

David Gibbs, a lawyer for the Okeechobee County School Board, said he had not
yet discussed the judge's order with board members, but thought they would be
satisfied.

''It appears that the judge will hold club members to the limitations they
presented in court that they will not discuss sex or promote sexual acts in
school,'' Mr. Gibbs said. ''I think the concern that club members would discuss
sexual activity in school will be alleviated by this order.''

Ms. Gonzalez, an 18-year-old senior, said, ''Now I'm hoping that they make a big
announcement that they're allowing us to meet there.''

After school officials refused to allow students to go to last year's prom with
same-sex partners, the club was formed at Okeechobee High School in September,
Ms. Gonzalez said. The club has more than 60 members and has met monthly off
school grounds, she said.

About 3,000 Gay-Straight Alliances designed to help gay and straight students
promote tolerance in school exist in high schools nationwide. In the past,
federal courts in several states have ruled in favor of the clubs when schools
have tried to stop their formation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (92%); GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
JUDGES (91%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SEX
EDUCATION (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); INJUNCTIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS (89%);
EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (78%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (78%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (78%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); LAWYERS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(76%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (73%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (73%); REGULATORY
COMPLIANCE (71%) Education and Schools; Homosexuality; Discrimination;
Organizations, Societies and Clubs; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

PERSON: Terry Aguayo; K Michael (Judge) Moore

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (91%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Okeechobee (Fla)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              759 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Ex-President Freed From Prison

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 87 words


Pasteur Bizimungu, a Hutu who was Rwanda's first post-genocide leader, walked
free from prison after serving two years of a 15-year term after a surprise
pardon from his successor, President Paul Kagame, a Tutsi, on the 13th
anniversary of the start of the 1994 genocide. Mr. Bizimungu resigned as
president in 2000 after disputes with the Tutsi-dominated governing party. He
set up a rival party, which the government immediately banned, and was later
charged with illegal political activity and threats to state security.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
PARDONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); AMNESTY (87%);
POLITICS (87%); ANNIVERSARIES (84%) Politics and Government; Hutu Tribe; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Tutsi Tribe; Amnesties and Pardons

PERSON: Pasteur Bizimungu; Paul (Pres) Kagame

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              763 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovo War-Crimes Trial Splits West and Prosecutors

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo


Ramush Haradinaj, a stocky ethnic Albanian former guerrilla commander and,
briefly, Kosovo's prime minister, is either one of the most impressive leaders
to emerge in the Balkans in recent years or a vicious war criminal. Or perhaps
both.

Mr. Haradinaj and two other men began to stand trial at the United Nations
tribunal in The Hague in March, charged with killing 40 people in 1998, during
the conflict between the Kosovo Liberation Army guerrilla group and
Serbian-dominated security forces.

But the prosecution's leading witness, Tahir Zemaj, and his son and nephew were
shot dead during the investigation. Another witness, Kjutim Berisha, died two
weeks before the trial when he was hit by a car in Podgorica, the Montenegrin
capital.

More than a third of those giving evidence for the prosecution are allowed to
conceal their identities, more than in any other case at the tribunal, according
to the prosecution.

The case has created a stark divide between prosecutors at the tribunal and in
Kosovo and diplomats from the United Nations and Western governments. Mr.
Haradinaj was a crucial partner in Western efforts to bring peace to the
province, so much so that they tried to prevent the case from going to trial,
according to a former head of the United Nations mission in Kosovo and the
court's chief prosecutor.

Once he was indicted, the mission supported his provisional release, which has
lasted almost two years; he is the only indicted person that the court, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, has released in order
to return to active politics.

''He moved this process forward in a way that nobody else has,'' said Soren
Jessen-Petersen, who was the head of the mission in Kosovo at the time of Mr.
Haradinaj's indictment, in March 2005, just four months after he became prime
minister.

Prosecutors in Kosovo and The Hague say the United Nations and Western
governments bent over backward to prevent his prosecution.

The tribunal's top prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, has referred to the trial in The
Hague as ''a prosecution that some did not want to see brought, and that few
supported by their cooperation at both the international and local level.''

In Kosovo, the former guerrilla commander is seen as one of the most charismatic
leaders to emerge from the fighting, from 1997 to 1999. While the Serbian
government vilified him as a terrorist, senior United Nations officials said he
was instrumental in promoting reconciliation.

''He clearly understood that Serbs could and should be part of the society,''
said Mr. Jessen-Petersen, who led the mission in Kosovo from June 2004 to June
2006. ''And he had the credentials. Because of his background nobody could
accuse him of betraying Kosovo.''

In March 2004, during rioting across Kosovo, he was credited with preventing
hundreds of rioters from attacking Kosovo's best-known Serbian Orthodox
monastery. United Nations officials say he also helped ensure that a January
2005 visit by Serbia's president, Boris Tadic, passed without incident.

International officials have tried to shield him in the name of stability. For
instance, the United Nations administration in Kosovo repeatedly blocked the
prosecution of Mr. Haradinaj on charges that he had attacked a group of former
fighters of the Kosovo Liberation Army.

The effect of the relationship between the United Nations and Mr. Haradinaj,
according to the prosecution, was to create a sense of impunity around him, and
to scare away witnesses.

''There was a general atmosphere of intimidation; they did nothing to change
this atmosphere,'' said Jean-Daniel Ruche, political adviser to the chief
prosecutor in The Hague.

He said that senior United Nations officials had met with Mr. Haradinaj before
his departure to the Netherlands at the time of his indictment in 2005 and when
he returned there to stand trial. ''This has had a chilling impact on our
witnesses,'' he said in a telephone interview.

The mission denies any detrimental effect on the tribunal.

''In decision after decision,'' wrote a United Nations spokeswoman, Myriam
Dessables, in an e-mail message, the tribunal's judges have ''made it clear that
the United Nations mission in Kosovo is in the best position to determine what
is in the interest of promoting peace and reconciliation in Kosovo.''

The indictment contains details that are among the most gruesome brought before
the tribunal: of prisoners being seized by men under Mr. Haradinaj's command,
bound in barbed wire and dragged behind vehicles, and of women raped repeatedly.

Mr. Haradinaj's supporters say that there is no evidence linking him directly to
the crimes and suggest that the court charged him simply to appear evenhanded.

As Mr. Haradinaj's indictment loomed in early 2005, Mr. Jessen-Petersen said he
was aware that Western diplomats were trying to block the case. But he
emphasized the mission in Kosovo had made no approaches to the court.

The mission, however, stopped at least one prosecution of Mr. Haradinaj within
Kosovo, according to two former members of Kosovo's Justice Department.

On July 7, 2000, Mr. Haradinaj led a group of men to a rival family's house in
the village of Strelc in western Kosovo. A battle broke out, according to police
investigators, and Mr. Haradinaj was wounded by a grenade. He was evacuated by
American personnel operating out of the main United States Army base in Kosovo,
and they removed evidence of the shootout from the walls, according to Frederick
Pascoe, a former American police officer serving with the United Nations who
investigated the shooting.

Kamudoni Nyasulu, an international prosecutor in Pec, in northwestern Kosovo,
said that between 2001 and 2004 he repeatedly tried to bring the case to court.

''What I had was sufficient for a case,'' said Mr. Nyasulu said, but he said he
was rebuffed by senior United Nations officials because the case was
''politically sensitive.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A poster of Ramush Haradinaj, a former Kosovo prime minister,
displayed near his home village. (Photo by Filip Horvat for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); EVIDENCE (77%); INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HOMICIDE (77%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); TERRORISM (71%);
SHOOTINGS (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); RIOTS
(60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (83%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (59%); UNITED NATIONS INTERIM ADMINISTRATION MISSION IN KOSOVO
(55%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
(54%) United Nations; International Criminal Court; Kosovo Liberation Army

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Ramush Haradinaj

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%); PODGORICA,
MONTENEGRO (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); ALBANIA (92%); MONTENEGRO (92%)

REGION: Serbia; Kosovo (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              764 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Truth About Darfur

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 36 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Talking Darfur to Death'' (editorial, March 31):

It's pathetic and illuminating that if Darfur had oil, we'd be dashing to stop
the genocide -- absolutely pathetic!Thom StayartDallas, March 31, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%); WAR CRIMES (85%); GENOCIDE (85%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations

PERSON: Thom Stayart

COUNTRY: SUDAN (91%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              766 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 9, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Soldier's Captors Say They Gave List of Demands to Israel

BYLINE: By JENNIFER MEDINA

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, April 8


Hamas militants involved in seizing an Israeli soldier whom they have held
captive for 10 months said over the weekend that they had sent Israeli
officials, through Egyptian mediators, a list of Palestinian prisoners they
would demand released in exchange for freeing him.

Reports in the Israeli news media quote unidentified Israeli government
officials as saying that they had received the list and would review it, but a
spokesman for the prime minister's office would not confirm the reports.

A spokesman for Hamas, Fawzi Barhoum, said that the list was a sign of progress
in the release of the soldier, Cpl. Gilad Shalit, who was captured by Hamas and
two other militant groups in a raid into Israel last June.

''The names have been presented to the Egyptian mediators, who in turn have
presented it to the Israeli side,'' Mr. Barhoum said Sunday. ''There is a clear
progress in the fact a list of names has been presented.''

The list of about 450 names, according to the news reports, included Marwan
Barghouti, a grass-roots leader of the Fatah faction and former leader of the
Tanzim, a Fatah militia, in the West Bank. He was sentenced in 2002 to five life
sentences for his role in the deaths of four Israelis and a foreigner. The list
also reportedly included Ahmed Saadat, the leader of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, who is accused of coordinating the assassination of an
Israeli tourism minister in 2001.

The Palestinian Authority information minister, Mustafa Barghouti, a distant
relation of Marwan Barghouti, said on Saturday that ''practical measures'' to
begin a prisoner exchange with Israel had begun.

''The Palestinians have done all they can regarding this case, and the ball is
now in the Israeli court,'' Mustafa Barghouti said. ''Israel will now decide how
quick the prisoners and Shalit will return home. If the Israeli government is
serious in its intentions, it must seize the opportunity to end this chapter.''

The Israeli government is always reluctant to release prisoners who have been
convicted of killing Israelis. Israel Radio reported on Sunday that Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert would convene a meeting with his security cabinet this week
to discuss the standards to determine how Palestinian prisoners could be
released in a deal to free Corporal Shalit.

In an interview with Army Radio, Issac Herzog, the social service minister and a
member of the security cabinet, said the government would consider being
flexible, but cautioned that a deal was not imminent. ''Regarding the
negotiations, I think we should use original thinking,'' he said. ''I understand
there has been progress compared to what we have seen until now. Nevertheless, I
would refrain from celebrating just yet.''

The news of the list comes just days after news reports that Corporal Shalit had
received a pair of eyeglasses sent to him by his father. But Israeli officials
said they had no confirmation. On Sunday, Burham Hammad, the Egyptian security
envoy in Gaza, denied the news reports, saying they were ''nothing but
speculation.''

Egypt has spent several months trying to hammer out a deal to release Corporal
Shalit, but has apparently been blocked by disagreements over the type and
number of prisoners to be exchanged, and the order in which they and the Israeli
soldier would be released. Talks of the imminent release of Corporal Shalit have
surfaced before. In December, Hamas members said that he could be released
''very soon.''

Given Marwan Barghouti's high profile in the intifada that began in 2000, it
would be especially difficult for Israel to release him. Gideon Ezra, a member
of the majority coalition in Parliament and former deputy director of the
Israeli secret service, had said several months ago that the government should
consider releasing Mr. Barghouti in order to empower Mahmoud Abbas, the
Palestinian president and Fatah leader, over Hamas, with which Fatah shares the
new unity government. But the situation has changed significantly since then, he
said in a telephone interview Sunday.

''There is a Palestinian unity government that has to be dealt with, and I am
not sure what the best solution is,'' he said. ''I am sure the leadership in
Israel will consider very carefully to know who, when and how prisoners will be
released.''

Israel has released prisoners in exchange for captured soldiers in the past --
most recently in 2004. As of last November, Israel had 9,075 Palestinians in
custody, including 345 minors, according to the independent Israeli human rights
group B'Tselem.

Also on Sunday, a Palestinian teenager stabbed two Israeli border policemen in
the West Bank city of Hebron, near the Tomb of the Patriarchs, and was then shot
by another Israeli officer. An Israeli Army spokesman said that the youth, who
is 17, approached the officers with a knife near a checkpoint there. He had
moderately serious wounds in his leg, Israeli officials said. An army spokesman
said that one of the policemen had moderately severe wounds in his abdomen.

Tensions in Hebron have risen in the last several weeks as Jewish settlers took
over a house there, which they say was legally purchased, but were ordered to
evacuate later this month. The tomb, thought to be the burial ground of Abraham,
also contains a mosque and is a holy site for Jews and Muslims. A popular site
for pilgrims, it is closed to Muslim worshipers during the Passover holiday,
which ends Monday night.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Israeli soldier's captors want Israel to free Marwan
Barghouti, shown in 2002, among others. (Photo by Eitan
Hess-Ashkenazi/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL FATAH (90%); PALESTINE
LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); SENTENCING (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); GOVERNMENT TOURIST OFFICES (72%); CULTURE
DEPARTMENTS (71%); LITIGATION (71%); HOMICIDE (71%) Palestinians; Assassinations
and Attempted Assassinations

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); PALESTINE LIBERATION FRONT (82%) Hamas; Fatah;
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (59%) Jennifer Medina; Gilad (Cpl) Shalit; Marwan Barghouti;
Ahmed Saadat

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); EGYPT (94%)

REGION: Israel; West Bank; Israel; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              768 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 10, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Objections Lead U.N. to Delay Genocide Exhibit

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 354 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 9


The United Nations dismantled an exhibit on the Rwandan genocide and postponed
its scheduled opening by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on Monday after the
Turkish mission objected to references to the Armenian genocide in Turkey at the
time of World War I.

The panels of graphics, photos and statements had been installed in the visitors
lobby on Thursday by the British-based Aegis Trust. The trust campaigns for the
prevention of genocide and runs a center in Kigali, the Rwandan capital,
memorializing the 500,000 victims of the massacres there 13 years ago.

Hours after the show was assembled, however, a Turkish diplomat spotted
offending words in a section entitled ''What is genocide?'' and raised
objections.

The passage said that ''following World War I, during which one million
Armenians were murdered in Turkey,'' Raphael Lemkin, a Polish lawyer credited
with coining the word genocide, ''urged the League of Nations to recognize
crimes of barbarity as international crimes.''

James Smith, the chief executive of Aegis, said he was told by the United
Nations on Saturday night that the sentence would have to be eliminated or the
exhibition would be struck.

Armen Martirosyan, the Armenian ambassador, said he sought out Kiyotaka Akasaka,
the United Nations under secretary general for public information, and thought
he had reached an agreement to let the show go forward by omitting the words
''in Turkey.''

But Mr. Akasaka said, ''That was his suggestion, and I agreed only to take it
into account in finding the final wording.''

Baki Ilkin, the ambassador of Turkey, said, ''We just expressed our discomfort
over the text's making references to the Armenian issue and drawing parallels
with the genocide in Rwanda.''

There were widespread killings of Armenians by Ottoman Turks during several
years beginning in 1915 in which an estimated 1.5 million died, but Turkey has
always vehemently denied claims of genocide.

Mr. Smith said he was ''very disappointed because this was supposed to talk
about the lessons drawn from Rwanda and point up that what is happening in
Darfur is the cost of inaction.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EXHIBITIONS (90%); WORLD WAR I (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); MURDER (54%); EXECUTIVES
(52%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Armenians

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations; Aegis Trust

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (88%) Warren Hoge; Ban Ki-Moon (Sec Gen)

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%); ARMENIA (96%); RWANDA (94%); SUDAN (79%)

REGION: Rwanda; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              770 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Mosque Raid Sets Off Sunnis In Iraq's Capital

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN; Ahmad Fadam and Qais Mizher contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1105 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, April 10


Sunni militants and residents of the Baghdad neighborhood of Fadhil fought a
fierce daylong battle with the Iraqi Army and American soldiers on Tuesday in
what appeared to be the most sustained confrontation since the start of the
security plan to calm violence in the capital.

The battle left seven people dead, three insurgents and four Iraqi soldiers, and
wounded 16 United States soldiers, according to a statement from the American
military. Two Iraqi Army soldiers and one child were also wounded, the statement
said.

But neighborhood residents reported far higher fatalities and said local gunmen
had destroyed five Iraqi Army Humvees. The fighting damaged an Apache
helicopter, the United States military said.

The fighting started after the Iraqi Army raided a mosque and killed two men,
according to residents contacted by phone and a Sunni religious group. Residents
said the gun battle began near the mosque in an area with many warehouses and
continued in a residential neighborhood.

While violence has hit many of the capital's neighborhoods during the first
eight weeks of the Baghdad security plan, clashes have been shorter, generally
lasting no more than several hours. Some suicide bombings have been deadlier. In
the Dora neighborhood, prolonged fighting, which erupts almost nightly between
militants and sometimes includes Iraqi Army and American forces, has also taken
a large toll.

The confrontation in Fadhil pit Iraqi security forces, backed by American
soldiers, against armed militants backed by local residents.

The largely Sunni Arab neighborhood of Fadhil is on the predominantly Shiite
eastern side of Baghdad. Shiite militias had tried to dominate the neighborhood
and surrounding area starting more than a year ago.

In response, residents of Fadhil organized a local guard patrol. But insurgents
came into the area and, following a pattern seen throughout Sunni Arab areas of
Baghdad, the neighborhood patrol gradually merged with the insurgency.

Now many people, including most journalists, avoid the Fadhil area because they
fear the Sunni insurgents operating there. The residents contacted for this
article were reached by phone, both because the neighborhood is dangerous and
because areas of fighting are routinely sealed off by the military.

Fighting began Tuesday just past dawn, when the Iraqis and the Americans
cordoned off part of the neighborhood and began searching for militants,
according to local residents and the American military in a written statement.

The Iraqi Army raided a mosque and killed two men in front of other worshipers
at the early morning prayers, according to the residents and the Muslim Scholars
Association, a hard-line Sunni religious group, which quoted witnesses' reports.
The American military said it had no information about any killings in the
mosque.

''One of those killed was named Sheik Saif; he was the muezzin,'' said Qais
Ahmed, 36, a day laborer, who lives near the mosque. The muezzin is the person
who calls the faithful to prayer from a mosque's loudspeakers and often is a
well-known figure in the neighborhood.

''Then, the locals took their guns and went out to fight the Iraqi Army and the
police in reaction to these executions,'' he said.

American troops, who were nearby to back up the Iraqis, came in to help them and
called for air support, according to a written statement from the American
military in Baghdad. An Apache helicopter was hit by small-arms fire and dropped
a rocket casing, the American statement said.

Mr. Ahmed said that the fighting had raged almost without stopping and that when
he opened his door late in the day he found bullets, broken glass and blood on
the sidewalk. But, he added, his neighborhood had done some damage to the Iraqi
Army, using homemade bombs to burn five Iraqi Army Humvees.

Reports of the loss of life varied widely.

At day's end, Mr. Ahmed said he went to one of the two mosques where bodies of
the neighborhood dead were laid out and counted 36 people, including women and
children.

Other residents reported that there were at least 23 dead. Several reported that
they were unable to transport wounded people to the hospital because they feared
that the military would take the wounded into custody on the grounds that they
were insurgents, and would arrest those carrying them as well.

The Muslim Scholars Association said it condemned the killing of civilians and
especially of women and children. ''The civilians of this district call for the
free world and human rights organizations to stop this massacre that does not
differentiate between men and women and children,'' the group said. ''They call
for relief and for help with their injuries.''

A Black Hawk helicopter was also hit by small-arms fire on Tuesday in central
Baghdad, according to a statement from the United States military in Baghdad. It
was unclear whether the attack on the Black Hawk was also related to the Fadhil
fighting. There were no casualties from the attack, the military said in a
written statement.

Nine unidentified bodies were found in Baghdad on Monday, according to an
official at the Ministry of Interior.

Also in Baghdad, a suicide bomber killed five people, the Interior Ministry
official said.

Four American soldiers died on Monday, the United States military announced in a
statement on Tuesday. Three were hit by a roadside bomb and a second explosion
in the southern part of Baghdad, and the fourth was killed in Anbar Province in
western Iraq, the statement said.

In Muqtadiya, a town in Diyala Province about 50 miles from Baghdad, a woman
blew herself up, killing 17 men applying to become members of the police force,
news agencies reported.

Lt. Col. Michael Donnelly of the 25th Infantry Division in Diyala said that the
military counted nine dead, but that fatalities were typically inaccurate in the
first 24 hours after an attack. He called the attack ''another weak attempt by
the enemy to break the will of the people.''

Colonel Donnelly added that the woman's explosive vest was stuffed with ball
bearings and that those killed and wounded were aspiring Iraqi police officers
and bystanders.

A guard at the police recruiting station and police officials said that the
woman hid her suicide vest under an abbaya, a long dress frequently worn by
Iraqi women. News agencies reported that the explosion wounded 33 people in the
majority Sunni Arab town.

Suicide bombings by women are rare, with the last one happening in Baghdad at
the Baratha mosque on April 7, 2006. In that case there were three suicide
bombers, including one woman.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); RELIGION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); BOMBINGS (78%); PARAMILITARY
& MILITIA (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (76%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); WRITERS (62%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Bombs and
Explosives; Terrorism

PERSON: Alissa J Rubin

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Diyala Province (Iraq); Anbar Province (Iraq);
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              776 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Militia Talks Could Reshape Conflict in Darfur

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1634 words

DATELINE: ABECHE, Chad


The two rebels sitting together on a dry riverbed could just as easily have been
sworn enemies, perched on opposite sides of an abyss that has cleaved their
homeland in two.

But their talks on a military alliance of Arab and non-Arab tribes in Darfur
could radically reshape the conflict, giving new life to rebel groups that have
fought Khartoum for more than four years and undermining the government's use of
Arab militias to quell the rebellion.

Adam Shogar, a commander of the Sudan Liberation Army, the non-Arab rebels at
the center of the Darfur conflict, stretched a coal-black arm at Yassine Yousef
Abdul Rahman, his copper-skinned, brown-eyed counterpart from an Arab insurgent
group, studying him carefully with midnight eyes.

''We are brothers for Darfur,'' Mr. Shogar said. ''We are in the same struggle
for our rights.''

The meeting of the two men took place here in eastern Chad recently, where
representatives of the main rebel groups fighting the government and its allied
tribal militias in Darfur have gathered to try to join forces, either to
negotiate a settlement to the crisis in Darfur or to mount a decisive offensive
against the government.

''The government fear is if the Darfur Arabs unify and move against them, that
is a decisive switch in the balance of power,'' said Alex de Waal, a Sudan
scholar at Justice Africa, a research institution in London, who has studied
Darfur for decades. ''Should they shift against the government, then the
government is in deep trouble.''

The struggle in Darfur has often been portrayed as one between Arabs and black
Africans, nomads and farmers, with the former bent on slaughtering the latter.
But the conflict has never been that simple.

In many ways, Darfur's Arab tribes have the same grievances as the African
farmers and the same suspicion that Sudan's central government in Khartoum views
them as marginal and expendable. And they fear that the government is trying to
scapegoat them as the sole authors of the killing in Darfur as the International
Criminal Court begins indicting suspects for war crimes.

Here in eastern Chad, where the intertribal violence gripping Darfur has spilled
over, Arab tribes have found themselves victims of non-Arab militias armed by
Chad's government, according to tribal leaders.

The complex and shifting role of Arab tribes in both Sudan and Chad underscores
how difficult it will be to secure a political solution to the four-year-old
crisis that has sent 2.3 million people fleeing their homes, killed at least
200,000 -- some say as many as 400,000 -- and set off a broad conflict in one of
the most unstable parts of the world.

The main perpetrators of some of the worst atrocities have been
government-sponsored Arab militias that have come to be known by a local epithet
for bandits, janjaweed.

The Sudanese government turned to these militias as a kind of counterinsurgency
force because its own military, weakened by a long civil war in the south and
made up largely of non-Arab recruits, could not be relied on to crush the
rebellion among non-Arab tribes in Darfur.

While some Arab tribal leaders, notably Musa Hilal and Ali Kushayb, heeded this
call, most did not, and instead remained on the sidelines, Mr. de Waal and other
Sudan experts said. Arab leaders in Darfur say that fewer than a quarter of its
tribesmen took up arms against their non-Arab neighbors.

Furthermore, the relationship between the central government, dominated by three
small Arab tribes living along the Nile, and Darfur's Arabs, who claim a
heritage going back to the Prophet Muhammad, is often antagonistic. Darfur's
Arabs have long been the stalwarts of the main opposition Umma Party, perhaps
the largest and most popular political party in northern Sudan.

A boom-and-bust cycle of livestock herding has often left Darfur's Arabs
destitute, especially during the great droughts of the 1970s and '80s. An
ancient land tenure system controlled by the farm-based non-Arab tribes has led
to conflicts between nomads and settled tribes for centuries, but traditionally
these disputes have been resolved through mediation.

That system broke down in the 1980s and '90s, as the government sought to
exercise greater control over Darfur. Political and traditional leaders at the
state and tribal level were replaced by Arab candidates closer to the
government.

But Arabs in the region have also suffered in the Darfur conflict. Some of their
traditional migration routes, which they have traversed for hundreds of years,
have been cut off by the fighting, forcing some nomads to become sedentary.

''The suffering of Arab nomads in this conflict has been completely ignored,''
said Mohammed El Sayed Hassan, director of Al Massar, a charity that helps
nomads in North Darfur. ''For centuries we have had friendship and exchange with
the Fur people and other African tribes. Now we are seen as killers.''

Indeed, nomads and farmers have depended on each other for centuries to survive
on some of the world's most forbidding terrain. Farmers allowed herders to
traverse their lands, and the herders brought milk and meat. They also
transported farm goods to markets, and traded durable goods not usually
available in remote farming villages. The farmers bartered those items for
vegetables and grain.

''The economic relationships between the Arabs and their non-Arab neighbors have
been very close,'' Mr. de Waal said. ''Given enough time they are likely to make
common cause against the government.''

The government has faced this sort of challenge before: a militia it armed to
fight the rebels in the civil war in the south eventually joined the rebels,
forcing the government to accept a cease-fire. Militias from South Darfur that
fought in the southern civil war were also blamed by the government for the
slaving raids that were the signature atrocity of that conflict. Those militias
were so angry at the betrayal that they refused to fight for the government in
Darfur, Mr. de Waal said.

The rapprochement between the Arab and non-Arab militias in Darfur is part of a
longstanding pattern of occasional alliances of convenience between the Arab
rulers in Khartoum and the Arab tribes of Darfur giving way to the reality that
the various tribes of Darfur need one other more than they need the government.

But even as the relationship between tribes begins to shift, slowly, back toward
its traditional balance in Darfur, Chad is descending deeper into interethnic
conflict.

Arab tribes here say they have suffered reprisal attacks by non-Arab militias.
Around Goz Beida, a town south east of Abeche and a good 60 miles from the
Sudanese border, interethnic violence has driven out tens of thousands of
people, most of them black Africans living in squalid, makeshift camps.

The Chadian government has blamed Sudan for this violence, but local officials
say that while Sudanese Arab militias have been deeply implicated in
cross-border raids closer to the porous frontier, much of the violence is
between Arab and non-Arab Chadians.

Said Brahim, who until recently was the sultan of Dar Silla, a region of eastern
Chad that is home to a combustible mix of tribes, said that intertribal violence
is exacting a terrible toll. He is a member of the non-Arab Dadjo tribe, but at
a recent meeting with United Nations officials he brought a prominent Arab
sheik, El Mahdi al-Samani of the Heimat tribe.

A tall, courtly man dressed in a flowing yellow robe and matching embroidered
skullcap, Mr. Brahim spoke in impeccable French, bemoaning the divisions that
were tearing his community apart.

''Are politics going to destroy centuries of friendship?'' he asked. ''The
picture is so bleak that I cannot even tell you how bad things are getting.''

The two wizened men described the violence that has enveloped their communities.
In all, 140,000 Chadians have been displaced in interethnic fighting in the past
year, the vast majority from Dadjo and other non-Arab tribes. Mr. Samani said 10
villages of Arab families have been displaced in the latest fighting, fleeing
toward Darfur against the advance of Dadjo militias.

Mr. Brahim said that he surrendered his position of sultan to his son under
pressure from the Chadian government because he opposed the government policy of
arming Dadjo militias to fight Arab militias from Sudan and Chad. Senior Western
diplomats confirmed that this arming was taking place.

Like Sudan's army, Chad's military is stretched thin by its efforts to fight
several rebel groups based in Sudan that are trying to overthrow President
Idriss Deby of Chad. Arming local militias is seen as an expedient way of
dealing with border security problems, but the experiences of Darfur and the
civil war in southern Sudan have shown that once militias are unleashed, they
are nearly impossible to control, experts say.

Beyond that, Chad, like Sudan, has now rejected a United Nations peacekeeping
force on its soil, saying it will accept only police officers, not troops.

In Darfur, the loyalty and obedience of janjaweed militias are highly suspect.
Mr. Rahman and his fellow fighters said that many Arabs felt betrayed by the
government and would not stand down even if Khartoum ordered them to do so.

Avoiding all-out war by negotiating a new political settlement has been the main
diplomatic objective over the past few months. John Holmes, the United Nations
under secretary general for humanitarian affairs, who just completed a tour of
the Darfur region, said that one of the most important messages he plans to
bring to the Security Council is the complexity of the conflict here.

''It is not simply Arab versus African, nomad versus farmer,'' Mr. Holmes said.
''It is a political problem, and it needs a political solution.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: ''We are brothers for Darfur,'' Adam Shogar, a commander of the
Sudan Liberation Army, says of the Arab and non-Arab militia groups.
 Thousands of displaced people trying to escape the fighting along the
Chad-Sudan border have taken shelter at a refugee camp near Goz Beida.
(Photographs by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. 4)  Map of Chad
highlighting Abeche: Tens of thousands of people near Abeche have been driven
out. (pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (72%);
POLITICS (72%); INDICTMENTS (69%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (69%); FARMERS & RANCHERS
(66%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (65%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%);
GENOCIDE (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and
Government; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (88%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (95%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              782 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Driving Up the Price of Blood

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 757 words


Perhaps the most surprising thing about President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan
isn't that he has presided over the systematic slaughter of hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children who are members of black African tribes.

It is that President Bashir's own family appears to come from an African tribe.
Yes, Mr. Bashir has led a genocide against people like himself.

As best I can establish from my contacts in Sudan, Mr. Bashir's grandfather was
from the Falata tribe and grew up in Nigeria. He migrated to Sudan to work on
the Gezira irrigation project and settled in a village called Um Audam.

Then the grandfather was killed in a dispute, and Mr. Bashir's father and
grandmother moved to Hash Banaga in the Arab north. Mr. Bashir grew up speaking
Arabic, so in that sense he is Arab -- but by heritage he is Falata and a black
African.

Americans often misunderstand genocide, assuming it is impossible to stop
because it is driven by millenniums of racial or ethnic hatreds. But
historically genocide has mostly been rooted in cool, calculated decisions by
national leaders that the most convenient way to solve a problem or stay in
power is to scapegoat and destroy a particular group. So it has been in most
past genocides, and so it is again in Darfur.

Nor is Mr. Bashir the only person in such a position. The on-and-off leader of
the janjaweed militias, Musa Hilal, has unleashed his soldiers with particular
brutality on another black African tribe, the Zaghawa. You can drive for hours
through Zaghawa regions of Darfur where every single village has been burned;
only corpses are left, and some of those have been stuffed into wells to poison
them.

Yet, according to people from Musa Hilal's hometown, his own mother is Zaghawa.

Likewise, the rebels of Darfur have sometimes turned on their own tribes --
raping and murdering their own people, or those of allied tribes.

So what motivates these people? Not ancient hatreds, but greed. They are not
Taliban-style extremists, but rather amoral, ruthless, calculating opportunists.

Mr. Bashir and others in his government faced a genuine problem back in 2003:
African tribes (including the Zaghawa) were staging a rebellion in Darfur.
Calling in the army to fight the rebels was problematic because many soldiers in
the regular army are from African tribes in Darfur and might not be reliable in
combat against their brethren.

So Mr. Bashir adopted an approach he had already used against rebels in southern
Sudan. He armed irregular militias and gave them license to wipe out civilians
and depopulate large areas. This would deprive the rebels of their base of
support and send a warning to any other tribe in Sudan that might contemplate a
rebellion.

Presumably Mr. Bashir guessed that foreigners might not like the idea of mass
murder. But he could deny visas to prying journalists, and he had Chinese
diplomatic protection at the United Nations.

So after weighing the pros and cons, Mr. Bashir decided that genocide was the
simplest counterinsurgency method. Some of the marauders were driven by
prejudice, and Arab attackers routinely shouted racial epithets against blacks.
But the leaders ---- they were just cynics. Musa Hilal and some of the rebel
commanders seemed to view murder and rape simply as paths to accumulate power
and livestock.

All this makes genocide easier to stop than people imagine. Where it arises from
a weighing of costs and benefits, then it is possible for outsiders to impose
additional costs and change the outcome. That's what we need to do. The U.S.
should lead other countries in pushing hard on all sides for a negotiated peace
agreement among the warring factions, for that is ultimately the best hope to
end the slaughter in Darfur and in neighboring areas in Chad and the Central
African Republic.

I find President Bashir's ruthlessness pretty easy to understand. What is harder
to fathom is President Bush's refusal to stand up to the genocide for four
years. Why not impose a no-fly zone, why not hold an international conference on
Darfur, why not invite survivors to the White House for a photo-op, why not give
a prime-time speech about Darfur?

Perhaps the explanation for Mr. Bush's passivity is the same as the explanation
for Mr. Bashir's brutality. Maybe Mr. Bush has made his calculations, looked at
the number of calls and letters he gets about Darfur, weighed the pros and cons,
and decided that Americans really don't care enough about genocide to make him
pay a major price for allowing it to continue.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMIES (88%); ARMED FORCES
(86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); POISONINGS (69%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (61%);
IRRIGATION (55%) Public Opinion; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); NIGERIA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              783 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turks and Armenians, Still Not Eye to Eye

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 339 words


To the Editor:

''Turkey and the U.N.'s Cover-Up'' (editorial, April 13) reflects only the
Armenian version of the events of 1915.

There is no explanation as to how and why these sad events took place in eastern
Anatolia. There is also no reference to those Turks who were mass-murdered by
Armenian bands during that time. Those tragic events took place in time of war,
and both populations suffered extensively.

As such, describing these events as ''genocide'' is unacceptable. Indeed, if it
had been a ''genocide,'' how was it possible for the Armenians living in other
parts of the Ottoman Empire to survive? In fact, there is still a large Armenian
Turkish minority in Istanbul that enriches our cultural diversity.

If the Armenian authorities are certain of their accusations, then they should
be able to accept Turkey's proposal to set up a joint historians' commission,
including those from third countries, to examine all the available documents and
to reach a public decision on what really happened.

Turkey has nothing to cover up. We are ready and willing to face the history. We
expect the same from the Armenian side.  Baki Ilkin  Permanent Representative
Turkish Mission to the U.N. New York, April 13, 2007  To the Editor:

The Armenian community commends you for properly characterizing the Armenian
genocide and portraying with clarity the lengths Turkey will go to just to
prevent discussion of this fact of world history.

It is not enough that Turkey, an aspirant to the European Union, prosecutes its
citizens for discussing the crimes and threatens to retaliate against countries
that acknowledge the Armenian genocide. It has shown the world that honoring the
memory of the 800,000 murdered Rwandans is much less important than imposing its
revisionism at the United Nations.

As you point out, the resulting embarrassment seems not to faze Ankara. It is
too busy figuring out new ways to sweep history under the rug.  Bryan Ardouny
Executive Director Armenian Assembly of America Washington, April 13, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HISTORY (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%);
EUROPEAN UNION (50%) Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%) Baki (Amb) Ilkin; Bryan Ardouny; Ban Ki-Moon (Sec Gen)

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (96%); TURKEY (95%); RWANDA (91%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Turkey; Rwanda; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              788 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Presses Sudan on Darfur, Citing Possible U.S. Sanctions

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Warren Hoge contributed reporting from the
United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


President Bush invoked the powerful imagery of the Holocaust on Wednesday to
intensify pressure on Sudan, warning that the United States would impose stiff
economic sanctions and seek others from the United Nations if President Omar
Hassan al-Bashir does not bring a quick end to the brutal violence in Darfur.

''The time for promises is over -- President Bashir must act,'' Mr. Bush said,
speaking at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. ''The world needs to
act. If President Bashir does not meet his obligations to the United States of
America, we'll act.''

But Mr. Bush stopped short of imposing sanctions immediately, a step that people
inside and outside the administration who have been working on the issue said he
had been prepared to take just days ago.

In the end, officials said, Mr. Bush bowed to pleas from the United Nations
secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, who called Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
on Tuesday to ask for more time to negotiate with Mr. Bashir. Mr. Ban also
raised the issue directly with the president last week. The White House made it
clear that Mr. Bush was skeptical that those negotiations would succeed.

''He's very frustrated about this,'' one senior administration official said of
Mr. Bush, speaking on the condition of anonymity in order to discuss internal
deliberations. ''We've seen a pattern of agreements made and never carried out,
commitments to facilitate made and what we get is obstruction.''

Mr. Bush has been trying to come up with a way to end what his administration
has said it regards as genocide in Darfur, in western Sudan, where 200,000
people have been killed and more than 2.5 million displaced. His comments on
Wednesday were the sharpest in a string of American warnings to the government
in Khartoum over the past year.

He said he would give Mr. Bashir ''a short period of time'' -- Mr. Bush was not
specific, but administration officials put the time frame at several weeks -- to
agree to a full deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces; to end his
support for the janjaweed, the militias that have been carrying out systematic
killings of civilians in Darfur; and to allow aid to reach the region.

If Mr. Bashir does not comply, Mr. Bush said that he would direct the Treasury
Department to block any dollar transactions between the Sudanese government and
the United States, and to bar 29 Sudanese companies from doing business here. He
said he would also impose sanctions against individuals responsible for the
violence and direct Ms. Rice to seek new United Nations sanctions.

Some of the advocates for peace in Darfur, who have long criticized the
administration for inaction, expressed severe disappointment that he did not
take stronger action. Still, some said the specter of the president laying out a
specific plan for sanctions against Sudan to an audience of Holocaust survivors
-- including Elie Wiesel, an author and Nobel Peace Prize winner -- signaled a
new level of intensity.

''The president has now embarked on a new phase,'' Mr. Wiesel said after the
speech. Asked if he thought the action was too late, he said: ''I am a Jew who
believes in daily miracles. When such a miracle occurs, rather than saying 'Why
so late?' I am thankful that it is done.''

Bush administration officials said last month that they were fed up with Sudan's
refusal to permit the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in the country
and that the president was ready to impose the kind of sanctions he outlined
Wednesday. Andrew S. Natsios, the United States special envoy to Sudan, recently
shared the proposal -- which the administration calls Plan B -- with the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.

Then, on Monday, Sudan announced that it had dropped its objections to letting a
3,000-member United Nations force of military police officers and six attack
helicopters into Darfur. The move, the second stage of a process aimed at
getting a total force of 21,000 peacekeepers into the region, came just as a
confidential United Nations study found that Sudan was flying arms and heavy
equipment into Darfur in planes painted white, apparently to masquerade as
United Nations jets.

Those developments, coupled with the pleas from Mr. Ban, forced the White House
on Tuesday to reconsider Mr. Bush's long-planned speech. Officials were still
working out the precise language Tuesday evening.

Mr. Ban, in Rome on an official visit, said through a spokeswoman that he
appreciated Mr. Bush's statement. And at the United Nations, ambassadors from
China, Russia and South Africa said the Sudanese announcement persuaded them
that this was not the time for sanctions.

''Why do we have to be so negative?'' said Vitaly I. Churkin, the Russian
ambassador.

Mr. Bush has been under political pressure from human rights advocates at home
to act. But the speech came as a shock to the advocates, who had been advised
earlier in the week by the State Department and the White House Office of
Political Affairs that they would like what they heard.

Even so, Larry Rossin, an official with the Save Darfur Coalition, an umbrella
group representing an alliance of faith-based and advocacy organizations, said
he was heartened that the president had put Plan B in his own words.

''Plan B, which has been around for months but has always been kind of hidden,
is now public,'' he said, ''and it's not merely public out of the mouth of
Andrew Natsios, but it's out of the mouth of the president of the United States
before a bunch of Holocaust survivors, and us. It's on the record now, and they
are on the hook.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (72%); FINES &
PENALTIES (58%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (56%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (89%); BAN KI-MOON (88%) Sheryl
Gay Stolberg; George W (Pres) Bush; Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir; Ban Ki-Moon
(Sec Gen); Condoleezza (Sec) Rice

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              789 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

No More Delay on Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 333 words


Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, attaches as little value to the
promises he makes to the international community as he does to the lives of the
many thousands of people who are being murdered in Darfur. A newly disclosed
United Nations report highlights his brazen duplicity, describing how the
Sudanese government painted false U.N. insignia on an air force plane being used
to deliver bombs to Darfur.

After months of threats President Bush proposed a package of economic sanctions
on Mr. Bashir's Sudan yesterday and called for an expanded Security Council arms
embargo. He also raised the possibility of the international community's
imposing a military no-flight-zone over Darfur to block aircraft from bombing
and strafing villages.

Tougher American sanctions -- and tougher action from the Security Council --
are long overdue. Unfortunately, Mr. Bush decided to delay them further to give
the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, more time to try to cut a
deal with Sudan to admit an international peacekeeping force that may be too
small to stop the killing.

Mr. Bashir has a record of making only the most limited concessions and then
violating agreements with impunity. And Mr. Ban has an unfortunate habit of
taking Mr. Bashir at his word. The immediate application of tougher American
sanctions would have usefully strengthened Mr. Ban's hand.

This crisis will not end without a large and well-armed peacekeeping force -- to
protect civilians and desperately needed aid workers -- and that is exactly what
Mr. Bashir has not agreed to. Khartoum and Darfur's rebel groups also need to be
pressured and shepherded into a political agreement that can ensure enough
stability so the peacekeepers can eventually be withdrawn.

More than four years into Darfur's nightmare, at least 200,000 people are dead
and more than 2.5 million displaced, and the numbers are climbing. If the
millions of lives still at risk are to be saved, there is no time for further
delay.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (94%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (93%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (79%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%);
BOMBINGS (76%); AIR FORCES (76%); ARMS TRADE (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (71%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); ARMS
EMBARGOES (70%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Embargoes and Economic Sanctions; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%) United
Nations; Security Council (Un)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (77%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              791 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bombings Leave Moroccans Both Worried and Confused

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: CASABLANCA, Morocco, April 20


In just over a month, six young men have blown themselves up in Morocco, causing
intense worry in a nation that has largely escaped local terrorism.

But apart from the bombers themselves, only one person was killed -- a blessing
but also a puzzle.

''I am very happy that they didn't kill anyone else -- no friend and no enemy,''
said Abed Maha, 61, the grieving and baffled father of two men who exploded
themselves near the American Consulate here last Saturday. ''They were the only
victims.''

Nonetheless, deep uncertainties have left the government in a state of ''extreme
alert'' over whether this moderate Muslim society faces a new terrorist threat
against its own government and tourist sites.

In an interview on Thursday, the nation's interior minister, Chakib Benmoussa,
took a careful line, playing down some fears while raising others. So far, he
said, there appeared to be no links between the Morocco bombers and the deadly
attacks last week in Algeria, where militants have formally attached themselves
to Al Qaeda. And in the attack near the American Consulate last Saturday, he
said the bombers seemed to go out of their way to avoid other casualties.

The attack Saturday followed one the previous Tuesday, in which three men blew
themselves up in the Hay Farah district here, and another on March 11, when a
militant blew himself up in a cybercafe.

Mr. Benmoussa said the bombers last week seemed to have come from two groups,
not one, as originally reported here. This means that, within a few days, two
distinct groups showed themselves capable of making powerful suicide belts and
carrying out attacks.

That indicates that the Qaeda ideology, combined with the availability of easy
bomb-making recipes on the Internet, appears to be growing deeper roots here.

Moreover, Mr. Benmoussa said that the main cell uncovered here recently,
comprising some 40 people, wanted to hit government institutions or tourist
sites, even if it had no concrete plans to do so immediately. The three men who
died in the first episode last week were part of that cell, but blew themselves
up in their apartment during a police raid. One policeman was killed.

''We are aware that they will try again and again,'' he said. ''We are now in
some kind of race where we have to remain very vigilant, with a very high level
of security.''

The Morocco suicide bombings last week coincided with two attacks across the
border in Algeria on April 11 that killed 33 people, in the deadliest bombings
there in years. As a result, terrorism experts have begun to worry that Al
Qaeda, which took responsibility for the Algeria attack, is focusing more on
northern Africa.

''Morocco is in a state of extreme alert, and this situation prevails as much in
Casablanca as in other cities and sensitive zones in the country,'' the
communications minister, Nabil Benbdellah, told reporters in Rabat, the capital,
on Wednesday.

The American Consulate in Casablanca has closed amid tightened security at other
consulates, hotels and police stations. Security forces patrol the highways,
searching cars and slowing traffic.

Skeptics say that the government has an interest in minimizing any local
connections with Al Qaeda to avoid scaring away foreign investment and tourism.

Even if the Moroccan bombings were not related to Al Qaeda or the attacks in
Algeria, they nonetheless stand out.

Terrorism experts say that in recent years the focus of Moroccan extremists has
been on recruiting fighters for Iraq, as earlier generations of other militants
went to Afghanistan and Bosnia. Security officials here estimate that 50
Moroccans have gone to Iraq, many as suicide bombers, with two dozen coming from
a single city, Tetouan, in the north.

''The only goal of these cells and the network is to force these regimes to let
them do what they want to do, which is to recruit people for Iraq,'' said
Mohammed Darif, an expert on Islamic terrorist groups at King Hassan II
University here. ''They want to fight there.''

But Mr. Benmoussa said that while groups did exist to recruit for Iraq, the
larger cell uncovered here last week was focused internally. In fact, he said,
investigations show it was a remnant of the group that carried out attacks here
in 2003 that hit foreign hotels and Jewish sites, killing 33 people.

He said that the police began following the group in February, and that police
pressure led to the explosion that killed one militant, apparently by accident,
in the March 11 episode in the cybercafe.

Then, five weeks ago, a group of young men, all from the shantytown of Sidi
Moumen to the city's north, rented a room in Hay Farah. Their landlady, who
would give only her first name, Jamaa, said they had paid $280 in advance for
two months, prompting some suspicion for not disputing the price.

On April 10, the police raided the building and three of the men blew themselves
up, killing one policeman. A fourth man was shot to death.

In contrast to the attacks in Algeria last week, where the bombers used plastic
explosives, the bombs in Casablanca were homemade, of acetone and cleaning
supplies, the authorities said.

Then on Saturday, just before 9 a.m., two men exploded themselves near the
American Consulate and an American-owned language school here.

But the bombs did not go off directly at either place, raising questions about
what the bombers intended. Indeed, despite strong warnings afterward from the
United States Mission about the possibility of new attacks against Americans,
Sean McCormack, a State Department spokesman in Washington, said, ''We don't
know'' if American interests were being singled out.

Mr. Benmoussa said security officials now believed that the Saturday attack was
by a completely different cell: an extremist older brother who recruited his
''normal'' younger brother into a ''spectacular suicide'' completely on their
own.

Confounding usual patterns of attack, he said that surveillance videos suggested
that the men actively tried not to kill others. One approached a guard and then
retreated before exploding himself. A note left behind, he said, protested
injustice in the Middle East, including Iraq.

To some Moroccans, the attack suggested a vague anger, rather than an action
coordinated with outside jihadist groups seeking maximum casualties and
attention.

Apart from their own safety, Moroccans have been debating the complicated causes
that may lurk behind last week's bombings. The elements include anger over the
Iraq war, felt at all levels of society here; the reach of Al Qaeda's jihadist
model; and, above all, how poverty may feed extremism.

Four of the six men who killed themselves lived in poverty in Sidi Moumen; the
bombers in 2003 also came from there. At that time, Morocco promised to enact
measures against poverty and to lift some restrictions on civil rights.

Mr. Benmoussa, the interior minister, said many strides had been made. But
others are not satisfied.

''The answer to extremism is more political openness, more democracy, more human
rights improvement, empowering young people, empowering women,'' said Mustapha
Khalfi, a leader in the moderate Islamist Justice and Development Party, a
growing political force here.

''With this, I think Morocco will win this war,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Sidi Moumen slum, north of Casablanca. Four of the six men
who recently killed themselves lived there, as did the bombers in a 2003 attack.

 A boarded-up apartment in the Hay Farah district, where three men blew
themselves up during a raid last week. One policeman was killed. (Photographs by
Candace Feit for The New York Times)  Map of Morocco highlighting Casablanca:
Officials say Moroccans from Tetouan have gone to fight in Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERVIEWS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(70%); SUICIDE (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%) Bombs and Explosives; Terrorism;
Politics and Government; Travel and Vacations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: Ian Fisher

COUNTRY: MOROCCO (97%); ALGERIA (93%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); AFRICA (79%); IRAQ
(79%)

REGION: Morocco; Morocco

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              792 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 21, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marine Officer to Testify on Iraq Killings in Exchange for Immunity

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 409 words


The officer in immediate command of three marines accused of killing civilians
in a house-to-house attack in Haditha, Iraq, in 2005 has been granted immunity
to testify at his subordinates' military hearings, lawyers involved in the case
said.

In exchange, the officer, First Lt. William T. Kallop, agreed to answer all
questions that prosecution or defense lawyers ask him, the lawyers said. The
immunity granted to Lieutenant Kallop, who gave an order to take control of a
house where several civilians were killed, could bolster the defense of the
three enlisted men charged with murder in the case, lawyers said, because it
would show that they were following orders.

Lieutenant Kallop, 25, is one of at least eight marines granted immunity to
testify about the attack on Nov. 19, 2005, that killed 24 people after the
marines' convoy was struck by a roadside bomb that killed Lance Cpl. Miguel
Terrazas. Four officers also face charges of dereliction of duty for the way
they dealt with the initial report of what happened in Haditha.

Earlier this month, Lt. Gen. James N. Mattis, the Marine officer overseeing the
prosecution of the case, dismissed charges against a fourth enlisted marine,
Sgt. Sanick P. Dela Cruz, 24.

General Mattis granted immunity to Lieutenant Kallop on April 3, days after
lawyers for another marine facing murder charges asked the Marine Corps to grant
immunity to Lieutenant Kallop so he could testify at hearings for the men, said
Kevin B. McDermott, a civilian lawyer for an officer charged in the case. The
grant of immunity was first reported in The Washington Post yesterday.

Several lawyers for the marines charged in the case said the deal strengthened
the arguments of the three enlisted men.

''It's central to the case if an officer is telling marines to take the house,''
said Brian J. Rooney, a civilian lawyer for Lt. Col. Jeffrey R. Chessani, the
highest-ranking officer charged in the case.

Mr. McDermott, who represents Capt. Lucas McConnell, the company commander who
was not present during the killings, said the immunity deal bolstered his
client's case.

''If the government's not going to charge the lieutenant that was at the scene
and gave the order to clear the house,'' Mr. McDermott said, ''I don't know how
he's not in the same boat as McConnell.''

At least seven other marines have also been granted immunity to testify at
preliminary hearings scheduled for next month, lawyers said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMUNITY (95%); LAWYERS (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS
(90%); TESTIMONY (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(89%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); LITIGATION (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); MURDER (73%); IMPROVISED
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%)
United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Immunity From Prosecution

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (54%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (74%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (54%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (54%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (54%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (54%)

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; William T (First Lt) Kallop

COUNTRY: IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              794 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Military Cites 'Negligence' in Aftermath of Iraq Killings

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 937 words


A military investigation has found that senior Marine Corps commanders in Iraq
showed a routine disregard for the lives of Iraqi civilians that contributed to
a ''willful'' failure to investigate the killing of 24 unarmed Iraqis by marines
in 2005, lawyers involved in the case said.

The report, completed last summer but never made public, also found that a
Marine Corps general and colonel in Iraq learned of the killings within hours
that day, Nov. 19, 2005, in the town of Haditha, but failed to begin a thorough
inquiry into how they occurred.

The 130-page report, by Maj. Gen. Eldon A. Bargewell of the Army, did not
conclude that the senior officers covered up evidence or committed a crime. But
it said the Marine Corps command in Iraq was far too willing to tolerate
civilian casualties and dismiss Iraqi claims of abuse by marines as insurgent
propaganda, according to lawyers who have read it.

''All levels of command tended to view civilian casualties, even in significant
numbers, as routine and as the natural and intended result of insurgent
tactics,'' General Bargewell wrote in his report, according to two people who
have read it. ''Statements made by the chain of command during interviews for
this investigation, taken as a whole, suggest that Iraqi civilian lives are not
as important as U.S. lives, their deaths are just the cost of doing business,
and that the Marines need to get the job done no matter what it takes.''

The killings in Haditha, in Anbar Province, began with a roadside bombing that
killed one American marine and wounded two. Several marines then began
methodically killing civilians in the area, eventually going door to door in the
village and killing women and children, some in their beds, according to a Naval
criminal investigation.

General Bargewell's report, completed at the request of Lt. Gen. Peter W.
Chiarelli, the day-to-day commander of American forces in Iraq at the time, did
not focus on the killings themselves, but rather on commanders' handling of the
aftermath.

The Washington Post published details of the report's findings on Saturday.
Spokesmen for the Marine Corps declined to comment, citing hearings for the
three enlisted marines charged with murder in the case and for four officers
charged with dereliction of duty for failing to ensure a proper investigation.

General Bargewell's report was said to have found what it called ''inattention
and negligence, in certain cases willful negligence,'' among Marine officers who
reported the civilian deaths immediately up their chain of command in ways that
the report said were ''untimely, inaccurate and incomplete.''

It is critical of the Marine division commander, Maj. Gen. Richard A. Huck, and
the regimental commander, Col. Stephen W. Davis, for fostering a perception that
civilian Iraqi lives were not as important as American lives and for failing to
investigate the civilian deaths in Haditha, lawyers who read the report said.

Lawyers for the four officers charged with dereliction of duty -- a lieutenant
colonel, two captains and a first lieutenant -- disagreed Saturday with the
report's conclusions about them.

''Colonel Chessani, Colonel Davis and General Huck all viewed this -- and still
do -- as a legitimate combat action,'' said Brian J. Rooney, a civilian lawyer
for Lt. Col. Jeffrey R. Chessani, who was relieved of his command and is the
highest-ranking officer known publicly to be punished in the Haditha matter.
''That same night and the next morning Colonel Chessani reported up the chain of
command what he had learned about the attacks,'' including that marines had
killed civilians. ''I don't know how that's untimely, accurate and incomplete.''

The Bargewell report, which was recently declassified, also established that
junior officers, including a captain who issued a news release on the episode
that blamed a roadside bomb planted by insurgents for most of the deaths, knew
from the beginning that marines had killed the civilians, the lawyers said.

The captain, Jeffrey S. Pool, told General Bargewell's investigators that he was
given reports from battalion commanders that accurately described the marines'
killing of civilians, said lawyers who read the report. But Captain Pool said he
issued a news release blaming insurgents for the deaths because he believed that
the killings were ultimately a direct result of the roadside bombing of the
marines, the lawyers said.

''The way I saw it was this,'' Captain Pool told two colonels questioning him,
according to a lawyer who read the report to a reporter. ''A bomb blast went
off, or was initiated, that is what started, that is the reason they're getting
this, is a bomb blew up, killed people. We killed people back, and that's the
story.'' (Since the investigation, the captain has been promoted to major and is
again working as a public affairs officer in Anbar Province.)

Lawyers for the four officers charged with failing to properly investigate the
civilian killings blame the inaccurate news release for creating the false
perception that the Marine Corps chain of command had covered up the killing of
civilians. But one lawyer also said that the captain's thinking reflected that
of his superiors, who believed that civilian casualties, though regrettable,
were an inevitable part of war.

''That's the rubric that the whole division was operating under,'' the lawyer
said. The report, he said, came to a similar conclusion. ''It just was the
culture of the Marine Corps,'' he said, paraphrasing the report, ''to think that
the Iraqis' story was propaganda, and didn't investigate.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 24, 2007



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about a military report that found that senior
Marine Corps commanders had contributed to a ''willful'' failure to investigate
the killing of 24 unarmed Iraqis by marines in the town of Haditha in 2005
misstated a word in a quotation from Brian J. Rooney, a lawyer for an officer
punished in the Haditha matter. Mr. Rooney said his client, Lt. Col. Jeffrey R.
Chessani, had promptly reported what he knew about the killings and ''I don't
know how that's untimely, inaccurate and incomplete.'' He did not say
''untimely, accurate and incomplete.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); ARMIES
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); TERRORISM (77%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%);
LAWYERS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); INTERVIEWS (70%); MURDER
(58%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (52%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (75%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (52%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (52%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (52%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (52%)

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; Richard A (Maj Gen) Huck; Stephen W (Col) Davis

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              795 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

3 Suspects Talk After Iraqi Soldiers Do Dirty Work

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN; Ashley Gilbertson contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1976 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, April 21


Out here in what the soldiers call Baghdad's wild west, sometimes the choices
are all bad.

In one of the new joint American-Iraqi security stations in the capital this
month, in the volatile Ghazaliya neighborhood, Capt. Darren Fowler was heaping
praise on his Iraqi counterparts for helping capture three insurgent suspects
who had provided information he believed would save American lives.

''The detainee gave us names from the highest to the lowest,'' Captain Fowler
told the Iraqi soldiers. ''He showed us their safe houses, where they store
weapons and I.E.D.'s and where they keep kidnap victims, how they get weapons,
where weapons come from, how they place I.E.D.'s, attack us and go away. Because
you detained this guy this is the first intelligence linking everything
together. Good job. Very good job.''

The Iraqi officers beamed. What the Americans did not know and what the Iraqis
had not told them was that before handing over the detainees to the Americans,
the Iraqi soldiers had beaten one of them in front of the other two, the Iraqis
said. The stripes on the detainee's back, which appeared to be the product of a
whipping with electrical cables, were later shown briefly to a photographer, who
was not allowed to take a picture.

To the Iraqi soldiers, the treatment was normal and necessary. They were proud
of their technique and proud to have helped the Americans.

''I prepared him for the Americans and let them take his confession,'' Capt.
Bassim Hassan said through an interpreter. ''We know how to make them talk. We
know their back streets. We beat them. I don't beat them that much, but enough
so he feels the pain and it makes him desperate.''

As American and Iraqi troops set up these outposts in dangerous neighborhoods to
take on the insurgents block by block, they find themselves continually facing
lethal attacks. In practice, the Americans and Iraqis seem to have different
answers about what tactics are acceptable in response.

Beatings like this, which are usually hard to verify but appear to be widespread
given the fears about the Iraqi security forces frequently expressed by ordinary
Iraqis, present the Americans with a largely undiscussed dilemma.

The beaten detainee, according to Captain Fowler, not only led the Americans to
safe houses believed to be used by Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia but also confessed to
laying and detonating roadside bombs along a section of road heavily traveled by
American patrols. Just a month ago, four soldiers from Captain Fowler's regiment
died on that road after the explosion of a large, deeply buried bomb, possibly
made in the bomb factory that the Americans were able to dismantle because of
the detainee's information, Captain Fowler said.

But beating is strictly forbidden by the United States Army's Field Manual, as
well as American and Iraqi laws. When the Americans learned about the beating,
they were quick to condemn it.

The use of torture by American soldiers and contractors at Abu Ghraib only
compounded Iraqi hatred of Americans and further undermined American moral
claims in Iraq. It also produced little valuable information. Most experts,
including in the military, say they believe that coerced confessions are an
unreliable way to learn about enemy operations because people being tortured
will often say whatever they think it will take to stop the pain.

This joint security station in Ghazaliya opened on March 15, about a month after
the latest increase in American troops began. The station, inhabited by about 70
soldiers of Company D of the Second Battalion, 12th Cavalry, and their Iraqi
counterparts, is named for Specialist Robert Thrasher, a member of the unit
killed by sniper fire on Feb. 11 when the company was scouting for a station
site.

Thrasher, as the station is known, sits in the southern part of Ghazaliya, one
of the roughest areas of western Baghdad. In the northern part, Shiite militias,
led by the Mahdi Army, have been driving out Sunni Arabs through raids and
assassinations. Sunnis have pushed Shiites out of the southern part.

Sewage pools in the streets. Water and electricity are almost nonexistent, and
fewer than half the houses are occupied. The neighborhood graffiti broadcasts
the presence of an active insurgency: ''Long live Abu Hamza al-Muhajar,'' reads
one scrawl, referring to a local insurgent leader.

The outpost's location, along one of the main arms smuggling routes from
Falluja, was chosen because it was next to a litter-filled lot that was a
dumping ground for bodies. When they first arrived, the American soldiers found
30 bodies there, among them women and children.

Now it is rare to find more than one or two, said Captain Fowler, who keeps
photos of every one on his computer as a reminder of how much worse it was
before his company took up residence. He can also point to other signs of
progress: children have begun to play outside again, and women walk to the
market.

But the area remains far from calm. The radio in the joint operations room
crackles all day long with reports of bomb explosions or newly sighted explosive
devices that must be scouted by the soldiers. The distance to the next security
station is barely half a mile, but it is so dangerous that the soldiers cannot
walk there and do not like to drive more often than necessary.

Although one tenet of the Baghdad security plan is that soldiers should patrol
on foot to get to know local residents, it was on just such a patrol that
Specialist Thrasher died. Now, said Sgt. Trevis Good, 34, ''foot patrols don't
exist; they are not something we do.'' The company's partner is the Third
Battalion, Fourth Brigade, of the Iraqi Army's 10th Division. The soldiers come
from Amara, the largest town in rural Maysan Province in the far south, a mostly
peaceful area where in a year of active duty they never had an injury, much less
a fatality.

In just three weeks in Ghazaliya, the battalion has lost two officers and a
soldier; 16 troops have been wounded. A few hundred Iraqi soldiers live in three
attached houses just over a brick wall from the Americans. The houses, beefed up
only by sandbags, lie outside the station's fortified area. Visiting their
quarters means crouching down and running behind vehicles until entering one of
the houses.

The Iraqi soldiers have their own network of informants, and they picked up the
detainee who was later beaten, Mustafa Subhi Jassam, after seeing him loitering
around a main patrol route twice in the same day. The other two insurgent
suspects were picked up separately.

After interrogating Mr. Jassam, a thin young man wearing a blue and red warm-up
outfit, for much of the night, the Americans took him to point out one of the
houses where the Qaeda militants made bombs. When the Americans arrived, a
half-eaten lunch was on the table next to a couple of detonators and some
blasting wire. The insurgents appeared to have been gnawing on chicken and flat
bread while making fuses for I.E.D.'s, improvised explosive devices, the
military's term for the roadside bombs found here.

On the table and in bags on the floor were mountains of soap, which can be used
in homemade explosives. Blasting wire lay in coils. Buried in the garden were
two large antiaircraft guns known as Duskas, three propane tanks, and an oxygen
tank that was partly cut in preparation for being turned into a huge bomb,
probably similar to the one that killed the four soldiers. On the roof a large
pile of homemade explosives was drying in the sun.

The Iraqi soldiers were ecstatic. They had delivered. They snapped photos of
each other in front of the cache with the blasting cords in their mouths,
grinning. The Americans were nervous. ''One spark will blow this place up,''
said First Lt. Michael Obal as an Iraqi soldier flicked a lighted cigarette butt
within inches of one cache of explosives. ''It's highly unstable TNT.''

Later, the Americans plotted into their computers the location of each of the
Qaeda safe houses that Mr. Jassam had pointed out. ''He was singing like a
songbird,'' said First Lt. Sean Henley, 24.

After the prisoner was returned to the Iraqis, Captain Fowler was asked whether
the Americans realized that the information was given only after the Iraqis had
beaten Mr. Jassam. ''They are not supposed to do that,'' he said. ''What I don't
see, I don't know, and I can't stop. The detainees are deathly afraid of being
sent to the Iraqi justice system, because this is the kind of thing they do. But
this is their culture.''

Later, Captain Fowler said that he thought Mr. Jassam had talked because he
hoped to be released. The captain wanted him let go so that he could act as an
informant. The Iraqi soldiers vetoed the idea.

Mr. Jassam is now being held in an Iraqi government detention center, widely
rumored to be places where suspected insurgents are abused.

Lieutenant Obal, the captain's deputy, was distraught at the thought that the
detainee had been beaten. ''I don't think that's right,'' he said. ''We have
intelligence teams, they have techniques for getting information, they don't do
things like that. It's not civilization.''

About 30 yards away, on the other side of the wall, the Iraqi soldiers suggested
that the Americans were being naive. The insurgents are playing for keeps, they
say, and force must be answered with force.

''If the Americans used this way, the way we use, nobody would shoot the
Americans at all,'' Captain Hassan said. ''But they are easy with them, and they
have made it easy for the terrorists.''

''I didn't beat them all, I beat Mustafa in front of the others. We tell him
we're going to string him up.'' He demonstrated, his arms spread wide. ''And, I
made the others see him,'' he said.

Captain Hassan and his colleagues said they knew the Iraqi Army had rules
against beatings, but ''they tell us to do what we have to do,'' he said.

''For me it's a matter of conscience, not rules,'' he said.

Captain Fowler's proposal to release Mr. Jassam in the hope he would become an
informant struck Captain Hassan as useless and quite possibly dangerous.

''It's kind of not a good idea,'' he said carefully, as if explaining something
to a child. ''He'll never become an informant. Al Qaeda will know he's been
captured. He'll go back to them and say, 'The Americans wanted me to be an
informer, but I will be loyal to you.' He will be more afraid of Al Qaeda guys
than of the Americans.''

But some detainees may have a simpler motivation: survival. The Iraqi soldiers
say many of the insurgents are paid for their attacks, and they gain respect and
protection from other militants.

Another officer in the Iraqi unit, Major Hussain, who would not give his full
name, said the only way to lure such militants out of the insurgent life would
be to offer them a comparable standard of living.

''Ziad, over there, wanted to come work with us,'' Major Hussain said,
indicating one of the insurgent suspects, Ziad Sabah Jasim, who became
cooperative after witnessing the beating of Mr. Jassam. ''He said, 'Just let me
join you,' ''

''Most of them don't believe in this insurgency,'' he said. ''They are young
people. They are having to stay home without employment. They want food. They
want money. They want to be able to marry. But there are no jobs. If you offered
them jobs, most of them would not be working with Al Qaeda.''

The American soldiers would agree, but they also are clear that the only way to
bring jobs is first to make the neighborhood secure. ''You need a J.S.S. every
kilometer or so,'' Captain Fowler said. For now, there are nowhere near that
many security stations on Baghdad's west side.   Islands in the Conflict

This is the first of a series of articles examining the effects of the joint
American and Iraqi security stations and troop increase in Baghdad.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: This suspected insurgent cooperated after Iraqi soldiers beat a
fellow detainee, an Iraqi Army officer said. (Photo by Ashley Gilbertson for The
New York Times)(pg. 1)
Iraqi soldiers detain Ziad Sabah Jasim. Mr. Jasim became cooperative ''after he
saw what we did to Mustafa,'' Capt. Bassim Hassan said.
 After being beaten by Iraqi soldiers, Mustafa Subhi Jassam led American troops
into a house that appeared to be an insurgent bomb-making lab. (Photographs by
Ashley Gilbertson for The New York Times)(pg. 18)  Map of Baghdad highlighting
Ghazaliya: American and Iraqi soldiers share a station in the Ghazaliya area.
(pg. 18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); ARMIES (78%);
BOMBINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
TORTURE (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); AL-QAEDA (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Torture;
Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Alissa J Rubin

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (98%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              797 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Holocaust Denied, and the Denier Defended

BYLINE: By WILBORN HAMPTON

SECTION: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; THEATER REVIEW; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 440 words


The very idea of denying the Holocaust is so ludicrous that any attempt at
writing a serious play on the subject would seem futile. Yet Peter Sagal's
''Denial,'' at the Metropolitan Playhouse, is an engrossing legal drama that
examines the moral and ethical dilemmas inherent in the First Amendment.

Bernard Cooper is a mild-mannered engineering professor who has written a book
and published a newsletter saying that the Holocaust was a fiction perpetrated
by Henry Morgenthau Jr. and other Jews to malign der Fuhrer and draw
international sympathy.

A sort of milquetoast neo-Nazi himself, Cooper is a cult hero to skinheads whose
idea of fun is to beat up Jews. When the F.B.I. raids his house, seizes his
mailing lists and charges him with inciting violence, Cooper appeals to the
American Civil Liberties Union, which in turn sends him to Abigail Gersten.

Gersten, a Jewish lawyer whose belief in the First Amendment overcomes her
personal revulsion for Cooper, takes the case. ''A witch hunt is a witch hunt,
even if he happens to be a witch,'' she reasons. The prosecutor is a zealous
young Jew fresh out of law school who wears a skullcap and tries to shame
Gersten into refusing to represent Cooper.

At the heart of the conflict is the question of how much sufferance a free
society should give its crackpots to maintain its liberties. And at what point
does the threat of violence to citizens validate curtailing an individual's
rights?

Mr. Sagal uses this platform to examine the issue of Holocaust denial. In
fairness, he lets Cooper present his argument and even introduces a plot twist
that exposes a false account of a death at Auschwitz that had appeared in a book
by a famous survivor of the camp. Cooper posits that one lie makes the whole
account of Holocaust horrors suspect.

For the most part, Mr. Sagal avoids sermonizing, although a final scene tacked
on as a sort of redemptive coda for Gersten is ill advised. He also employs some
dubious legal practices to bring the Holocaust denier and survivor face to face
in the lawyer's office. But the characters are well drawn, the arguments
balanced, and the central issues couldn't be more timely.

Under Alex Roe's smooth direction, the six actors give able performances. As
Gersten, Suzanne Toren is thoroughly convincing as a woman struggling to
reconcile conflicting beliefs. As Cooper, H. Clark Kee is chillingly
calculating. And John Tobias delivers an excellent turn at the end as Nathan,
the Auschwitz victim who actually survived.  ''Denial'' continues through May 13
at the Metropolitan Playhouse, 220 East Fourth Street, East Village; (212)
995-5302.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin Novemsky and Suzanne Toren in Peter Sagal's ''Denial.''
(Photo by Michelle DeBlasi)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (92%); WITCHCRAFT (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(90%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (78%); WRITERS (78%); THEATER (78%); ETHICS (77%);
LAWYERS (77%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); LAW SCHOOLS
(72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%)
Theater; Reviews

COMPANY: SA GUYOMARC'H ALIMENTAIRE (SAGAL) (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2013 SAUSAGES & OTHER PREPARED MEAT PRODUCTS (58%)

PERSON: Wilborn Hampton; Peter Sagal; Alex Roe; H Clark Kee; Suzanne Toren

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              802 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japan Court Rules Against Sex Slaves and Laborers

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, April 27


In two landmark rulings, Japan's highest court on Friday rejected compensation
claims filed by former wartime sex slaves and forced laborers from China but
acknowledged that they had been coerced by the Japanese military or industry.

The decisions were handed down as Prime Minister Shinzo Abe tried to head off a
resolution on Japan's wartime sex slavery in the House of Representatives during
a two-day visit to Washington.

It was the first time that the Supreme Court has ruled on lawsuits by Japan's
mostly Chinese and Korean captives during World War II, effectively quashing
dozens of similar cases that have been working their way through the lower
courts in recent years.

The court said in both cases that the Chinese plaintiffs had lost their rights
to seek individual legal claims against the Japanese government and companies
because of a 1972 joint statement in which Beijing renounced war reparations
from Japan, a decision supporting the government's position that postwar
agreements cleared Japan of responsibility for future individual claims.

China's Foreign Ministry denounced the rulings, describing them as ''illegal and
invalid'' and calling the court's interpretation of the 1972 statement as
''arbitrary.''

Shao Yicheng, 82, a plaintiff in one of the suits who was forced to work for the
Japanese construction company Nishimatsu during the war, when he was 19, called
the ruling ''unjust.''

''I didn't even get paid,'' he said at a news conference here. ''I was just made
to work. The least I want is to get my wages. I want justice.''

But in a striking rebuke to nationalist politicians who have tried to play down
Japan's wartime crimes, the court acknowledged the historical facts of sex
slavery and forced labor, two practices that continue to fuel anger in Asia six
decades after the war's end.

In its 16-page ruling in a sex slavery case, the court acknowledged that
Japanese soldiers had abducted two teenage Chinese girls and forced them to work
as sex slaves for months, contradicting Mr. Abe's recent denial of the practice.

Last month, Mr. Abe said there was no evidence that the military had directly
forced women into sex slavery, a position that was put into a written statement
and endorsed by the cabinet as the government's official position on March 16.

In his first visit to the United States as prime minister, Mr. Abe -- who fought
for years to have references to wartime sex slavery excised from the nation's
government-endorsed school textbooks -- repeated his general apology to the
former sex slaves, known euphemistically as comfort women.

Historians have estimated that 50,000 to 200,000 women from Japan, Korea,
Taiwan, China, the Philippines, Indonesia and elsewhere were taken as sex slaves
by the Japanese military during the war.

''Regarding the extremely hard situation they were placed in, I am filled with a
sense of apology,'' Mr. Abe said Thursday in a meeting with leaders of the House
of Representatives. And in a press conference with President Bush at Camp David
on Friday, he said that he had ''deep-hearted sympathies'' for the women and
that he was sorry that they had been ''placed in extreme hardships and had to
suffer that sacrifice,'' The Associated Press reported.

In both statements, Mr. Abe avoided assigning responsibility for the practice
and did not retract his denial of the military's direct role in it, a crucial
point to his nationalist supporters, who argue that the women were prostitutes
or forced into brothels by private brokers.

The House is considering a resolution that would call on Japan to unequivocally
admit its wartime sex slavery and apologize for it.

In the sex slavery ruling, the court acknowledged that Japanese soldiers
abducted the two plaintiffs, who were 13 and 15 at the time, in Shanxi Province,
China, in 1942.

According to the court, Japanese soldiers took the 15-year-old from her older
sister's house to a Japanese military base. There, the girl -- a virgin who had
yet to have her first period -- was raped repeatedly by soldiers, including the
commanding officer, the court said. Her family obtained her release after two
weeks, but soldiers kidnapped her again, confining her and raping her
repeatedly, the court said.

The 13-year-old -- also described by the court as a virgin who had yet to have
her first period -- was kidnapped by Japanese soldiers and raped repeatedly for
40 days. Relatives of this woman, who died in 1999, pursued the lawsuit.

Toshitaka Onodera, the lead lawyer for the Chinese plaintiffs, said that despite
the rulings against them, the Supreme Court had now established the historical
record, including the military's direct coercion of women into sex slavery.

''No one can deny that, because of the particulars of the Shanxi cases,'' Mr.
Onodera said. ''This ruling is a powerful one, like a sharp knife pointed at
Abe.''

The government has not yet reacted to the rulings. But when Mr. Abe was asked in
Parliament recently about a separate case -- in which a lower court also
rejected the plaintiffs' claims but acknowledged that soldiers had abducted and
forced women into sex slavery -- he dismissed the judge's acknowledgment of
those facts as ''legally unimportant.''

In the forced labor case, the court overturned a lower court's ruling in 2004
ordering Nishimatsu Construction to pay $230,000 to five Chinese plaintiffs who
were forced to work at a hydroelectric plant in 1944. But the presiding judge
took note of the plaintiffs ''extremely large mental and physical suffering''
and called on the company to ''provide relief to the victims.''

Experts often compare Japan in its treatment of its wartime forced laborers with
Germany, which has taken reparations out of the court system and has been
compensating aging victims while they are still alive.

''If it's freedom from legal threats that Japan was seeking, that goal was
achieved today,'' said William Underwood, an American researcher who recently
completed a dissertation at Kyushu University in Fukuoka, Japan, on Chinese
forced labor. ''But if the goals are reconciliation and mutual understanding
with the Chinese, that project is very much unfinished.''

According to Japanese government data, about 38,935 Chinese men were forcibly
brought to Japan, most of them after March 1944. They were made to work in 135
sites for 35 companies, 22 of which are still in business.

Of the total, 6,830 men, or nearly 18 percent, died in a little more than a year
because of brutal working conditions. Countless others died after their capture
in China or during their transit to Japan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Song Jixiao was another forced laborer for Japan during the
war.
 Shao Yicheng, 82, a plaintiff in one of the lawsuits ruled on yesterday, was
forced to work without pay for a Japanese construction company during World War
II. At a news conference, he called the decision unjust. (Photographs by Ko
Sasaki for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); FORCED LABOR (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); HISTORY (78%);
WAGES & SALARIES (78%); WOMEN (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%);
PRIME MINISTERS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%);
ARMED FORCES (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (68%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (67%);
TEXTBOOKS (50%) World War II (1939-45); Sexual Slavery; United States
International Relations

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (79%) Norimitsu Onishi; Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (78%); TOKYO, JAPAN (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (99%); CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); TAIWAN (79%);
PHILIPPINES (79%); ASIA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%)

REGION: Japan; China

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              807 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing United Nations: Revised Genocide Exhibit Opens

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 124 words


A United Nations exhibit on the Rwandan genocide that was dismantled three weeks
ago after Turkey objected to a reference to the Armenian genocide was opened in
revised form by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. Where the original exhibit had an
entry called ''What is genocide?'' that cited the deaths ''following World War
I'' of a million Armenians ''in Turkey,'' the revised entry is called ''Defining
the Crime'' and refers to ''mass killings of Armenians in the Ottoman Empire
during World War I.'' Some 1.5 million Armenians were killed by Ottoman Turks,
but Turkey says they were victims of war and unrest instead of genocide. The
exhibit observes the 13th anniversary of the 100-day slaughter in Rwanda of
800,000 Tutsis by Hutus.   WARREN HOGE

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); WORLD WAR I (90%); EXHIBITIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); ANNIVERSARIES (70%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Armenians

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (88%) Warren Hoge; Ban Ki-Moon (Sec Gen)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (96%); TURKEY (96%); RWANDA (94%)

REGION: Rwanda; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              810 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: U.N. Says Police Officers May Reapply

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 134 words


The Security Council has ruled that 700 former Bosnian police officers dismissed
by United Nations police trainers after the 1992-1995 civil war for misconduct
or alleged involvement in war crimes can reapply for law enforcement work,
though not necessarily the same jobs they had. Emyr Jones Parry, the British
ambassador to the United Nations, president of the council in April, said in a
letter to Bosnian authorities that the country's standards for recruitment and
selection were now acceptable and that individuals could regain police jobs as
long as they met those standards. In recent years, 260 of the officers have
protested their firings, saying they were guilty only of minor misconduct. Mr.
Jones Parry said that his letter should not be interpreted as guaranteeing
reinstatement.    WARREN HOGE

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); MISCONDUCT (91%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Police; Police Brutality and Misconduct

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%)
Security Council (Un); United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              811 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 3, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Difference of Opinion On a Memoir of Her Mother

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON; Maureen Seaberg contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 703 words


As a first-time author, Margaret Ajemian Ahnert had hoped that her appearance at
a Barnes & Noble store on the Upper East Side would draw attention to her
just-published book, ''The Knock at the Door,'' which deals with the Armenian
genocide.

Her reading and question-and-answer session on Tuesday evening drew attention,
to be sure, but not the kind she expected.

A man in the audience was arrested after he and several other people disrupted
Ms. Ahnert's reading, shouting and passing out leaflets denying that the
genocide occurred. Ms. Ahnert's 209-page book tells, among other things, how her
mother survived the genocide as a teenager during World War I and eventually
came to the United States.

Ms. Ahnert said yesterday she did not mean ''The Knock at the Door'' to be a
political narrative.

''Here I was trying to tell the story of my mother, not making a political
statement,'' she said. ''It's a mother-daughter story, it's how it affected my
life. It's not just about the Armenian genocide, it's about my mother growing
up, my life, and events in her life that affected me. It's a mother-daughter
memoir. I'm not making any historical statements.''

Most historians say the Ottoman Empire was responsible for the death of more
than one million people around 1915 in a campaign intended to eliminate the
Armenian population throughout what is now Turkey.

Ms. Ahnert said the disruption came as she answered a question from the crowd at
the Barnes & Noble, at 240 East 86th Street near Second Avenue. Some of those
who attended her talk were her friends, including former Gov. Hugh L. Carey and
the Manhattan district attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, whose grandfather, Henry
Morgenthau, was the ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1913 to 1916.

''Someone in the middle of the back of the room stood up and said, 'That's not
so,' '' Ms. Ahnert said. ''Five or six men started to pass out fliers of denial.
I thought, oh, my goodness sakes, it's like Holocaust deniers. I was completely
taken aback.''

Mary Occhino, who was in the audience, said some of the people were shouting,
''This is a lie, this is a lie, this never happened.''

''I got up and said, 'Enough,' '' said Ms. Occhino, the host of a call-in
program on Sirius satellite radio. ''Her mother lived through the genocide --
that's all she said.''

The man who was arrested, identified by the police as Erdem Sahin, 41, a Turkish
immigrant who lives in Staten Island, was charged with resisting arrest, a
misdemeanor punishable by up to a year in jail, and also faces lesser charges.

At a hearing yesterday in Manhattan Criminal Court, Judge Rita Mella adjourned
the charges in contemplation of dismissal, meaning that the case will be dropped
in six months if Mr. Sahin is not arrested again.

Mr. Sahin said later yesterday that he and the other protesters were angry that
France had ''made it illegal to say there was no genocide.'' The French National
Assembly approved such legislation last fall.

''We realize that if we don't do something, we will soon have no rights,'' he
said. ''We are fighting for freedom of speech.''

When asked about his views on the Armenian genocide, he said, ''Honestly, I'm
not a historian, but historians say there is no genocide.''

The subject is taboo in Turkey, and in recent years, Turkish writers who have
referred to the genocide have faced reprisal. Orhan Pamuk, who won the 2006
Nobel Prize in literature, was also sued by a nationalist group for referring to
the genocide in a Swiss interview, and in January, Hrant Dink, a newspaper
editor who had challenged the official Turkish version of the genocide, was
fatally shot as he left his office in Istanbul.

A spokeswoman for the Barnes & Noble chain said it was unusual for a reading to
be disrupted. Passing out pamphlets violated the company's no-solicitation
policy, she said, adding: ''They were asked to stop passing out leaflets. They
refused. They were jeering the author. They were asked to sit down and they
refused.'' The police were called then, she said.

Ms. Ahnert said she had appeared on campuses and at a literary festival in
Florida with no problems. ''This is something I hope I don't have to look
forward to,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WRITERS (90%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (90%);
BOOKSTORES (90%); ARRESTS (89%); LITERATURE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); WORLD WAR I (74%); HISTORY (74%); HOLOCAUST (72%);
SATELLITE RADIO (60%); RIOTS (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Demonstrations and Riots; Books and Literature

COMPANY: SIRIUS XM HOLDINGS INC (50%)

TICKER: SIRI (NASDAQ) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515111 RADIO NETWORKS (50%); SIC4832 RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS
(50%)

PERSON: James Barron; Erdem Sahin; Margaret Ajemian Ahnert

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (94%); TURKEY (92%); UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia; New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              812 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Back in U.S., Queen Celebrates Ex-Colony

BYLINE: By IAN URBINA

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, Va., May 3


A girl standing with her school marching band said she was on hand on Thursday
to see whether the queen of England really waved with a cupped hand.

Another bystander said he hoped to see how Her Majesty compared with Helen
Mirren, the Oscar-winning actress in ''The Queen.''

They watched for different things as thousands gathered around the Capitol here
under rainy skies with hopes of glimpsing Queen Elizabeth II on her first visit
to the United States in more than 15 years. Her husband, Prince Philip, is
accompanying her on the six-day trip.

As the 81-year old monarch stepped to the microphone to address a commemorative
session of state legislators at the newly renovated Capitol, she was somber and
reflective in celebrating the 400th anniversary of Jamestown, the first
permanent English colony in the New World.

''Over the course of my reign and certainly since I first visited Jamestown in
1957, my country has become a much more diverse society, just as the
commonwealth of Virginia and the whole United States of America have also
undergone a major social change,'' the queen said. ''The 'melting pot' metaphor
captures one of the great strengths of your country and is an inspiration to
others around the world as we face the continuing social challenges ahead.''

In February, Virginia became the first state to pass a resolution expressing
official regret for slavery. In recent weeks, some scholars and minorities had
asked whether the queen would consider making a formal apology for Britain's
role in slavery and the way early English settlers mistreated the Indians.

Though she offered no such apology, she observed that human progress rarely came
without a cost.

Gov. Tim Kaine echoed the importance of how much had changed since her visit in
1957.

''We didn't tell everybody's story; we didn't include everyone; we didn't honor
all the accomplishments,'' Mr. Kaine said at a news conference. ''We didn't
acknowledge that the progress came at a cost and there was huge pain along the
way. This time, we have a chance to really get it right.''

Before her speech, the queen met representatives from eight Indian tribes in
Virginia. She also planned to meet with Oliver W. Hill Sr., a 100-year-old civil
rights lawyer whose litigation helped lead to the 1954 Supreme Court decision to
end racial segregation in public schools.

And referring to the April 16 shooting rampage at Virginia Tech, where a student
killed 32 students and professors before taking his own life, Elizabeth said,
''On behalf of the people of the United Kingdom, I extend my deepest sympathies
at this time of such grief and sorrow.''

The queen is also expected to have a private audience with survivors of the
attack and some victims' families.

Besides visiting Jamestown and Williamsburg, the royal couple will dine at the
White House, attend the Kentucky Derby, lay a wreath at the National World War
II Memorial in Washington and tour the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in
Maryland.

Preparations for the royal arrival have been occurring for months, not the least
of it choreographing protocol. Buckingham Palace sent about 15 advisers to
consult with the governor's office on being a host to the queen. The State
Department also dispatched a consultant.

The governor started a hot line and a Web page on royal etiquette that more than
340,000 people visited in the last week, said Tamra Talmadge-Anderson, a
spokeswoman for the governor.

As she left the Capitol in pouring rain to drive back to Bethesda, Md., Sarah
Archer said of the queen, ''Honestly, I was struck by how poised she was.'' She
added: ''You think of her as this caricature. But to hear her speak, I was
really impressed.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Queen Elizabeth II of England arriving yesterday at the Virginia
State Capitol in Richmond. She met Indians from eight tribes in Virginia. (Photo
by Jim Young/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BRITISH MONARCHS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); SCHOOL
DESEGREGATION (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); BRITISH ROYALTY (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); NATIVE
AMERICANS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (74%); SLAVERY
(73%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); ANNIVERSARIES
(69%); RACE & RACISM (64%); LITIGATION (63%); LAWYERS (60%); SHOOTINGS (60%);
SUPREME COURTS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(50%); PRESS CONFERENCES (50%); APPEALS (50%)

PERSON: ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (93%); PRINCE PHILIP (88%);
TIM KAINE (79%); HELEN MIRREN (57%) Queen of Great Britain Elizabeth Ii; Duke of
Edinburgh Philip; Ian Urbina

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (94%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ENGLAND (93%)

REGION: Great Britain; Richmond (Va); Jamestown (Va)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              813 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 5, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Not All Troops Would Report Iraq Abuse, Study Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 399 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


Only 40 percent of American marines and 55 percent of soldiers in Iraq say they
would report a fellow service member for killing or injuring an innocent Iraqi,
a Pentagon study published Friday showed.

The study, which showed increasing rates of mental health problems for troops on
extended or multiple deployments, also said well over one-third of soldiers and
marines believed that torture should be allowed to gain information that could
save the lives of American troops, or knowledge about insurgents.

Of the 1,320 soldiers and 447 marines who took part, about 10 percent said they
had mistreated civilians through physical violence or damage to personal
property.

The study was conducted by Army medical experts from Aug. 28 to Oct. 3 last
year.

''Soldiers with high levels of anger, who had experienced high levels of combat
or who screened positive for mental health symptoms, were nearly twice as likely
to mistreat noncombatants,'' the acting Army surgeon general, Maj. Gen. Gale S.
Pollock, told reporters.

The findings are posted at www.armymedicine.army.mil.

The survey data came out a month after Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates
extended tours for soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan to up to 15 months, from 12.
American forces in Iraq are being increased under a security plan ordered by
President Bush.

The report, the fourth prepared by the Army's Mental Health Advisory Team since
the war in Iraq began in 2003, showed that mental health problems like acute
stress, anxiety and depression rose among troops facing longer deployments or
their second or third tour in Iraq.

Over all, about 20 percent of soldiers and 15 percent of marines showed symptoms
of anxiety, depression or acute stress. The rate was at 30 percent among troops
with high combat experience.

Among soldiers, 27 percent of those with more than one tour of duty tested
positive for a mental health problem, versus 17 percent for soldiers on their
first deployment.

The rate of anxiety, depression and acute stress stood at 22 percent among
soldiers deployed for more than six months and at 15 percent for troops in Iraq
for less than six months. Army experts recommended that the Pentagon extend the
interval between deployments to 18 to 36 months so that troops could recover
mentally.

Mr. Gates said last month that troops in the region could expect to spend 12
months at home between deployments.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RESEARCH REPORTS (93%); ARMIES (91%); MENTAL HEALTH (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MENTAL ILLNESS (89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); DEPRESSION
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (70%) United States Armament and Defense; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: SURGEON GENERAL (56%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              816 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Propaganda Fear Cited in Account Of Iraqi Killings

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1449 words


Recently unclassified documents suggest that senior officers viewed the killings
of 24 Iraqi civilians in Haditha in late 2005 as a potential public relations
problem that could fuel insurgent propaganda against the American military,
leading investigators to question whether the officers' immediate response had
been intentionally misleading.Col. R. Gary Sokoloski, a lawyer who was chief of
staff to Maj. General Richard A. Huck, the division commander, approved a news
release about the killings that investigators interviewing him in March 2006
suggested was ''intentionally inaccurate'' because it stated, contrary to the
facts at hand, that the civilians had been killed by an insurgent's bomb.

According to a transcript of the interview, Colonel Sokoloski told the
investigators, ''We knew the, you know, the strategic implications of being
permanently present in Haditha and how badly the insurgents wanted us out of
there.''

But Colonel Sokoloski told them he believed that the news release was accurate
as written. ''At the time,'' he said, ''given the information that was available
to me and the objective to get that out for the press'' before insurgents put
out their own information, ''that is what we went with.''

The documents also show that derailing enemy propaganda was important to senior
Marine commanders, including Col. Stephen W. Davis, a highly regarded regimental
commander under General Huck, who played down questions about the civilian
killings from a Time magazine reporter last year, long after the attacks and the
civilian toll were clear to the military.

''Frankly, what I am looking at is the advantage he's giving the enemy,''
Colonel Davis said of the reporter, Tim McGirk, whose article in March 2006 was
the first to report that marines had killed civilians in Haditha, including
women and children. In their sworn statements, General Huck and his subordinates
say they dismissed Mr. McGirk's inquiries because they saw him as a naive
conduit for the mayor of Haditha, whom the Marines believed to be an insurgent.

Four officers were charged with failing to properly investigate the civilian
killings. The first hearing against one of the officers, Capt. Randy W. Stone,
is set for Tuesday morning, in a military courtroom at Camp Pendleton, Calif.
Three enlisted marines are charged with the killings. Their hearings, to
determine whether the charges warrant general courts-martial, are set to begin
in the coming weeks. As Marine Corps prosecutors prepare their evidence against
Captain Stone and his fellow officers, the unclassified documents suggest that
senior Marine commanders dismissed, played down or publicly mischaracterized the
civilian deaths in ways that a military investigation found deeply troubling.
The documents suggest that General Huck ignored early reports that women and
children were killed in the attack, and later told investigators that he was
unaware of regulations that required his staff to investigate further.

The documents, including a report by Maj. Gen. Eldon A. Bargewell of the Army,
copies of e-mail messages among Marine officers in Haditha and sworn statements
from several ranking officers, focus only on how the Marine chain of command
handled the killings and have not been made public. Portions of the report and
commanders' reactions to the killings were reported by The Washington Post in
January and April. The documents were provided to The New York Times by people
familiar with the investigation only on condition that they not be identified.

Captain Stone, 34, of Dunkirk, Md., is accused of failing to investigate reports
of the civilian deaths. In an interview that repeated similar frustrations
voiced by lawyers for other accused officers, Captain Stone said he did not
investigate the killings because his superiors told him not to.

''The regimental judge advocate informed me that we don't do investigations for
'troops in contact' situations,'' said Captain Stone, referring to the
regiment's lawyer, Maj. Carroll Connelly. Troops in contact is military language
for combat against enemy fighters.

''That's my understanding of what higher wanted,'' Captain Stone said, referring
to his superior officers, ''and that's why there was no investigation.''

''I don't think I did anything wrong,'' he went on. But he added, ''There is a
certain level of disappointment that the Marine Corps decided that, in the
entire chain of command, that I am the one who should be held accountable.''

Major Connelly, who was not charged with any crime, has been granted immunity to
testify at the coming hearings, said Captain Stone's civilian lawyer, Charles W.
Gittins.

After weighing evidence and arguments from prosecutors and defense lawyers, an
investigating officer presiding over the hearing will determine whether there is
sufficient evidence to recommend a general court martial. The other three
officers facing dereliction charges are: Capt. Lucas M. McConnell, the company
commander; First Lt. Andrew A. Grayson, a Marine intelligence officer; and Lt.
Col. Jeffrey R. Chessani, the battalion commander.

The Haditha investigators pored over thousands of e-mail messages, slide
presentations, sworn statements and field reports, sifting through sometimes
contradictory information and conflicting points of view to determine what
officers at each level knew and when they knew it.

The documents and interviews produced in the Bargewell investigation indicate
that investigators had suspected possible wrongdoing, at least initially, at
even higher levels.

''As you go up the chain of command, the question always becomes, 'Where do you
stop?' '' said John D. Hutson, a former Navy judge advocate general, now the
dean of the Franklin Pierce Law Center in New Hampshire. ''You have to be
reasonably certain that you'll get a conviction.''

Intangible considerations can also influence military lawyers in deciding
whether to recommend charges when wrongdoing is more ambiguous. ''If you know
the guy and he's done well and he's never done anything dishonest before,'' Mr.
Hutson said, ''you might give him the benefit of the doubt.''

Documents declassified by the military last week include an e-mail message
within three hours of the Haditha attack from a battalion operations officer to
the regiment, a superior command, saying that 15 civilians had been killed,
''seven of which were women and kids.''

Senior commanders told investigators that such early field reports were passed
on to General Huck's staff.

In a statement he gave at Camp Lejeune, N.C., in April, nearly five months
later, General Huck told investigators that he could not recall being informed
of reports that 15 civilians had been killed. He said he was overseeing several
combat operations at the time, and that he had no reason to believe that the
civilians killed in Haditha were not enemy fighters.

''I didn't know at the time whether they were bad guys, noncombatants, or
whatever,'' General Huck said, according to a transcript of the interview. Later
in the interview, he added, ''They may have been guys pulling the trigger, for
all I know.''

General Huck, who is expected to testify at the accused officers' hearings, told
investigators he did not recall orders, called commanders critical information
requirements that required him to alert his superiors and investigate the
circumstances of any attack that killed at least three times as many civilians
as American forces.

General Huck said that three days after the Haditha episode, in the midst of two
combat operations, he visited Colonel Chessani, the battalion commander, who
showed him an electronic slide show of the attacks that, according to
investigators, did not mention the civilian deaths.

''I sat there and took the brief and no bells and whistles went off,'' General
Huck told investigators.

The bells, the general said, sounded two and a half months later, on Feb. 12,
after he sent his boss, Lt. Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli, the commander of ground
operations in Iraq at the time, an e-mail message with Colonel Chessani's slide
presentation attached to it.

''I support our account and do not see a necessity for further investigation,''
General Huck wrote in the message to General Chiarelli in Baghdad, adding:
''Allegedly, McGirk received his info from the mayor of Haditha, who we strongly
suspect to be an insurgent.''

Less than five hours later, records show, General Chiarelli forwarded the e-mail
message to his chief of staff, Brig. Gen. Donald Campbell, with a note.

''Don: We need to get together at the first possible moment tomorrow morning,''
he wrote. ''We're going to have to do an investigation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Randy W. Stone, right, with an Iraqi soldier in an undated
photo supplied by Captain Stone's lawyer. (pg. 14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); EVIDENCE (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LAWYERS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
TRANSCRIPTS (71%); GENOCIDE (60%) United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Public Relations and Publicity; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; R Gary (Col) Sokoloski; Richard A (Maj Gen) Huck;
Randy (Capt) Stone; Lucas (Capt) Mcconnell; Andrew (First Lt) Grayson; Jeffrey R
(Lt Col) Chessani

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              820 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japanese Premier Makes Gift to War Shrine But Does Not Visit

BYLINE: By MARTIN FACKLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Tuesday, May 8


Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan made a ceremonial offering to a controversial
Tokyo war shrine last month but did not go himself, a shrine official said
Tuesday.

Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto memorial that commemorates Japan's wartime dead,
including Class A war criminals from World War II, has been a focal point of
Chinese and South Korean ire over what many in Asia see as Japan's lack of
remorse for its wartime deeds.

Mr. Abe, who has worked to improve relations with booming China, has for months
refused to say if he would visit the shrine. On Tuesday, Japanese news reports
said Mr. Abe sent a small plant as a type of compromise -- a way of paying his
respects and playing to his conservative base without making a visit, which the
Chinese would surely take as an affront.

Mr. Abe sent about $425 last month to buy a plant that was presented to the
shrine, said Sayaka Ishida, a shrine spokeswoman. She said Mr. Abe bought a
six-foot-tall sakaki, a type of evergreen used in Shinto rituals.

The top government spokesman, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yasuhisa Shiozaki, later
told reporters that the government could not comment because the offering was
made by Mr. Abe as a private citizen and not in his capacity as Japanese leader.

However Ms. Ishida, the spokeswoman, said the plant carried a small wooden
placard that read ''Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.''

The seemingly small gesture could take on larger symbolic significance in
Japan's rocky relations with its neighbors, where memories of the Imperial
military's wartime march through Asia remain raw. Mr. Abe has recently made
progress in improving ties with Beijing and Seoul, one of the few major
successes so far of his eight-month-old administration.

It is unclear if the action will hurt those efforts or be seen as a compromise
that satisfies Japan's neighbors because he did not actually visit the shrine. .
As of Tuesday morning, Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, had not posted
any reaction to the news on its Web site. South Korea's Foreign Ministry also
made no comment on Tuesday morning.

Junichiro Koizumi, the previous prime minister, outraged many in Asia by making
annual visits. They won him support from Japanese veterans groups and other
conservatives, who viewed them as displays of respect for Japan's war dead.

Mr. Abe, who has pushed a conservative political agenda, has yet to make clear
whether he will visit Yasukuni as prime minister, a move that would almost
certainly anger China and South Korea. So far, Mr. Abe has tried to walk a thin
line between appealing to his domestic conservative base and improving relations
with Asian neighbors, with whom Japan has robust economic ties. One of his first
moves after taking office in September was a trip to Beijing and Seoul that was
widely credited with building good will.

The plant was offered during an annual spring ceremony at the shrine that was
held April 21-23, shortly after a visit here by China's prime minister, Wen
Jiabao, that was hailed as further mending of relations between the two Asian
powers. The visit was the first in nearly seven years by a Chinese leader;
China's top leaders had refused to come because of Mr. Koizumi's trips to the
shrine.

Ms. Ishida, the shrine spokeswoman, said the last prime minister to make that
type of offering was Yasuhiro Nakasone, in 1985. Prime Minister Nakasone also
visited the shrine, angering Asian neighbors. Ms. Ishida said the shrine only
allows high-ranking politicians and leaders of veterans and bereaved family
groups to make such offerings.

Reuters reported that Japan's foreign minister, Taro Aso, told reporters he
thought the gesture would have little impact on Sino-Japanese ties, which have
improved markedly since Mr. Abe took office.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Official support for the Yasukuni Shrine for Japan's war dead
angers China and South Korea. (Photo by Kazuhiro Nogi/Agence France-Presse --
Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CONSERVATISM (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); VETERANS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); WEB SITES (50%)
World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Yasukuni Shrine (Tokyo); World War II (1939-45)

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (92%) Martin Fackler; Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe; Junichiro
Koizumi

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (92%); TOKYO, JAPAN (90%); BEIJING, CHINA (72%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (97%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (95%); ASIA (94%); CHINA (93%)

REGION: China; South Korea; Japan

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              821 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Shrine Gift By Japan Leader Prompts Concern

BYLINE: By MARTIN FACKLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 355 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Wednesday, May 9


China and South Korea made subdued expressions of concern on Tuesday after
disclosures that Japan's prime minister had presented an offering to a Tokyo war
shrine, as officials in Tokyo tried to play down the gift's significance.

There have been worries here that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's gift last month of
a ceremonial plant to Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto memorial to Japan's war dead,
could set off fresh anger across Asia. Previous prime ministers have outraged
Japan's Asian neighbors by visiting Yasukuni, which includes war criminals among
the enshrined and has become a symbol in the region of what many see as Japan's
unrepentant attitude toward its wartime aggression.

Seoul and Beijing have so far shown restraint after news of the offering first
appeared on Monday. In a statement, South Korea's Foreign Ministry called the
gift ''very regrettable'' and said it ran ''counter to establishing a correct
perception of history.''

A Chinese government spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, told reporters that Yasukuni was an
''important and sensitive political issue'' and asked Japan to ''strictly
abide'' by its pledges to cooperate with China.

Since taking office last year, Mr. Abe has left intentionally vague whether he
plans to visit the shrine, an ambiguity aimed at appeasing Japanese
conservatives while not provoking former wartime victims like China, with whom
Japan has growing economic links. On Tuesday, Mr. Abe refused even to
acknowledge that he made the offering, despite the fact it had earlier been
confirmed by both the government and the shrine.

''As long as matters concerning the Yasukuni Shrine remain a diplomatic issue, I
make it a rule not to comment whether I will visit the shrine, or whether I have
made an offering to it,'' he told reporters.

Other Japanese leaders said they expected the reaction in Asia to be muted. The
governing Liberal Democratic Party's secretary general, Hidenao Nakagawa, said
Mr. Abe had made the offering as a private citizen, not as prime minister. He
also said there was no change in Mr. Abe's stance on Yasukuni, which has already
been explained to South Korea and China.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); WORLD WAR II (78%); POLITICS (78%);
GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (72%); RELIGION (72%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(71%); CONSERVATISM (67%) World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Yasukuni Shrine (Tokyo)

PERSON: SHINZO ABE (79%) Martin Fackler; Shinzo (Prime Min) Abe

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (91%); SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (59%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (97%); CHINA (95%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: China; South Korea; Japan

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              822 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Democrats' Pledge

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 564 words


Last year, Congressional Democrats allowed the Bush administration to ram
through one of the worst laws in the nation's history -- the Military
Commissions Act of 2006. This year, the Democrats pledged to use their new
majority to begin repairing the profound damage the law has done to the nation's
justice system and global image.

But there are disturbing signs their pledge may fall victim to the same tactical
political calculations and Bush administration propagandizing that allowed this
scandalous law to pass in the first place.

Rewriting the act should start with one simple step: restoring to prisoners of
the war on terror the fundamental right to challenge their detention in a real
court. So far, promised measures to restore habeas corpus have yet to see the
light of day, and they may remain buried unless Democratic leaders make them a
priority and members of both parties vote on principle, not out of fear of
attack ads.

President Bush turned habeas corpus into a partisan issue by declaring that the
prisoners in Guantanamo Bay, even innocent ones, do not deserve a hearing.
Lawmakers who objected were painted as friends of terrorists.

But let's be clear. There is nothing ''conservative'' or ''tough on terrorism''
in selectively stripping people of their rights. Suspending habeas corpus is an
extreme notion on the radical fringes of democratic philosophy. As four retired
military chief prosecutors -- from the Navy, the Marines and the Army -- pointed
out to Congress, holding prisoners without access to courts merely feeds Al
Qaeda's propaganda machine, increases the risk to the American military and sets
a precedent by which other governments could justify detaining American
civilians without charges or appeal.

Consider some of the other wild-eyed liberals calling on Congress to restore
habeas corpus: William Sessions, director of the F.B.I. under the first
President Bush; David Keene, head of the American Conservative Union; the
National Association of Evangelicals; David Neff, editor of Christianity Today,
founded by the Rev. Billy Graham; a long list of other evangelical leaders and
scholars; and nearly two dozen sitting and retired federal judges.

There are a half-dozen bills in the House and the Senate that would restore
habeas corpus. But the Democratic leadership has not found a way to bring the
issue to a vote. The first vehicle is the Defense Department's budget
authorization bill. But Representative Ike Skelton, chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee, chose not to include habeas corpus in his baseline version
of the measure, known as the chairman's mark, which will be taken up by the
committee today.

We hope habeas will be added to the bill by the committee, or that other
sponsors of measures to restore the ancient right, including Representatives
John Conyers Jr. of Michigan and Jerrold Nadler of New York, and Senators
Christopher Dodd of Connecticut and Patrick Leahy of Vermont, will find ways to
bring their bills to a vote.

The Democratic majority has a long list of wrongs to right from six years of Mr.
Bush's leadership. We are sympathetic to their concerns about finding a way to
revive habeas corpus that won't die in committee or be subject to a presidential
veto of a larger bill. But lawmakers sometimes have to stand on principle and
trust the voters to understand.

This is one of those times.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); HABEAS CORPUS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (85%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); ARMIES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING
(78%); LIBERALISM (78%); NAVIES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CONSERVATISM
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); DEFENSE SPENDING
(73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); AL-QAEDA (69%); JUDGES (69%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (66%); RELIGION (66%)
Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Habeas Corpus; Law and Legislation; Editorials;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Election Issues

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%); JERROLD NADLER (58%); CHRISTOPHER DODD (58%); IKE
SKELTON (58%); JOHN CONYERS (58%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (87%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              823 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Agency Affirms Mandates for Driver's Licenses

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


The Homeland Security Department said Tuesday that it would plow ahead with
national standards for driver's licenses, despite a highly unusual level of
activity by state legislatures opposed to the idea, and substantial second
thoughts in Congress.

The department said it had received about 12,000 public responses to its draft
rules, in a 60-day comment period that ended Tuesday. Russ Knocke, a spokesman,
said the comments were mixed.

Comments at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing Tuesday were more negative. The
chairman, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, complained that
security rules were supposed to be ''smart as well as tough'' and predicted that
state motor vehicle departments would not be able to cope with the requirements,
which include verifying all documents presented by applicants. Even renewals
will require birth certificates or other proof of legal residence. And the
change will impose billions of dollars in costs on states and localities, Mr.
Leahy and others said.

Mr. Leahy, who is a sponsor of a bipartisan bill to repeal the rules before they
take effect, asserts that the department cannot even safeguard the personal
information of its own employees. (Recently the department acknowledged that it
had released the names and Social Security numbers of thousands of employees,
including undercover sky marshals.)

According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, which has a clock on
its Web page counting down the time until the law's requirements take effect
(368 days as of Tuesday), Washington and Montana have enacted laws pledging not
to comply. In Idaho, the Legislature passed, and the governor signed, a budget
specifying that expenditures for carrying out the law next year would be zero.
Resolutions opposing the new licenses have been passed by one or both houses of
the legislature, and in some cases signed by the governor, in Arkansas, Arizona,
Colorado, Hawaii, Michigan, North Dakota and Utah.

Carl Tubbesing, deputy executive director of the conference, said, the actions
of legislatures was ''without precedent in the last 20 years.''

But Mr. Knocke, the spokesman for the Homeland Security Department, predicted
that reluctant states would come around because people would demand it. Without
the standardized licenses, they would need a passport to board an airliner, he
said.

''Residents of non-Real ID-compliant states are going to displeased with their
leadership,'' he said.

While states have mostly complained about costs, others have raised privacy
objections. The American Civil Liberties Union said Tuesday that the system as
laid out by the Bush administration ''streamlines identity theft.''

There was some support for the license plan at the hearing. Janice L. Kephart,
former counsel to the Sept. 11 commission, pointed out that Ziad Jarrah, a
hijacker of United Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania, had been stopped
for speeding two days before the Sept. 11 attacks and gave the police officer
one of the two Florida driver's licenses he was carrying. If the nation had a
system that limited applicants to a single license, the authorities would have
had a better chance of catching him, she said.

The law requires the states to begin issuing the standardized licenses by next
May, but the department can issue extensions through Dec. 31, 2009. All licenses
are supposed to be compliant by May 10, 2013.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); LICENSES & PERMITS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); DRIVERS LICENSES (90%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (89%); TERRORISM (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); VEHICLE SEARCH
(78%); IDENTITY THEFT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); US REAL ID ACT OF 2005
(78%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BUDGETS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (70%); HIJACKING (65%);
EXECUTIVES (62%); AIRLINES (60%) Roads and Traffic; Drivers Licenses; States
(US)  ; Law and Legislation; Security and Warning Systems; Terrorism; Privacy

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (93%); NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF
STATE LEGISLATURES (54%) Homeland Security Department

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (77%) Patrick J (Sen) Leahy; Matthew L Wald

STATE: HAWAII, USA (79%); NORTH DAKOTA, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (79%);
PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              825 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Norway: Police Hold Suspect In Bosnia War Crimes

BYLINE: By WALTER GIBBS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 112 words


The police arrested a 40-year-old native of Bosnia, now a Norwegian citizen, on
suspicion of committing war crimes against Bosnian Serbs while serving in an
ethnically Croatian military unit in 1992. The man, who in keeping with
Norwegian police practice was not identified, faces up to 21 years in a Norway
prison if convicted on charges of assault, rape and illegal detention at a
prison camp during the wars over the former Yugoslavia. The police have said
they are investigating 70 immigrants to Norway who are suspected of war crimes
in a number of countries. The arrested man arrived in Norway with his family in
1993 and received citizenship in 2001.    WALTER GIBBS

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARRESTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); POWS & MIAS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); PRISONS (86%); ASSAULT
& BATTERY (86%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (86%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (86%);
GENOCIDE (85%); CITIZENSHIP (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: Walter Gibbs

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); NORWAY (96%); CROATIA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Norway; Croatia

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              826 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Officer Says Civilian Toll In Haditha Was a Shock

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 8


The only Marine Corps officer who was in Haditha, Iraq, when American troops
killed 19 civilians in their homes in 2005 testified at a military hearing on
Tuesday that he was ''shocked'' to find only unarmed people, including women and
children, among the dead. But he said the marines had not violated any law of
war.

The officer, First Lt. William T. Kallop, said that soon after the killings, he
inspected one of the homes with a Marine corporal, Hector Salinas, and found
women, children and older men who had been killed when marines threw a grenade
into the room.

''What the hell happened, why aren't there any insurgents here?'' Lieutenant
Kallop testified that he asked aloud. ''I looked at Corporal Salinas, and he
looked just as shocked as I did.''

Lieutenant Kallop, a platoon leader, was the first witness called by lawyers for
Capt. Randy W. Stone, one of four Marine officers charged with dereliction of
duty for failing to properly investigate the deaths of two dozen civilians in
Haditha on Nov. 19, 2005. The hearing, in a Marine Corps courtroom here, is
meant to determine whether there is sufficient evidence against Captain Stone to
refer the charges to a general court-martial.

As Captain Stone and his three lawyers sat quietly at the defense table, a
Marine prosecutor spent most of the day cross-examining Lieutenant Kallop about
the actions of Staff Sgt. Frank D. Wuterich, the Marine squad leader whom
Lieutenant Kallop had ordered to ''clear'' an Iraqi home in Haditha after a
roadside bomb had killed a Marine lance corporal earlier that morning. Sergeant
Wuterich is charged with multiple counts of murder in connection with the
killing of the civilians that day.

''Did he tell you that he had left two wounded children in that house?'' the
prosecutor, Lt. Col. Sean Sullivan, asked Lieutenant Kallop, referring to
Sergeant Wuterich. ''Did he tell you that he had killed a child? Did he tell you
that there was a woman at the bottom of the stairs that they had killed?''

Lieutenant Kallop, who is not charged in the case and testified after being
given immunity from prosecution, replied to each question with a firm ''No,
sir.''

''Did he say anything,'' Colonel Sullivan later asked, ''about the five children
in the back bedroom being killed on the bed'' in the second house?

Lieutenant Kallop again answered no.

A hearing for Sergeant Wuterich, who was not present, is more than a month away.

In addition to Captain Stone, the other Marine officers charged in the case are
Capt. Lucas M. McConnell, the company commander; First Lt. Andrew A. Grayson, a
Marine intelligence officer who inspected the scene of killings; and Lt. Col.
Jeffrey R. Chessani, the battalion commander, who sent an electronic slide show
presentation of the killings to his superiors.

None of the four officers was present during the explosion of the roadside bomb
and the subsequent civilian killings by marines.

Despite the number of civilians killed by marines that morning in Haditha --
five men who ran from a car, and then another 19 people in their homes after
Lieutenant Kallop arrived -- he testified Tuesday that he believed his men had
acted appropriately and according to their training.

He said Sergeant Wuterich had told him that they had killed people in one house
after approaching a door to it and hearing the distinct metallic sound of an
AK-47 being prepared to fire.

''I thought that was within the rules of engagement because the squad leader
thought that he was about to kick in the door and walk into a machine gun,''
Lieutenant Kallop said. ''Corporal Salinas told me the same thing.''

Later he added, ''I had no doubt in my mind that they were telling the truth.''

Moreover, Lieutenant Kallop, who arrived in the town after the roadside bomb had
killed Lance Cpl. Miguel Terrazas, said his platoon had been told that Haditha
was ''an insurgent-controlled-and-occupied city.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Randy Stone, charged with failing to properly investigate
the deaths of 24 civilians in Haditha, Iraq, arrived at his hearing yesterday.
(Photo by Denis Poroy/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (86%); LAWYERS (78%); TERRORISM
(78%); EVIDENCE (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); IMMUNITY (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); LAW
OF WAR (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); GENOCIDE
(65%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); MURDER (58%) United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Immunity From Prosecution; Terrorism

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; Randy (Capt) Stone; William T (First Lt) Kallop

CITY: SALINAS, CA, USA (72%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              827 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marine Testifies to Urinating on Body

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 9


A marine testified on Wednesday that he urinated on the bloody remains of one of
five unarmed Iraqi men in Haditha whom his squad leader fatally shot in late
2005 moments after a roadside bomb had killed one of their comrades.

The marine, Sgt. Sanick Dela Cruz, said at a hearing here that he had acted in
anger over the death of Lance Cpl. Miguel Terrazas, known as T.J., whose convoy
was hit by a bomb planted by Sunni Arab insurgents.

''I know it was a bad thing what I done, but I done it because I was angry T.J.
was dead,'' Sergeant Dela Cruz said in a monotone.

The Iraqis had driven up to the site of the bombing, drawing suspicion from the
squad leader, Staff Sgt. Frank Wuterich, and his men, military investigators
have said.

Under a grant of immunity, Sergeant Dela Cruz testified that Staff Sergeant
Wuterich had ordered the five unarmed Iraqis out of their car and fired six to
eight rounds into them as they stood with arms raised.

''I watched him shooting, sir, at the Iraqis,'' Sergeant Dela Cruz said. He
walked around the car to inspect the bodies, he said. ''They were dead.''

From 10 feet away, the sergeant said, he sprayed the bodies with automatic fire
and then urinated on the bullet-ripped head of one man.

Sergeant Dela Cruz said that Staff Sergeant Wuterich had told the squad, ''If
anybody asks, they were running away, and the Iraqi Army shot them.'' Staff
Sergeant Wuterich's lawyers have said he fired on the five civilians after they
ran from the car and defied his order to stop.

Marine prosecutors charged Staff Sergeant Wuterich, Sergeant Dela Cruz and two
other marines in December with murder in the killings of a total of 24 Iraqi
civilians in Haditha on Nov. 19, 2005. Last month, in exchange for Sergeant Dela
Cruz's testimony, prosecutors dropped all five counts of unpremeditated murder
that he faced.

Four Marine officers are also charged in the case, accused of failing to
investigate the civilian deaths properly. Wednesday was the second day of a
hearing to determine if enough evidence exists to refer the charges against one
of those officers to a court-martial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); SHOOTINGS
(90%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
TESTIMONY (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); IMMUNITY (78%); TERRORISM (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(76%); ARMIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); MILITARY OFFENSES (73%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (73%); LAWYERS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (68%); GENOCIDE (63%); MURDER (58%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism; United States Armament
and Defense; United States International Relations; Immunity From Prosecution

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; Frank D (Sgt) Wuterich; Sanick P (Sgt) Dela Cruz

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              828 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

As We Try to Foil Another 9/11

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 821 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Answering Al Qaeda,'' by Clark Kent Ervin (Op-Ed, May 8):

I believe, as Mr. Ervin does, that it is just a matter of time before we are
again attacked by Al Qaeda. Unfortunately, our leaders have neglected to pay
attention to the details and have spent the last six years following a policy
that has done little if anything to increase our security.

Our borders are as porous as ever, our food supply goes unchecked, and our
harbors and nuclear plants are vulnerable to attack. Even our military bases are
targets for the terrorists.

Unfortunately, we must accept this as a reality until our government truly
addresses our weaknesses. Our National Guard has been weakened to the point that
natural disasters like the tornado in Kansas leave us practically defenseless
and unable to recover from such calamities.

Ben Franklin once remarked that we have a republic if we can keep it. We're not
doing such a great job, are we?  Russell K. Carter Berkeley Heights, N.J., May
9, 2007  To the Editor:

Nowhere in ''Answering Al Qaeda'' does Clark Kent Ervin address the real
problem, mentioned merely in passing at the close of his second paragraph, that
''the supply of young people who are willing and even eager to attack America
seems limitless.''

What do those young people see when they look at America? A country that spends
vast amounts on its military; a breathtaking hubris and arrogance that feels it
can disregard the facts on the ground or in the street because ''we're an empire
now, and when we act, we create our own reality''; a dangerous combination of
triumphalism combined with a naive idealism; a lack of historical consciousness;
and a political elite that thinks nothing of dragging a country to war based on
lies.

While in no way condoning the murderous rage of these young people, until we
understand its source, we will fail miserably at making our country and world a
safer place.  Stanislao G. Pugliese Rockville Centre, N.Y., May 8, 2007  The
writer is a professor of history at Hofstra University.  To the Editor:

Clark Kent Ervin's ''to-do list'' for taking steps to reduce our vulnerability
to a terrorist attack indicates that we have indeed been vulnerable, and still
are, for almost six years since 9/11.

If only those billions of taxpayer dollars that were, and still are, being spent
in Iraq could have been used to protect America, Mr. Ervin, along with the rest
of us, wouldn't be concerned about our vulnerability.  John Cappelletti New
York, May 8, 2007  To the Editor:

Clark Kent Ervin says ''it is only a matter of time before another catastrophic
attack is attempted.'' Why should Al Qaeda bother? It has already succeeded
beyond its wildest dreams.

America is floundering in Iraq, bleeding lives and treasure; developing into a
totalitarian state at home; and inexorably sinking in the estimation of the rest
of the world. The populace is nervous and fearful. What more could Al Qaeda hope
to accomplish?  Lois Taylor Old Greenwich, Conn., May 8, 2007  To the Editor:

Clark Kent Ervin's illusory prescription for reducing our vulnerability to Al
Qaeda and other terrorists ''as close to zero as possible'' provides more of a
road map for lobbyists serving the homeland security industry than a clear-eyed
view of how to respond to the threat of terrorism.

With one or two exceptions, Mr. Ervin's recommendations are both extraordinarily
expensive and ridiculously easy to overcome by any determined terrorist
organization. Moreover, his attempt to be comprehensive doesn't touch on
potential threats to our water and food supplies, the risk of bioterrorism, or
simple but effective attacks by men with guns.

Combating Al Qaeda and similar groups demands not a barricade mentality but a
close examination of the causes and motivations of terrorism and, where
possible, actions to reduce its appeal.

Such actions could include abandonment of hegemonic foreign and military
policies; demands for political reform and greater respect for human rights by
our allies, and not just our enemies, in the volatile Middle East; and
recognizing that our national dedication to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness need not be inextricably bound up in the pursuit of oil.  Bill Cordes
Washington, May 8, 2007  To the Editor:

To help make America safer, Clark Kent Ervin calls for inspection of 100 percent
of the cargo ships headed to the United States to detect any concealed weapons
of mass destruction. To this good-sense idea some point to the cost to the
taxpayers of performing the inspections.

The solution is simple. Charge those companies importing the goods for the
inspections as a cost of doing business. The companies that have the bottom-line
benefit and market advantage from importing cheap foreign goods should shoulder
the expense of minimizing the risks that these shipments may contain.   Keith R.
Schmitz Shorewood, Wis., May 8, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Keith Negley)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (75%); WEATHER (73%); WRITERS (73%); NATURAL DISASTERS (73%); HISTORY
(67%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)
Terrorism; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; Terrorism; Security and Warning Systems

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%)

PERSON: Russell K Carter; Stanislao G Pugliese; John Cappelletti; Lois Taylor;
Bill Cordes; Keith R Schmitz; Clark Kent Ervin

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              830 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Bosnian Serb Wins Genocide Appeal

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 78 words


An appeals court of the United Nations war crimes tribunal overturned a 2005
conviction for complicity in genocide against a former Bosnian Serb officer,
Vidoje Blagojevic, saying it had no proof that he had known of the ''genocidal
intent'' of the perpetrators of the 1995 massacre of Muslims at Srebrenica and
provided only logistical support. The court reduced his prison sentence to 15
years from 18, and upheld several related war crimes charges.    MARLISE SIMONS

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); APPEALS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%);
RELIGION (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (83%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Islam; Sentences (Criminal)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Vidoje (Col) Blagojevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (89%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Hague (Netherlands); Srebrenica (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              832 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Sarkozy of the Future Jousts With the Chirac of the Past

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 10


Repentance for the sins of the past has come easy to President Jacques Chirac.
He will be remembered as the first French leader to recognize the country's
crimes against Jews in World War II and to commemorate formally its complicity
in African slavery.

President-elect Nicolas Sarkozy, by contrast, does not believe in saying he is
sorry.

''I'm going to make the French proud of France again,'' Mr. Sarkozy said in his
speech after he was elected president on Sunday. ''I am going to bring an end to
repentance, which is a form of self-hatred, and the battle of memories that
feeds hatred of others.''

But when Mr. Chirac pointedly asked Mr. Sarkozy to attend a ceremony remembering
the victims of the French slave trade and celebrating the abolition of slavery,
he could not refuse.

Perhaps it was a last act of Chirac-ian vengeance, just six days before Mr.
Sarkozy takes over. Mr. Chirac and Mr. Sarkozy do not like each other, even
though Mr. Sarkozy served as a minister in Mr. Chirac's cabinet and Mr. Chirac
endorsed him -- reluctantly -- for president.

The two men stood side by side in the Luxembourg Gardens on Thursday -- their
first time together since the election -- for the ceremony.

They walked into the park together, Mr. Chirac's left hand resting a bit
paternally on the right shoulder of the much-shorter Mr. Sarkozy. They listened
to poetry read by two students and a song written and performed by the
Senegalese singer Youssou N'Dour. They made the rounds of the invitation-only
crowd. Mr. Chirac inaugurated a sculpture representing the links of a broken
chain.

Some of the invitees greeted Mr. Sarkozy's role with skepticism.

''His presence was a surprise,'' said Lilian Thuram, the Guadeloupe-born French
soccer star, who sharply criticized Mr. Sarkozy during the campaign. ''He said
he didn't want repentance, and today he's here. Civil society requires work on
our past.''

The far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, who did not go to Thursday's ceremony,
criticized Mr. Sarkozy for attending, saying it reflected ''continuity with
Chirac-ian universal repentance'' and not the ''rupture'' Mr. Sarkozy had
promised.

The issues of slavery and of France's colonial past have been particularly
delicate since an orgy of unrest in 2005, mainly among ethnic Arab and black
African youths in the troubled suburbs. The country's failure to integrate its
minorities and to give them educational and employment opportunities will be one
of the most important issues facing the Sarkozy presidency.

Despite the many faults of his 12-year presidency, Mr. Chirac has been widely
praised for trying to heal the wounds of history.

Soon after he was elected in 1995, he acknowledged that France bore heavy
responsibility for deporting tens of thousands of Jews to Nazi death camps
during World War II.

He pushed successfully for the modification of a divisive law passed in 2005
that called for a positive portrayal of France's colonial past in history
textbooks.

After the unrest in the suburbs, he set up a commemoration day for the end of
the slave trade, and called the examination of the past ''one of the keys to our
national cohesion.''

Mr. Sarkozy promotes himself as a forward-looking leader with an eye on the
future, for whom apologizing for events of the past is a sign of weakness.

''I want us to stop this systematic repentance,'' he said in March. ''The
colonial system was unjust, but to say that all the French who were in Algeria
were exploiters is false.''

In April he was even more blunt, saying: ''I am among those who think that
France should not be ashamed of its history. It didn't commit genocide. It
didn't invent the 'final solution.' It invented human rights.''

Furthermore, he said, ''all Frenchmen didn't support'' Marshal Henri Philippe
Petain, whose Vichy government collaborated with Nazi Germany after France's
defeat in 1940.

Mr. Sarkozy is unrepentant about his personal decisions as well. After his
election victory, his aides gave the impression he was off to a monastic retreat
to contemplate the weight of the decisions awaiting him.

Instead, he left in secret with his wife, Cecilia, and their 10-year-old son,
Louis, as guests aboard the 190-foot yacht of the billionaire Vincent Bollore, a
personal friend, corporate raider and media tycoon. The trip was both criticized
and ridiculed by Mr. Sarkozy's political opponents.

The French press likened Mr. Sarkozy's appetite for the fine life to that of
Silvio Berlusconi, the much-maligned former Italian prime minister. Liberation,
a left-leaning daily in Paris, ran a front-page picture of the Sarkozys on the
yacht with the headline ''Boat People.''

Unlike other French leaders, Mr. Sarkozy flaunts his connections with the
moneyed class and has criticized France's penchant for hiding wealth and
ambition. ''It seems that success has become so shameful in France that a young
person who wants to succeed must leave,'' he wrote in his 2006 memoir,
''Testimony.''

''I don't see the controversy,'' Mr. Sarkozy said Wednesday about his
all-expense-paid vacation as he jogged on a beach in Malta. ''I have no
intention of hiding. I have no intention of lying. I have no intention of
apologizing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (90%); SLAVERY (90%); POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (78%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (69%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (69%);
POETRY (64%); SONG WRITING (64%); EMPLOYMENT (60%); SOCCER (50%) Politics and
Government; Slavery; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (92%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (92%); JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (58%)
Elaine Sciolino; Jacques (Pres) Chirac; Nicolas Sarkozy

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (78%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (95%); SENEGAL (79%)

REGION: France

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              834 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Republicans in Congress Press Bush for Sanctions on Sudan

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


In the latest attempt to exert pressure on Sudan over the killing in the Darfur
region, a group of conservative to moderate Republicans in Congress demanded
Thursday that President Bush impose sanctions against the government for its
failure to rein in the violence.

In a three-page letter sent to the White House, 15 members of the House urged
Mr. Bush to ''follow your instincts'' and ''authorize the actions you outlined
on April 18,'' when Mr. Bush promised that the United States would impose
sanctions on Sudan if its government did not take action soon on Darfur.

The letter came a day after 108 members of Congress sought in another letter to
press China to flex its muscles in Sudan to try to end the violence in Darfur.
The two letters underscore the mounting frustration in Washington with the
government of Sudan. On Thursday, Liu Guijin, a former ambassador to Zimbabwe
and South Africa, was named China's special envoy assigned to the Darfur issue,
a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, said.

The Republicans' letter said: ''The time is at hand to reassert the resolve of
the United States that the atrocities taking place in Darfur cannot stand. We
urge you to do everything within your power to inflict serious economic pain
upon those who act as obstructionists to peace, and to take the other actions as
necessary, to halt the continued assault against human dignity in Darfur.''

Representatives who signed the Thursday letter included Eric Cantor of Virginia,
the deputy whip; Thaddeus McCotter of Michigan, chairman of the Republican
policy committee; Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida and Tom Tancredo of Colorado.

A senior official of the Bush administration said Thursday that the United
States might move toward sanctions within days. Mr. Bush said April 18 that he
would give Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, ''a short period of time''
to meet several conditions. The United States wants Mr. Bashir to agree to a
full deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces; to end his support for
the janjaweed Arab militias that have been carrying out systematic killings of
civilians in Darfur; and to allow aid to reach the region.

Mr. Bush was prepared to impose sanctions last month, administration officials
said, including a directive to the Treasury Department to block any dollar
transactions between the Sudanese government and the United States, and to bar
29 Sudanese companies from doing business there. But the president bowed to
pleas from the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, for more time to
negotiate with Mr. Bashir, administration officials said.

''The president made it clear that President Bashir needs to act to take care of
his people and to stop the violence,'' said Gordon D. Johndroe, a White House
spokesman.

Congressional staffers said the 15 Republicans decided to send the letter after
reading recent news reports about Sudanese military airstrikes against the site
of anticipated rebel unity talks in Darfur, in direct violation of a United
Nations Security Council resolution.

Besides the Republican lawmakers, the filmmaker Stephen Spielberg has also tried
to step up pressure on Sudan's government. Mr. Spielberg, who is an artistic
director for the Beijing Olympics, has requested a meeting on Darfur with
President Hu Jintao in the next 30 days, his spokesman, Marvin Levy, said
Thursday.

Mr. Levy said Mr. Spielberg did not explicitly threaten to withdraw from his
association with the Beijing Olympics, an issue about which China is very
sensitive. When Mr. Levy was asked what Mr. Spielberg would do if he did not get
the meeting with Mr. Hu, he said, ''We'll cross that bridge when it comes.''

Last month Mr. Spielberg sent a letter to Mr. Hu, asking that China pressure
Sudan to accept the United Nations peacekeeping force, but he did not receive an
answer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 12, 2007



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about mounting pressure on world leaders to
help bring an end to the violence in Darfur misspelled the given name of a film
director who has tried to step up pressure on Sudan's government. He Steven
Spielberg, not Stephen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CONSERVATISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (77%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (73%); PEACEKEEPING (73%); FINES
& PENALTIES (72%); GENOCIDE (61%) United States International Relations;
Embargoes and Economic Sanctions; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); THADDEUS G MCCOTTER (58%); ERIC CANTOR (58%);
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN (58%); THOMAS G TANCREDO (58%); BAN KI-MOON (50%) Helene
Cooper; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); ZIMBABWE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              837 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 12, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Value of an Afghan Life

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 88 words


To the Editor:

Re ''U.S. Pays and Apologizes to Kin of Afghans Killed by Marines'' (news
article, May 9):

It was rather disappointing to read that the value of an innocent Afghan life is
a mere $2,000 -- the amount the United States paid for each death.

Contrast this with the fact that tens of thousands of dollars are being spent
per wounded American soldier on medical treatment and rehabilitation.

Surely a country with a defense budget of more than $500 billion could do
better!  Ninad R. Bondre Oxford, Ohio, May 9, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); DEFENSE SPENDING (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); WAR &
CONFLICT (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); BUDGETS (83%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Finances; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: Ninad Bondre

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (91%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              838 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civilian Deaths Undermine Allies' War on Taliban

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and DAVID E. SANGER; Carlotta Gall reported from
Zerkoh, and David E. Sanger from Brussels. Taimoor Shah contributed reporting
from Zerkoh, and Abdul Waheed Wafa from Kabul.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2397 words

DATELINE: ZERKOH, Afghanistan, May 9


Scores of civilian deaths over the past months from heavy American and allied
reliance on airstrikes to battle Taliban insurgents are threatening popular
support for the Afghan government and creating severe strains within the NATO
alliance.

Afghan, American and other foreign officials say they worry about the political
toll the civilian deaths are exacting on President Hamid Karzai, who last week
issued another harsh condemnation of the American and NATO tactics, and even of
the entire international effort here.

What angers Afghans are not just the bombings, but also the raids of homes, the
shootings of civilians in the streets and at checkpoints, and the failure to
address those issues over the five years of war. Afghan patience is wearing
dangerously thin, officials warn.

The civilian deaths are also exposing tensions between American commanders and
commanders from other NATO countries, who have never fully agreed on the
strategy to fight the war here, in a country where there are no clear battle
lines between civilians and Taliban insurgents.

At NATO headquarters in Brussels, military commanders and diplomats alike fear
that divisions within the coalition and the loss of support among Afghans could
undermine what until now was considered a successful spring, one in which NATO
launched a broad offensive but the Taliban did not.

''There is absolutely no question that the will and support of the Afghan people
is vitally important to what we do here,'' Gen. Dan K. McNeill, the American
commander of the International Security Assistance Force, said in an interview.
''We are their guests, they are the hosts. We have to be mindful of their
culture, we have to operate in the context of their culture, and we have to take
every possible precaution to not cause undue risk to those around us, and to
their property.''

But American officials say that they have been forced to use air power more
intensively as they have spread their reach throughout Afghanistan, raiding
Taliban strongholds that had gone untouched for six years. One senior NATO
official said that ''without air, we'd need hundreds of thousands of troops'' in
the country. They also contend that the key to reducing casualties is training
more Afghan Army soldiers and police officers.

The anger is visible here in this farming village in the largely peaceful
western province of Herat, where American airstrikes left 57 villagers dead,
nearly half of them women and children, on April 27 and 29. Even the accounts of
villagers bore little resemblance to those of NATO and American officials -- and
suggested just how badly things could go astray in an unfamiliar land where
cultural misunderstandings quickly turn violent.

The United States military says it came under heavy fire from insurgents as it
searched for a local tribal commander and weapons caches and called in
airstrikes, killing 136 Taliban fighters.

But the villagers denied that any Taliban were in the area. Instead, they said,
they rose up and fought the Americans themselves, after the soldiers raided
several houses, arrested two men and shot dead two old men on a village road.

After burying the dead, the tribe's elders met with their chief, Hajji Arbab
Daulat Khan, and resolved to fight American forces if they returned. ''If they
come again, we will stand against them, and we will raise the whole area against
them,'' he warned. Or in the words of one foreign official in Afghanistan, the
Americans went after one guerrilla commander and created a hundred more.

On Tuesday, barely 24 hours after American officials apologized publicly to
President Karzai for a previous incident in which 19 civilians were shot by
marines in eastern Afghanistan, reports surfaced of at least 21 civilians killed
in an airstrike in Helmand Province, though residents reached by phone said the
toll could be as high as 80.

While NATO is now in overall command of the military operations in the country,
many of the most serious episodes of civilian deaths have involved United States
counterterrorism and Special Operations forces that operate separately from the
NATO command.

NATO, which now has 35,000 soldiers in the country, has emphasized its concern
about keeping civilian casualties to a minimum. Yet NATO, too, has been
responsible for civilian casualties over the past year, as it has relied on air
power to compensate for a shortage of troops, an American military official who
has served in Afghanistan said in a recent interview.

The subject of civilian casualties was the source of intense discussion on
Wednesday in Brussels when the NATO secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer,
met with the North Atlantic Council, the top representatives of the coalition.
But the conversation was less about how to reduce casualties, according to
participants, than about how to explain them to European governments, who say
their troops are there for reconstruction, not hunting the Taliban or
terrorists.

''The Europeans are worried about a lack of clarity about who is responsible for
the counterterror mission,'' said one participant in the debate. ''They are
worried that if NATO appears responsible for these casualties, it will result in
a loss of support'' for keeping forces in Afghanistan.

But it is not only the Americans whose practices are being questioned. NATO
soldiers have frequently fired on civilians on the roads, often because the
Afghans drive too close to military convoys or checkpoints.

The public mood hardened against foreign forces in the southern city of Kandahar
after British troops fired on civilians while driving through the streets after
a suicide bombing last year, and Canadian soldiers have repeatedly killed and
wounded civilians while on patrol in civilian areas.  Air Power and Popular
Anger

The reliance on air power has led to a string of prominent episodes recently
involving the deaths of large numbers of civilians, who often cannot escape,
caught between NATO forces and the Taliban and its sympathizers.

Since the beginning of March at least 132 civilians have been killed in at least
six bombings or shootings, according to officials. The actual number of
civilians killed is probably higher, since the areas of heaviest fighting, like
the southern province of Helmand, are too unsafe for travel and many deaths go
unreported and cannot be verified.

''You have a bag of capital -- that is the good will of the people -- and you
want to spend that as slow as you could,'' said the American military official.
''We are spending it at a fearsome rate.''

The issue of civilian casualties has dogged United States-led coalition forces
from the beginning of their intervention here in 2001. But as the Taliban surged
in strength in 2006, civilians have been caught in the middle more than before,
and at a time when Afghans have grown weary of the fighting, said Dr. Sima
Samar, director of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.

''If we still have civilian casualties, it can be used by the opposition groups
to the government to encourage the people against the government and against the
international community,'' Dr. Samar said at a recent news conference. ''That's
why we are concerned, and we ask the international community and the Afghan
government to be very, very careful.''

Now in Afghanistan, calls are growing for more political control over military
operations.

This week Afghan's upper house of Parliament recommended that the government
start peace talks with the Taliban, and that foreign forces cease all offensive
operations. While the chances of passage as worded are unlikely, the proposal
was one measure of the rising popular anger.

The episode here in this valley in Shindand district in late April showed just
how changeable the attitudes toward foreign troops can be.

The ethnic Pashtuns who live in the Zerkoh Valley are from a fiercely
independent tribe, surrounded by local enemies, and with a record of fighting
all comers. Still, NATO and United States soldiers were a common -- even
friendly -- sight in this valley in western Afghanistan. They came and talked to
the tribal leaders, built schools and culverts, and had plans for a new bridge.

A senior Bush administration official said American Special Forces units were
conducting an operation in the valley in late April. After the Taliban pinned
them down in a firefight, the airstrike was necessary, the military official
said. ''It was the only way to extract our guys,'' the official said.

''If your mortars are not getting you out, you call in close air support and
that will be less precise,'' said one senior American official who follows the
action in Afghanistan closely. ''We know that the Taliban hide in villages. The
job that we have not done as well is making it clear to European publics that
it's the Taliban who are exploiting the civilians.''  A Complicated Environment

But the Americans had stepped into a complicated political environment. In
interviews, villagers, who had cooperated with NATO before, blamed local rivals
for planting false information with the Americans, to encourage the Americans to
attack Zerkoh.

After the Special Forces units started raiding homes, the villagers were so
angered, they said, they fought the Americans themselves. They insisted that no
Taliban were here, an area that has been mostly calm.

''NATO was coming regularly, and the Afghan Army and police, and we were
cooperating with them,'' said Muhammad Alef, 35, a farmer who was tending to his
wounded cousin in the provincial hospital in the city of Herat.

''But when the Americans came without permission, and they came more than once
and disturbed the people,'' he said. ''They searched the houses, and the second
time they arrested people, and the third time the people got angry and fought
them.''

The American forces searched the tribal chief's house and arrested two of his
staff members, the villagers said. One, a watchman named only Bahadullah, 45,
said he had been handcuffed, covered with a hood and taken to the nearby
American base at Shindand.

He said he had been strung up by his feet for what seemed like an hour and a
half as American soldiers swung him about. When he was let down the soldiers
kicked and beat him, he said. In an interview this week, he said he was still
passing blood and in pain from the beatings.

A United States military spokesman at Bagram air base north of Kabul, Maj. Chris
Belcher, denied in an e-mail message that Afghan or American Special Forces
units had entered the villages or detained anyone.

The American forces did not find any weapons caches in the Shindand area,
either, he said. They were attacked with small-arms fire, rocket-propelled
grenades and mortar shells, he said.

A senior American military official who has looked at what happened in Zerkoh
said that some compounds were bombed but added that the troops were receiving
fire from them.

But a villager, Abdul Waheed, said the Americans had searched his family
compound and found no weapons and certainly must have seen the women and
children. Two days later they bombed the compound, killing six children, he
said.

''The Americans should leave Afghanistan because this is my own home,'' he said.
''I am sitting here and they come and just order a bomb to drop.''

Whether there was firing from the compound or not, the military official said
tactics needed to be reviewed. ''We just have to go over each one of these, one
by one, and say even if this was within the rules, is this what we want to do
next time,'' the official said.

Villagers said the first fighting broke out on April 27, as they had gathered at
the bazaar in the central village of Parmakan. Two old men, Adel Shah, 80, who
was walking home with some meat and sugar for his family, and Sarwar, 80, who
was harvesting poppies, were shot dead by the Americans, said Abdul Zaher, Mr.
Shah's son.  A Village Under Fire

That night, the first airstrikes were carried out, mainly on Bakhtabad, the
village at the entrance to the valley, residents said. On April 29, the
Americans returned, positioning their armored vehicles outside Parmakan.

Villagers said they thought the Americans were going to raid houses again, and
the men gathered to fight. Husi, 35, lives in a house near the school and on the
edge of the village. She was alone with her 10 children, and when the shooting
started they cowered at the entrance of their walled home, she said.

Then suddenly a plane bombed the five-room house. ''When they bombed I just
ran,'' she recalled as she held her 1-year-old boy. Women and children were
pouring out of the village to the river to cross it to safety, she said.

In the panic as they fled, Husi was separated from three of her children, Amina,
8, Tote, 5, and Fazli, 3, who are still missing.

''We ran with bare feet, we left our shoes,'' said Sara, a relative and the
mother of seven, whose house was also bombed. ''I was running and they were
shooting at us from the plane,'' she said.

Two uncles and two cousins were killed when the house was bombed, she said. ''We
have nothing, it's all finished,'' she said.

The river was chest-high at the time, and a number of women and children were
swept away. Fifty-seven people died over all, including 17 children under 10, 10
women and 14 old men, Hajji Daulat Khan said. Eight people are still missing,
including a 21-year-old man, and Husi's three children.

The bombing of the village so outraged people that they continued fighting the
Americans even after the airstrikes. American and Afghan military officials
admitted that they had been surprised at the ferocity of the response, and said
that at one point American soldiers had been forced to call in the Afghan Army.

''We are not saying that the foreigners should leave or stay, we are just saying
they should not do this,'' said a farmer, Fateh Muhammad, 55, gesturing with his
scythe at an enormous bomb crater and his neighbor's collapsed house. He showed
the place where two of his neighbors had been killed in a field nearby.

The airstrikes damaged about 100 homes and a new school built by Italian troops.

''This is a big mistake the Americans are making,'' said Nasrullah Khan, a
younger brother of the tribal chief, Hajji Daulat Khan. ''If the Americans are
here for peace, this is not the way.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rozaddin, right, a laborer, was wounded last month during
American airstrikes in Herat Province, Afghanistan, that villagers said killed
57 people. (Photo by Joao Silva for The New York Times)(pg. 1)
Hajji Arbab Daulat Khan, left, Parmakan's village chief, in a classroom damaged
in the attack on the village. He said 57 villagers had been killed. Another
villager, Sara, on the far left in the photo at right, said four of her
relatives had been killed. ''We have nothing, it's all finished,'' she said.
 Abdul Quduz, 15, said his father and an uncle were killed in a recent
American-led raid on his village, Parmakan, in the Afghan province of Herat.
(Photographs by Joao Silva for The New York Times)(pg. 8)  Map of Afghanistan
highlighting Parmakan: An American operation damaged about 100 homes in
Parmakan. (pg. 8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); POLITICS (77%); ARMIES (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (75%) United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) Taliban  ; North Atlantic
Treaty Organization

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (77%) Carlotta Gall; David E Sanger; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); BELGIUM (58%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              842 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Antiwar Iraqi in Washington Has a More Sectarian Agenda at Home

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE and EDWARD WONG; Scott Shane reported from Washington,
and Edward Wong from Baghdad. Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi and Alissa J. Rubin
contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times
from Baquba.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1385 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


As Congress and the White House continue to spar over war plans, Iraqis
representing all sides in the conflict are turning up in the halls of power here
to press their views.

For two weeks, in meetings with a score of members of Congress, Muhammad
al-Daini, a Sunni Arab member of the Iraqi Parliament who says he has survived
eight assassination attempts, has offered a well-practiced pitch that emphasizes
the need for American troops to withdraw.

''The problem in Iraq is the American Army,'' Mr. Daini told a group of
attentive American legislators gathered last week in the office of
Representative Jim McDermott, an antiwar Democrat from Seattle. ''What brought
terrorism, what brought Al Qaeda and what brought Iranian influence is the
Americans.''

Mr. Daini, soft-spoken and generally unsmiling, has been ushered from meeting to
meeting by a public relations firm paid by an American businessman who calls the
Iraqi politician ''a true humanitarian.'' The businessman, Dal LaMagna, says he
is devoting the fortune he made selling his high-end grooming tools business,
Tweezerman, to seeking an end to the violence in Iraq, a goal he says Mr. Daini
shares.

But a closer look at Mr. Daini's record in Iraq suggests a more complicated
picture. The real lesson of his tour may be the difficulty of sorting out from
Washington who is who in a distant, bitter sectarian conflagration, where
hyperbole is rife and solid facts are hard to come by.

Last year, after Mr. Daini helped expose a secret torture jail run by the
Interior Ministry, his Shiite opponents accused him of having ties to Sunni
insurgents. He has publicly praised the Sunni insurgency for taking on American
troops, and a reporter for a Shiite newspaper has accused him of complicity in
the killing of the reporter's brother.

A central part of Mr. Daini's pitch is the perfidy of the Shiite-led government
in Baghdad, and he has brought to Washington a stack of documents that he
contends prove the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki is tied to
death squads and takes orders from Iran. One is a letter purporting to bear Mr.
Maliki's signature pledging to Iran's Revolutionary Guard to destroy 13
opponents in Parliament ''by any means,'' including ''physical elimination.''

Another supposedly shows Mr. Maliki advising the radical Shiite cleric Moktada
al-Sadr to hide his top militia commanders in Iran or send them to the south
during the new Baghdad security push.

Mr. Maliki's allies, however, say the documents are forgeries. The government
now plans to ask Parliament to vote to lift Mr. Daini's immunity from criminal
prosecution, a privilege of all legislators, so that he can be charged with
forgery.

''The documents that he has can be found on the terrorists' Web sites,'' Hassan
al-Sineid, a senior Shiite legislator from Mr. Maliki's party, said Saturday.
''The Iraqi government knows all about what he's doing in Washington.''

Mr. Daini's visit last week coincided with those of Mowaffak al-Rubaie, Iraq's
national security adviser, and Barham Salih, a deputy prime minister. Mr. Salih
and Mr. Rubaie urged Congress to have patience, leaving American troops in
place; Mr. Daini urged a timetable for a pullout.

Mr. Daini grew animated when asked about Mr. Rubaie, a conservative Shiite. ''He
always says the opposite of the truth,'' Mr. Daini said. ''I'd like to ask him,
do you dare even step into the streets of Iraq?''

Later he asserted that Mr. Rubaie was, in fact, an Iranian merely posing as an
Iraqi.

''There is an Iranian army inside the Defense Ministry and the Interior
Ministry,'' Mr. Daini told the Congressional group gathered by Mr. McDermott.

The American lawmakers were polite and inquisitive but some appeared nonplussed
by hints of the polarization of Iraqi views. When Representative Bill Delahunt,
Democrat of Massachusetts, suggested that it might be valuable to get all Iraqi
factions to meet for talks in the United States, Mr. Daini demurred.

The Shiites represented by Mr. Maliki, he said, ''have had a chance to rule.''

''I don't think they deserve another chance,'' he said.

Mr. McDermott, trained as a psychiatrist, ''believes in listening to the
patient,'' said his spokesman, Mike DeCesare. He does not necessarily accept Mr.
Daini's analysis, but he believes Congress should hear a range of Iraqi views,
Mr. DeCesare said.

In the claims and counterclaims that saturate Iraqi politics, accusations of
treason and murder are commonplace. But Mr. Daini's basic claims -- that the
Maliki government has ties to Shiite militias and to Iran -- are widely accepted
and have caused serious concern to American officials.

Some Sunnis fear that a quick American pullout could endanger them. But Mr.
Daini asserts that American support for the Maliki government merely prolongs
the bloodshed and empowers Iran. Only an American withdrawal, combined with an
international conference, can free Iraqi nationalists of all sects to unite the
country, he said.

Mr. Daini, 35, is a member of the National Dialogue Front, a Sunni Arab
political group led by Saleh al-Mutlak, a former Baath Party official who
insists that the Baath Party, the party of Saddam Hussein, was the best party
ever to govern Iraq.

Mr. Daini is from Diyala Province, an area north and east of Baghdad that is one
of the most violent places in Iraq, with Sunni insurgents, Shiite militias and
American forces all battling for control. He won a parliamentary seat in
December 2005.

Last June, Mr. Daini drew national and international attention when he helped
expose a prison in Diyala containing hundreds of mostly Sunni prisoners, many of
whom bore marks of torture. Video of Mr. Daini speaking with prisoners was
broadcast in Britain in November and on CNN in March.

Days after the exposure of the prison, Mr. Daini said, 10 male relatives who
were working as his bodyguards were stopped by Shiite militia members and shot
to death.

Even as those events were unfolding, the reporter for the Shiite newspaper,
Samir al-Awad, was pressing for a criminal investigation of Mr. Daini in
connection with the killing of Mr. Awad's brother, a Shiite truck driver who
disappeared last summer. Mr. Awad's campaign has drawn support from Ahmad
Chalabi, the prominent Shiite politician.

The police pinpointed two suspects, both from the Daini tribe, Mr. Awad said,
but could not find them.

Then, on Feb. 6, Mr. Awad said that he saw Muhammad al-Daini appear on Al
Jazeera television holding up a photo of a corpse that Mr. Awad recognized as
that of his brother, but that Mr. Daini claimed showed a Sunni Arab murdered by
Shiite militiamen.

''I saw his face,'' he said. ''It was so clear it was my brother.''

In an interview, Mr. Daini denied that the picture showed Mr. Awad's brother and
said he had nothing to do with what he called the ''terrible killing.'' He said
he was ''fighting against Al Qaeda,'' though he acknowledged that he had often
praised Iraqi resistance to the American occupation.

''I'm Iraqi and I love my country, just like the Americans love their country,''
he said, ''and I want Iraq without any occupation.''

The accusations about insurgency and murder never arose last week as Mr.
LaMagna, the American businessman, accompanied Mr. Daini on his visits. Mr.
Daini briefly saw Howard Dean, chairman of the Democratic National Committee,
and met with Lee H. Hamilton, the co-chairman of the Iraq Study Group.

He saw a long list of members of Congress. Most were antiwar Democrats, but one
Republican, Representative Wayne T. Gilchrest of Maryland, explained his meeting
in a press release, calling it ''incredibly important'' to hear ''different
perspectives on the complicated factions'' in Iraq.

Mr. LaMagna, who plunged into antiwar advocacy after selling his company in
2004, has helped finance three films on the war and first heard of Mr. Daini
last year on a visit to Jordan with Mr. McDermott. He said he had found Mr.
Daini ''consistent,'' did not believe claims that he was involved in
disinformation or violence and was enjoying playing host to Mr. Daini at his
Washington house.

''I like to hang with someone to get to know him,'' said Mr. LaMagna. ''We
brought in a cook. I jog with him in the morning. We have the same agenda: we
want to stop the violence.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad al-Daini, a Sunni member of Parliament, urged an
American withdrawal at a meeting in Representative Jim McDermott's office.
(Photo by Andrew Councill for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
ARMIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%);
ASSASSINATION (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); AL-QAEDA (69%); COUNTERFEITING
(66%); IMMUNITY (61%); PUBLIC RELATIONS (53%) United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Biographical Information;
Terrorism

COMPANY: TWEEZERMAN INTERNATIONAL LLC (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325620 TOILET PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC2844 PERFUMES,
COSMETICS, & OTHER TOILET PREPARATIONS (55%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (89%); JIM MCDERMOTT (73%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (56%)
Muhammad Al- Danai; Nuri Kamal Al- (Prime Min) Maliki; Dal Lamagna; Scott Shane;
Edward Wong

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Washington (DC)  ; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              843 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Key Taliban Leader Is Killed in Afghanistan in Raid by Afghans, U.S. and NATO

BYLINE: By TAIMOOR SHAH and CARLOTTA GALL; Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar,
and Carlotta Gall from Kabul, Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1357 words

DATELINE: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, May 13


The man who probably was the Taliban's foremost operational commander, Mullah
Dadullah, was killed in a joint operation by Afghan security forces, American
forces and NATO troops in Helmand Province, Governor Asadullah Khaled of the
neighboring Kandahar Province said Sunday.

Mullah Dadullah's body was displayed for journalists on Sunday morning in this
southern Afghan city. The NATO force in Afghanistan confirmed his death in a
statement issued in Kabul, saying that American troops had led the operation.
There were various reports of the actual circumstances and day of the death.

Mullah Dadullah was one of the most wanted Taliban leaders, close to the leader
Mullah Muhammad Omar, and with links to Al Qaeda, and was probably the most
important operational commander.

While the exact number of Taliban fighters or the command structure are not
known, military officials say he organized fighters, weapons, supplies and
finances across much of southern and southeastern Afghanistan, the centers of
the Taliban insurgency. He had been sighted in various places in the last nine
months to a year, apparently moving into and out of southern Afghanistan from
Pakistan border regions.

His death would cause a ''significant blow to the Taliban's command and
control,'' said Maj. Chris Belcher, an American military spokesman at Bagram Air
Base, north of Kabul, the capital. He added that Mullah Dadullah ''was a
military leader, primarily in charge of the effort to recapture the city of
Kandahar,'' once the Taliban's stronghold.

The Taliban insurgency swelled in 2006 in an effort to deter NATO troops as they
arrived to take over command of southern Afghanistan. Last year the Taliban made
a strong effort to gain control of the city of Kandahar, or at least the
surrounding area. This year fighting has centered on Helmand Province.

In the last year Mullah Dadullah was known to be traveling in Pakistan's tribal
areas on the Afghan border, and in particular North and South Waziristan, a
Pakistan intelligence official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity
because of the nature of intelligence work. Taliban militants and foreign Qaeda
allies have created a virtual Taliban ministate in that area.

Mullah Dadullah is also thought to be responsible for ordering numerous
assassinations of clerics, government officials and health and education
workers, as well as kidnappings and beheadings, including of foreigners. The
intelligence officials said he was responsible for training and sending scores
of suicide bombers to Afghanistan. The bombs have killed or wounded hundreds of
Afghans and dozens of foreigners in the last year and a half.

Military and intelligence officials said his death would be a serious blow to
the Taliban, since he had orchestrated many of the insurgents' operations.
Mullah Dadullah is the third member of the 10-member leadership council of the
Taliban to be killed in the last six months.

Mullah Dadullah ''will most certainly be replaced in time, but the insurgency
has received a serious blow,'' NATO said in a news release.

Governor Khaled said, ''This is a huge loss for the Taliban; it will certainly
weaken their activities.'' He led journalists to see the body, on the veranda of
the governor's palace. Mullah Dadullah, an amputee, was recognizable in part
from his missing left leg and thick black beard. He was wounded in the head and
left eye and his face and chest were bloodied.

Military officials said they were keeping information about the circumstances of
his death to a minimum so as not to jeopardize continuing intelligence
operations.

Mullah Dadullah was tracked by a ''robust'' intelligence operation and had left
the sanctuary of a neighboring country just days before and entered Afghanistan,
said Maj. John Thomas, a NATO spokesman.

Major Belcher said Mullah Dadullah was killed in the Garmser district of
Helmand, on the route in from Pakistan, south of the town of Lashkar Gah.
Taliban fighters have moved frequently across the border, and the southern part
of Helmand is a vital supply route for Taliban militants fighting in Helmand.

One official in the region, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he
was not authorized to speak about the matter, said the operation in which Mullah
Dadullah was killed was a helicopter-borne assault by American troops who were
dropped in and engaged him and his men in a firefight. The bodies were later
given to the Afghans, he said.

The operation began Friday night, based on intelligence, and the American forces
knew Mullah Dadullah was at the location. ''It was swift and short commando
operation,'' the official said. Either Mullah Dadullah had been lured to a
meeting or someone had betrayed him, he said.

Major Belcher said he was killed by small-arms fire.

The Afghan military spokesman, Gen. Zaher Azimi, said at a news conference that
the Taliban commander was found among 11 bodies of Taliban fighters at the end
of heavy fighting in Sarwan Qala in northeastern Helmand, an area where fighting
this week killed at least 21 civilians. Residents reported a far higher death
toll at the time.

Mullah Dadullah was a member of the nomadic Kuchi tribe, who move across
Afghanistan with the seasons with their camels, sheep and goats. Villagers in
one of the most remote areas of Afghanistan, Char Chine in Oruzgan Province,
said he used to pitch his tent on a hill there. A longtime fighter and senior
commander of the Taliban, he fought on the front lines as the Taliban seized
control of much of the country in the 1990s.

Human rights groups have said he was responsible for killing numerous civilians
during a campaign in the mid-90s in the central Afghanistan province of Bamian,
peopled mostly by Shiite Muslims who were resisting the Taliban advance.

In 2001, he was fighting in northern Afghanistan and became trapped with
thousands of Taliban fighters in the city of Kunduz when the United States began
its campaign against the Taliban government. He agreed to surrender, along with
the senior Taliban military commander in the north, Mullah Fazel, and drove out
to meet with the Northern Alliance commander, Abdul Rashid Dostum in December
2001 in Mazar-i-Sharif.

But while Mullah Fazel arranged the surrender of thousands of other foreign and
Afghan fighters, Mullah Dadullah escaped. He later told the BBC that he had paid
a large amount of money to a Northern Alliance commander and escaped into the
mountains, crossing the length of Afghanistan to reach the Taliban heartland in
southern Afghanistan.

He is thought to have taken refuge in Pakistan for the next few years, and as
the Taliban re-emerged as a fighting force in 2005 he began to give interviews
to selected journalists, including television interviews, and released
propaganda videos vowing to send waves of suicide bombers and fighters into
Afghanistan to overthrow the government.

There had been reports over the years that he had been captured, but they turned
out to be unfounded.

The Kandahar governor said people could now live more peacefully with Mullah
Dadullah gone. ''The people have now been rescued from the cruelty of this wild
butcher,'' he told the journalists.  Bin Laden Alive, Afghan Rebel Says

DUBAI, May 13 (Reuters) -- An anti-American Afghan rebel leader said in a video
broadcast Sunday that he had information that Osama bin Laden was alive but
keeping a low profile by not issuing statements.

''Based on information I have, I believe Osama is alive,'' said Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, whose forces operate in southeastern Afghanistan near Pakistan, in
the undated video broadcast on Al Arabiya television. His remarks were dubbed
into Arabic.

Mr. Hekmatyar said he believed ''that it is wise that no statements or tapes are
issued even after a long while.''

Mr. Hekmatyar, a former Afghan prime minister, is on an American wanted list and
leads an insurgency separate from the Taliban movement. He said in January that
fighters loyal to his group had helped Mr. bin Laden and his deputy, Ayman
al-Zawahri, escape an American effort to capture them in eastern Afghanistan in
late 2001.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Afghanistan highlighting Kandahar: The body of Mullah Dadullah
was displayed yesterday in Kandahar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); TALIBAN (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%) United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); AL-QAEDA (56%) Taliban;
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) Dadullah (Mullah); Osama Bin Laden; Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar; Taimoor Shah; Carlotta Gall

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Helmand Province (Afghanistan)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              846 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Witness Next Door

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 710 words


One of the most unusual people in New Jersey these days is a tall 34-year-old
black man named Daoud Hari. Others may lose their tempers at traffic jams on the
turnpike, but he's just glad he's no longer being tortured.

Mr. Hari has just arrived in the U.S. from Chad and Darfur, where he says he was
beaten and told repeatedly he was going to be executed. He is one of just a
handful of Darfuris -- his lawyer knows of two others -- whom the U.S. has
accepted as refugees.

I knew Mr. Hari in his previous life, because he interpreted for me early last
year. We journeyed together along the Darfur-Chad border through a no man's land
of villages that were being attacked by Sudan's janjaweed militia.

Mr. Hari helped me interview two orphan boys living under a tree, a 13-year-old
girl shot in the chest, a 6-year-old boy trying desperately not to cry as
doctors treated shrapnel wounds to his leg and a 15-year-old girl gang-raped by
the janjaweed.

It is a different world there. It is the antipodes of New Jersey.

When our vehicle became stuck in the sand in one janjaweed area, we strained
side by side to push it out before trouble arrived. We slept in the sand under
the stars, we saw gruesome injuries, we witnessed people preparing to be killed,
and we saw each other dusty and frightened. In that crucible, I grew steadily
more impressed with Mr. Hari's courage, for as a local person he was at greater
risk of immediate execution than a foreigner like me.

He was scared, of course, but what drove him was a relentless determination to
get out the story of what was happening to his fellow Darfuris. He was
determined to fight genocide with the best weapon he had, his training in
English.

Interpreters and drivers are the secret to good international reporting, and
they do much of the work, take most of the risks and get none of the credit. Mr.
Hari regularly interpreted for other journalists, repeatedly putting himself in
danger to get out the stories.

Last August, he accompanied an ace Chicago Tribune reporter, Paul Salopek, into
Darfur, but they were seized by an armed faction. Once, he said, a commander
ordered his soldiers to execute him, but they were from the same tribe and
balked. Another time, he says, a commander untied him and told him to escape --
but he refused unless the driver was freed as well. So Mr. Hari was tied up
again, and he was beaten as he was interrogated about his work with me and other
journalists.

Finally, after more than a month, Sudan freed Mr. Hari along with Mr. Salopek
and the driver. Eventually Mr. Hari made his way back to Chad, and the U.S.
granted him status as a political refugee. It is disorienting to be with him
here, where we are both clean, rested and safe.

Yet even here Mr. Hari is haunted by Darfur. He knows one brother was killed;
the other was attacked and beaten, but Mr. Hari assumes he is still alive. Of
his three sisters, Mr. Hari last saw one in 2003 and the others in 2006.

He plans to study and is also determined to speak out about Darfur and tell
Americans what is happening to his people.

Mr. Hari's presence in the U.S. underscores a profound difference between Darfur
and past genocides: In the past, we could always claim that we didn't fully
appreciate what was going on until too late.

It was only a faint reed of an excuse, for in fact information always did
trickle out about past genocides even as they were underway. But this time we
can't even feign ignorance.

A superb new documentary, ''The Devil Came on Horseback,'' provides a wrenching
tour through the eyes of a tormented American military observer there. A handful
of books chronicle the killings; one of them, ''Not on Our Watch,'' has hit the
best-seller list with its suggestions for what citizens can do. President Bush
has described the slaughter in Darfur as genocide since 2004.

Google Earth has developed a first-rate program to observe the devastation from
above. On my blog, www.nytimes.com/ontheground, you can see a man whose eyes
were gouged out by the janjaweed as well as video from the journey last year
with Mr. Hari.

Or, if you live in New Jersey, you can simply turn to one of your newest
neighbors, and see the pain in his eyes as he wonders if his sisters are still
alive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(88%); JOURNALISM (85%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); TOLL ROADS & TURNPIKES
(77%); TORTURE (77%); IMMIGRATION (75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); LAWYERS (69%); ORPHANS (68%); WRITERS (67%); GENOCIDE
(66%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); ARMED FORCES (60%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Asylum (Political); Immigration and Refugees

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Daoud Hari

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHAD (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              847 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Compassion Fatigue on Darfur?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 789 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Save the Darfur Puppy'' (column, May 10):

Nicholas D. Kristof says the reason people will try to help a single person (or
animal) rather than an entire population is that we lack a ''troubled
conscience.'' I disagree.

People are more willing to help an individual person (or animal) because they'll
be able to ''see'' the outcome. We want to know that what we're being asked to
do is actually having an effect.

When people are asked to save another country or an entire population, they are
rightly skeptical about where their money will go because it seems to go into a
black hole. We don't want to give our time or our money to a bureaucracy.

I agree with Mr. Kristof's take on ABC News (and many mainstream news outlets).
Americans might be more willing to organize to help people around the world if
we could actually see and understand what is going on there. But as long as our
news outlets keep giving more time to salacious items (JonBenet Ramsey, Anna
Nicole Smith), we'll probably never have the context to understand what goes on
in other parts of the world where entire populations really do need our help.
Michelle O'Hagan Chicago, May 10, 2007  To the Editor:

It may be accurate to say that the human conscience is less affected by mass
suffering than by an individual in distress. But there could be another
explanation for people's reluctance to give to alleviate the hunger of millions.

We can be moved to tears by the pain caused by genocide, and in fact overwhelmed
by the magnitude of a suffering that we as individuals do not have the resources
or power to alleviate. Our consciences can be appeased only when we see that we
have actually helped someone; hence the appeal of feeding one hungry child or
financing a micro-loan for a farmer in Africa.

But that feeling of helplessness that causes us to distance ourselves from a
pain too great to bear does not provide an excuse for President Bush or members
of the United Nations who actually have the power to directly influence global
events.  Beth Bistrow Chicago, May 10, 2007  To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof alleges that lack of public outcry over Darfur has meant
that the International Criminal Court has accomplished little there. But this
overlooks the extensive prosecutorial investigation conducted by the court since
2005 and the American public pressure that made it possible.

Since the court received the referral of Darfur from the Security Council two
years ago, the court has collected voluminous evidence, taken statements of more
than 100 witnesses (and screened hundreds more) and conducted five missions to
Sudan.

Last week, the I.C.C. issued warrants for the arrest of a senior Sudanese
government minister and a janjaweed militia leader.

As for outcry, the United States' abstention on the Security Council referral of
Darfur to the I.C.C. resulted largely from public pressure on the administration
through efforts like the Save Darfur Campaign.   John Washburn  New York, May
10, 2007  The writer is convener, American N.G.O. Coalition for the
International Criminal Court, United Nations Association of the U.S.A.  To the
Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof, noting the slow response of America's leaders and much of
the public to the genocide in Sudan, contends that they would show more interest
if the victim was ''a suffering puppy with big eyes and floppy ears.'' Sadly,
there is ample historical precedent for Mr. Kristof's concern.

In 1939, most of Congress and the public opposed the Wagner-Rogers bill, which
would have granted haven to 20,000 refugee children from Nazi Germany. President
Franklin D. Roosevelt refused to support the bill.

The next year, Pets magazine published a sympathetic photo of a British puppy,
accompanied by an appeal to rescue purebreds that were endangered by the German
bombing raids on England. Several thousand readers responded with offers to
shelter the puppies.  Rafael Medoff Washington, May 10, 2007  The writer is
director of the David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies.   To the Editor:

I can't stop thinking about Nicholas D. Kristof's dramatic and unassailable
point that, sadly, we do need a ''Darfur puppy'' to impel us to take action.
Further, it made me realize how gratifying it is that my synagogue's efforts for
Darfur resulted in a solar cooker campaign where we can actually see on a small
scale the faces of the women we are helping.

Our rabbi and past president who brought this campaign to the congregation were
very wise to give us something on a personal level that we could respond to. We
want to help.

As Mr. Kristof knows, save one, you save the world. Maybe that's the bottom
line.  Yvette Perry New York, May 11, 2007

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Matt Rota)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (85%); GENOCIDE (68%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (63%);
WITNESSES (63%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%);
MICROFINANCE (50%) Foreign Aid; United States International Relations; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; News and News Media

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
International Criminal Court; United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (66%) Michelle O'Hagan; Beth Bistrow; John Washburn;
Rafael Medoff; Yvette Perry; Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              849 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 781 words


INTERNATIONAL A3-12  Panel Says Iran Has Fixed Its Enrichment Problems
Inspectors for the International Atomic Energy Agency have concluded that Iran
appears to have solved most of its technological problems and is now beginning
to enrich uranium on a far larger scale than before, according to the agency's
top officials.  A1  Search for Missing G.I.'s  The search for three missing
American soldiers abducted after an attack south of Baghdad continued as the
Qaeda group that claimed responsibility for the ambush said the soldiers would
never be found.  A10   Pakistan Shaken by Protests Opposition parties shut down
the southern port city of Karachi and slowed commerce in other parts of the
country with a strike to protest the deaths of at least 39 people in political
violence over the weekend. A11   Fraud Claims in Philippine Vote Voters went to
the polls in the Philippines to elect senators, congressmen and local officials,
amid reports of violence and accusations of fraud.

The results will be unknown for several days because the votes will be counted
by hand. A3   Red Cross Denounces Israel The International Committee of the Red
Cross, in a confidential report about East Jerusalem and its surrounding areas,
accuses Israel of a ''general disregard'' for ''its obligations under
international humanitarian law -- and the law of occupation in particular.'' A6
Palestinian Official Steps Down The Palestinian interior minister, Hani
al-Qawasmeh, resigned, and four more Palestinians were killed in fierce
factional gun battles.  A8   NATIONAL A13-17   Gonzales's Top Deputy Is Stepping
Down Paul J. McNulty, the deputy attorney general whose Congressional testimony
in February provided a spark that turned a smoldering issue over the firings of
federal prosecutors into a raging inferno, announced his resignation.  A15
Plans to Study Fuel Standards President Bush announced that he had directed his
administration to begin the months-long process of establishing new, higher
fuel-efficiency standards for new cars.   A17  Expansion in the Floodplains
There has been a sharp increase in residential and commercial development in the
floodplains in St. Louis, despite the floods of 1993. . A13  Inquiry Into
Medicare Marketing In the first major investigation of Medicare marketing, the
Oklahoma insurance commissioner has documented widespread misconduct by agents
working for Humana and ordered them to take corrective action to protect
consumers against high-pressure sales tactics.   A14  Military Restricts Web
Sites Service members will not be allowed to use military computers to
communicate through popular sites like YouTube and MySpace, according to new
restrictions on Internet use imposed by the Department of Defense.   A16  Terror
Suspect's Trial Begins The trial of Jose Padilla, the American convert to Islam
charged with conspiring to support terrorism, opened with federal prosecutors
describing what they called a calculated plan to provide money, equipment and
recruits to Al Qaeda.   A14  NEW YORK/REGION B1-7  Freshman Congresswoman Has No
Time to Savor Win Representative Kirsten Gillibrand, a freshman Democrat from
New York, only recently introduced her first bill since arriving in Washington
four months ago. But the list of Republicans angling to challenge her next year
is already growing.  A1  Subway Complaints Welcomed Howard H. Roberts Jr., the
new president of New York City Transit, says he is eager to hear New Yorkers'
complaints about the subways. He plans a system of report cards in which riders
on each line will be asked to grade different aspects of subway service.  B1  A
Test for Civil Unions The Connecticut Supreme Court became the first in the
nation to hear arguments over whether the establishment of civil unions creates
a fundamentally inferior status for gays and lesbians. B1  BUSINESS DAY C1-15
Sex Offenders on MySpace Attorneys general from eight states are charging that
the online social network MySpace, a division of the News Corporation, has
discovered thousands of known sex offenders using its service, but has failed to
act on the information.   C2  SPORTSTUESDAY D1-7  Amputee Aims for Olympics
Oscar Pistorius of South Africa wants to be the first amputee runner to compete
in the Olympics and has begun erasing the lines between abled and disabled.   A1
OBITUARIES B8  Kate Webb A correspondent for United Press International during
the Vietnam War, she was 64. B8  EDITORIAL A18-19  Editorials: In divided New
Orleans; mammograms in decline; cameras in the courts; Serge Schmemann on the
new French president's roots.  Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.  Crossword E2
TV Listings E11 Weather D10

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); VOTERS & VOTING (88%); MEDICARE (88%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (78%); MIDDLE
EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); LAW OF WAR
(76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); CONSPIRACY (76%);
ARMED FORCES (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); MISCONDUCT (75%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (75%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); POLITICS (75%); CONSUMER LAW
(73%); INSURANCE (73%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (73%); INSURANCE
REGULATORY BODIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (68%); INTERNET
& WWW (67%); TESTIMONY (66%); FLOOD ZONES (66%); RESIGNATIONS (64%); INTERNET
SOCIAL NETWORKING (63%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (63%); AL-QAEDA (62%); RELIGION (50%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (84%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE
OF THE RED CROSS (55%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%);
UNITED STATES (93%); ISRAEL (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              850 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marine Refused Staff's Advice On Iraq Deaths, Major Testifies

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 14


A Marine Corps officer testified Monday that a commander in Iraq rejected
recommendations from two subordinates that he investigate accusations that
marines in his battalion deliberately killed a group of civilians in Haditha in
late 2005.

Maj. Samuel H. Carrasco, the operations officer for the Third Battalion, First
Marines at the time, testified in a military hearing here that the battalion
commander, Lt. Col. Jeffrey R. Chessani, forcefully dismissed advice from staff
officers to look into whether marines he supervised had killed the civilians in
violation of the laws of war.

''My men are not murderers!'' Colonel Chessani yelled at Major Carrasco and the
battalion's executive officer, Maj. Kevin M. Gonzalez, during a meeting of the
three officers in January 2006, Major Carrasco told military prosecutors.

Colonel Chessani is the highest ranking among four Marine officers who have been
charged with failing to investigate properly the killing of 24 civilians by a
small group of Marine infantrymen in Haditha on Nov. 19, 2005. The testimony on
Monday was the first public suggestion that Colonel Chessani had disregarded his
subordinates' warnings that the killings by the marines, in response to a
roadside bomb attack that killed a young lance corporal, might have constituted
a war crime.

The testimony was part of a weeklong hearing to determine whether enough
evidence existed to refer to a court martial charges against another officer,
Capt. Randy W. Stone, the Third Battalion's lawyer at the time. But prosecutors
have used the hearing to interrogate witnesses about the other marines accused
of crimes in the case, including three enlisted men charged with murder.

Colonel Chessani's outburst came during a tense discussion in his quarters,
Major Carrasco said, about an e-mail inquiry from a Time magazine reporter, Tim
McGirk. The e-mail message had been forwarded to the battalion by a
division-level press officer. The reporter's questions, including some about
whether marines had gathered civilians in their homes and then executed them,
were regarded by the battalion's top officers as sensational and informed by
insurgent sympathizers, Major Carrasco testified.

Major Carrasco testified that the e-mail message ''hit me in the chest like a
baseball bat.'' He said he had been frustrated by the list of questions, which
he said ''wasn't one that I thought was based in reality,'' but had advised
Colonel Chessani to look into the matter more thoroughly.

''These allegations are pretty serious, probably something we want to look at,''
he recalled saying. ''I was of the belief that where there's smoke, there's a
little bit of fire.''

Colonel Chessani grew increasingly more agitated as the conversation went on,
and at least twice told his officers his men were not murderers, Major Carrasco
said.

During the proceedings on Monday, Colonel Chessani sat quietly in the courtroom
gallery, taking notes.

Brian J. Rooney, one of Colonel Chessani's lawyers, said the Time magazine
questions had been reviewed and passed down to Colonel Chessani from senior
Marine commanders who should have made any decision to investigate the deaths.

''By that point, the wheels were in motion above Chessani's level,'' Mr. Rooney
said in a telephone interview. ''It's higher's responsibility,'' he went on,
referring to the division and other superior levels of command in Iraq at the
time, ''to investigate a law-of-war violation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TESTIMONY (89%); BOMBINGS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); LAW OF WAR (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); LAWYERS (73%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); GENOCIDE (69%); MURDER (58%)
Bombs and Explosives; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: Time (Magazine)

PERSON: Paul Von Zielbauer; Samuel H (Maj) Carrasco; Jeffrey R (Lt Col)
Chessani; Tim McGirk

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              851 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jerry Falwell, Moral Majority Founder, Dies at 73

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME; Margalit Fox contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2841 words


The Rev. Jerry Falwell, the fundamentalist preacher who founded the Moral
Majority and brought the language and passions of religious conservatives into
the hurly-burly of American politics, died yesterday in Lynchburg, Va. He was
73.

His death was announced by Liberty University, in Lynchburg, where Mr. Falwell,
its founder, was chancellor. The university said the cause had not been
determined, adding that he died in a hospital after being found unconscious
yesterday morning in his university office.

Mr. Falwell went from a Baptist preacher in Lynchburg to a powerful force in
electoral politics, at home in both the millennial world of fundamentalist
Christianity and the earthly blood sport of the political arena. As much as
anyone, he helped create the religious right as a political force, defined the
issues that would energize it for decades and cemented its ties to the
Republican Party.

He came to prominence first as a religious broadcaster through his ''Old-Time
Gospel Hour'' and then, in 1979, as the leader of the Moral Majority, an
organization whose very name drew a vivid line in the sand of American politics.
After the organization disbanded a decade later, he remained a familiar and
powerful figure, supporting Republicans like George W. Bush, mobilizing
conservatives and finding his way into a thicket of controversies. And he built
institutions and groomed leaders -- including his two sons, who will succeed him
in two important positions. [Page A17.]

Mr. Falwell grew up in a household that he described as a battleground between
the forces of God and the powers of Satan. In his public life he often had to
walk a line between the certitudes of fundamentalist religion, in which the word
of God was absolute and inviolate, and the ambiguities of mainstream politics,
in which a message warmly received at his Thomas Road Baptist Church might not
play as well on ''NBC Nightly News.''

As a result, he was a lightning rod for controversy and caricature. After the
Sept. 11 attacks, for example, he apologized for calling Muhammad a terrorist
and for suggesting that the attacks had reflected God's judgment on a nation
spiritually weakened by the American Civil Liberties Union, providers of
abortion and supporters of gay rights. He was ridiculed for an article in his
National Liberty Journal suggesting that Tinky Winky, a character in the
''Teletubbies'' children's show, could be a hidden homosexual signal because the
character was purple, had a triangle on his head and carried a handbag.

Behind the controversies was a shrewd, savvy operator with an original vision
for effecting political and moral change. He rallied religious conservatives to
the political arena at a time when most fundamentalists and other conservative
religious leaders were inclined to stay away. And he helped pulled off what had
once seemed an impossible task: uniting religious conservatives from many faiths
and doctrines by emphasizing what they had in common.

He had many failures as well as successes and always remained a divisive figure,
demonized on the left in much the way Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, or Jane Fonda were on the right. Even so, political experts agree
he was enormously influential.

''Behind the idea of the Moral Majority was this notion that there could be a
coalition of these different religious groups that all agree on abortion and
homosexuality and other issues even if they never agreed on how to read the
Bible or the nature of God,'' said John Green, director of the Ray C. Bliss
Institute of Applied Politics at the University of Akron and an expert on
religious conservatives.

''That was a real innovation,'' Mr. Green continued, ''And even if that's an
idea that did not completely originate with Falwell, it's certainly an idea he
developed and championed independently of others. It was a very important
insight, and it's had a huge influence on American politics.''  Seeds of Faith

Jerry Falwell was born Aug. 11, 1933, in Lynchburg. His ancestors there dated
back to 1669, and his more immediate ones lived as if characters in the pageant
of sin and redemption that formed his world view.

His paternal grandfather, Charles W. Falwell, embittered by the death of his
wife and a favorite nephew, was a vocal and decisive atheist who refused to go
to church and ridiculed those who did.

His father, Carey H. Falwell, was a flamboyant entrepreneur who opened his first
grocery store when he was 22. He was soon operating 17 service stations, many
with little restaurants and stores attached. He built oil storage tanks and
owned an oil company and in 1927 began American Bus Lines, supplying old
battery-operated movie projectors to show Charlie Chaplin and Laurel and Hardy
movies to riders.

Later, he turned to bootlegging liquor, among other enterprises. His best-known
business was the Merry Garden Dance Hall and Dining Room, high on a Virginia
hilltop, which became the center of Virginia's swing society. Carey Falwell,
too, had no use for religion. He was left shaken forever by an episode in which
he shot his brother to death. He became a heavy drinker and died of liver
disease at the age of 55.

On the other hand, Mr. Falwell's mother, the former Helen Beasley, was deeply
religious. Every Sunday when he awoke, Mr. Falwell recalled, Charles Fuller's
''Old-Fashioned Revival Hour'' was ringing out from the radio.

''It was my mother who planted the seeds of faith in me from the moment I was
born,'' Mr. Falwell said in his autobiography, ''Strength for the Journey.''

What he saw in his own family, he said, was the battle between God and the
Enemy, the malignant force just as real and just as determined to produce evil
as God is to create good. It was the Enemy who destroyed his father and
grandfather, he said, and God whose grace ennobled his mother.

In his telling, Mr. Falwell chose God on Jan. 20, 1952, when he was 18. It was
an experience, he said, not of blinding lights and heavenly voices. ''God came
quietly into Mom's kitchen'' and answered her prayers, he said.

He declared his acceptance of Christ that night at the Park Avenue Baptist
Church in Lynchburg, on an evening in which he also first saw the woman who
would become his wife, the church pianist, Macel Pate. The next day he bought a
Bible, a Bible dictionary and James Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the
Bible. Two months later, he decided he wanted to become a minister and spread
the word.

He transferred from Lynchburg College, where he had hoped to study mechanical
engineering, to Baptist Bible College in Springfield, Mo. Returning home, he
decided to start his own church, an experience that melded his mother's faith
with his father's entrepreneurial instincts. He started the Thomas Road Baptist
Church with $1,000 and an initial congregation of 35 adults and their families
in an abandoned building that had housed the Donald Duck Bottling Company.

Mr. Falwell began building his church in 1956 much as he would build a political
movement. Carrying a yellow legal pad and a Bible, he set out to visit 100 homes
a day, knocking on doors to seek members. Soon after the church opened, he began
a half-hour daily radio broadcast. Six months later, he broadcast his first
televised version of the ''Old-Time Gospel Hour.'' He was struck by how
effective the radio and television broadcasts were in drawing new members.

''Television made me a kind of instant celebrity,'' he wrote. ''People were
fascinated that they could see and hear me preach that same night in person.''
On the church's first anniversary, in 1957, 864 people showed up to worship, and
he felt he was on his way. The church grew. Anticipating the megachurches to
come, it morphed into a social service dynamo, with a home for alcoholics, a
burgeoning Christian Academy, summer camps and worldwide missions.

In 1971, Mr. Falwell established Liberty University, originally Liberty Baptist
College, with the intent of making it a national university for fundamentalist
Christians. The same year, when the ''Old-Time Gospel Hour'' began broadcasting
nationally from his church's sanctuary, he gained a national audience at a time
when televised evangelism was exploding.  Political Action

There were reversals as well. A lawsuit in July 1973 by the federal Securities
and Exchange Commission accused the church of ''fraud and deceit'' and ''gross
insolvency'' in the selling of $6.6 million worth of bonds for church expansion
and services. The charges were dropped a month later after a United States
District Court found that there had been no intentional wrongdoing.

As the cultural passions and transformations of the 1960s and '70s swept the
nation, Mr. Falwell, like many religious leaders, struggled with what role to
play. He saw ministers joining the civil rights movement and was unimpressed.

''Preachers are not called to be politicians, but soul winners,'' he said in a
sermon titled ''Ministers and Marchers'' in March 1964. ''If as much effort
could be put into winning people to Jesus across the land as is being exerted in
the present civil rights movement, America would be turned upside down for
God.''

His position reflected his opposition at the time to the civil rights movement
and his loyalty to a long fundamentalist tradition in which the faithful
believed their role was to cater to the soul, not to the transitory tides of
politics.

But Mr. Falwell said the 1973 Supreme Court ruling legalizing abortion, Roe v.
Wade, produced an enormous change in him. Soon he began preaching against the
ruling and calling for Christians to become involved in political action.

In 1977, he supported the singer Anita Bryant's efforts to repeal an ordinance
granting equal rights to gay men and lesbians in Dade County, Fla. The next
year, he played a similar role in California. He urged churches to register
voters and for religious conservatives to campaign for candidates who supported
their positions. He organized ''I Love America'' rallies, blending patriotism
and conservative values; students at Liberty University produced their own
upbeat presentations around the country.

As he told it, at a meeting of conservatives in his office in 1979, Paul M.
Weyrich, the commentator and activist, said to him: ''Jerry, there is in America
a moral majority that agrees about the basic issues. But they aren't
organized.''

To Mr. Falwell, that suggested a movement encompassing more than just
evangelical or fundamentalist Christians. He envisioned one that would also
include other Protestants, Catholics, Jews, even atheists, all with a similar
agenda on abortion, gay rights, patriotism and moral values.

''I was convinced,'' he wrote, ''that there was a 'moral majority' out there
among these more than 200 million Americans sufficient in number to turn back
the flood tide of moral permissiveness, family breakdown and general
capitulation to evil and to foreign policies such as Marxism-Leninism.''

The movement, he said, would be pro-life, pro-traditional family, pro-moral and
pro-American -- precisely the kind of broad agenda that could unite
conservatives of different faiths and backgrounds. His agenda also included
fervent support for Israel, even if his relations with Jews were often rocky; in
1999, for example, he apologized for saying that the Antichrist was probably
alive and if so would be in the form of a male Jew.

The Moral Majority, he said, had a basic goal in building its membership: ''Get
them saved, baptized and registered.'' He held up a Bible at political rallies,
telling followers: ''If a man stands by this book, vote for him. If he doesn't,
don't.'' Within three years of the Moral Majority's founding, he boasted of a
$10 million budget, 100,000 trained clergymen and several million volunteers.

In 1980, the Moral Majority was credited with playing a role in the election of
Ronald Reagan and in dozens of Congressional races. The election gave resounding
evidence of the potential of religious conservatives in politics. They
themselves were electrified by their influence, but many others were alarmed,
fearing an intolerant movement of lockstep zealots voting en masse for the
preachers' designated candidates.

A. Bartlett Giamatti, president of Yale University in 1981, accused the Moral
Majority and other conservative groups of a ''radical assault'' on the nation's
political values.

''A self-proclaimed Moral Majority and its satellite of client groups, cunning
in the use of a native blend of old intimidation and new technology, threaten
the values'' of the nation, Mr. Giamatti told Yale's entering freshman class of
1985. He called the organization ''angry at change, rigid in the application of
chauvinistic slogans, absolutistic in morality.''

But many of those who defend mixing religion and politics, not all of them
conservatives, say it is a form of bigotry to seek to deny religious
conservatives their voice in the political process.

Mr. Falwell disbanded the Moral Majority in 1989, saying ''our mission is
accomplished.'' But he remained a lightning rod. While running for the
Republican presidential nomination against George W. Bush in 2000, Senator John
McCain of Arizona characterized Mr. Falwell and the evangelist Pat Robertson as
''forces of evil'' and called them ''agents of intolerance.'' He soon
apologized, but the remarks, believed to have alienated the party's base, were
seen as enormously damaging to his candidacy. The two men later reconciled. Last
year, Mr. McCain delivered the commencement address at Liberty University.

For all the controversy, Mr. Falwell was often an unconvincing villain. His
manner was patient and affable. His sermons had little of the white-hot menace
of those of his contemporaries like Jimmy Swaggart. He shared podiums with
Senator Kennedy, appeared at hostile college campuses and in 1984 spent an
evening before a crowd full of hecklers at Town Hall in New York, probably not
changing many minds but nevertheless expressing good will. He seemed ''about as
menacing as the corner grocer,'' the conservative writer Joseph Sobran wrote in
National Review in 1980.

Many experts say his role as a direct participant in politics may have peaked
with the Moral Majority. Others, like Ralph Reed and Karl Rove, were even more
successful in taking Mr. Falwell's ideas and translating them into lasting
political power and influence. But he never left the public eye, whether trying
to rescue the foundering PTL ministry in the late 1980s, seeing his libel suit
against Larry Flynt go to the Supreme Court or describing President Bill Clinton
as an ''ungodly liar.''  Culture vs. Politics

It could be argued that he affected electoral politics more than mainstream
culture. The Moral Majority, for instance, began a campaign to ''clean up''
television programs in the 1980s, but no one viewed the initiative as a great
success. After President Clinton was acquitted by the Senate in his impeachment
trial, Mr. Weyrich wrote his supporters to say that maybe there was not a
''moral majority'' after all.

For all Mr. Falwell's influence on the world stage, home always remained
Lynchburg and his church. Last year the church moved to grand and vast new
quarters in Lynchburg, with a membership of about 22,000.

Besides his wife, Macel, whom he married in 1958, Mr. Falwell is survived by two
sons, Jerry Jr., of Goode, Va., who will succeed his father as Liberty
University's chancellor, and the Rev. Jonathan Falwell, of Lynchburg, who will
become senior pastor of Thomas Road Baptist Church; a daughter, Jeannie Savas, a
surgeon, of Richmond; a fraternal twin brother, Gene, of Rustburg, Va.; and
eight grandchildren.

To the end of his life, Mr. Falwell remained active at Liberty University,
expanding the campus by buying surrounding land and erecting buildings. And he
continued to participate in the political discourse, meeting with prospective
Republican candidates for president in the 2008 campaign and inviting them to
speak at Liberty.

He preached every Sunday and remained openly political in his sermons,
declaring, for example, that the election of Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton to the
presidency would represent a grave threat to the country.

He surprised some critics, who felt his views on some social issues, like gay
rights, had moderated over time.

But, at his core, he remained through his career what he was at the beginning: a
preacher and moralist, a believer in the Bible's literal truth, with convictions
about religious and social issues rooted in his reading of Scripture.

So there was no distinction at all between his view of the political and the
spiritual. ''We are born into a war zone where the forces of God do battle with
the forces of evil,'' he wrote in his autobiography. ''Sometimes we get trapped,
pinned down in the crossfire. And in the heat of that noisy, distracting battle,
two voices call out for us to follow. Satan wants to lead us into death. God
wants to lead us into life eternal.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Religion

PERSON: Rev. Jerry Falwell

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Rev. Jerry Falwell in 2003. (Photo by Dave
Martin/Associated Press)(pg. A1)
The Rev. Jerry Falwell mobilized religious conservatives, including at this 1980
rally outside the State House in Trenton. (Photo by William E. Sauro/The New
York Times)
Mr. Falwell, top, after introducing President Reagan at the Conservative
Political Action Conference in Washington in 1987, and crowd surfing in 1997 at
a basketball game at Liberty University, which he founded. (Photo by Doug
Koontz/Lynchburg News and Advance, via Associated Press)
 (Photo by Barry Thumma/Associated Press)(pg. C15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (94%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(93%); CONSERVATISM (91%); POLITICS (91%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); CHURCH & STATE (78%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); CHILDREN (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (72%); MILLENNIUM (70%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (66%); LGBT RIGHTS (60%); ABORTION (60%); GAYS & LESBIANS
(60%) United States Politics and Government; Biographical Information; Deaths
(Obituaries); Elections; Conservatism (US Politics); Evangelical Movement;
Election Issues; Christians and Christianity; United States Politics and
Government; Baptist Churches

ORGANIZATION: LIBERTY UNIVERSITY (91%) Moral Majority (Orgn) (Defunct); Liberty
University (Lynchburg, Va)

RONALD REAGAN (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Jerry (Rev) Falwell; Peter Applebome;
Jerry Jr Falwell; Jonathan (Rev) Falwell

CITY: TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              854 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Couple Held Two Servants Captive for Years, U.S. Says

BYLINE: By PAUL VITELLO

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y., May 15


Federal prosecutors charged a wealthy Long Island couple on Tuesday with keeping
two Indonesian domestic workers as virtual prisoners in their home for more than
five years under conditions they called ''modern-day slavery,'' beating one
severely and paying them very little.

The couple, Varsha Mahender Sabhnani, and Mahender Murlidhar Sabhnani, 51, who
the authorities say run a multimillion dollar perfume business from their home
in Muttontown, pleaded not guilty to the charges at their arraignment here
before Magistrate Judge Kathleen Tomlinson of United States District Court. They
were charged under a federal law that makes it illegal to force someone to work
under threat of violence.

Their lawyers, Charles A. Ross and Alexandra Tseitlin of Manhattan, said the
accusations against the Sabhnanis amounted to nothing more than ''an assault
allegation.''

Police and federal immigration agents developed the case against the couple
after one of the women, identified only as ''Samirah'' in court papers, was seen
wandering near a Dunkin' Donuts shop in Syosset on Sunday morning, wearing only
pants and wrapped in a towel. Her face was bruised, and when shop employees
tried to communicate with her, she made gestures of slapping herself and
uttering what sounded to them like the word ''master,'' prosecutors said.

The police took Samirah to Nassau University Medical Center, where, with the
help of an Indonesian translator, she told them that she and a second woman,
identified in papers only as ''Nona,'' were forced by the Sabhnanis to work long
hours, given little food, forced to sleep on mats on the floor, kept hidden when
company came, threatened with violence, and in Samirah's case, frequently beaten
by Mrs. Sabhnani.

In court documents, prosecutors said Samirah's employer had promised to pay her
$300 a month when they offered her a job in 2002 during a visit to Indonesia.
They paid only $100, however, and the money was sent directly to Samirah's
daughter in Indonesia. Mrs. Sabhnani was also charged in the papers with having
cut Samirah with a knife, burned her with cigarettes and subjected her to a
series of tortures, in one instance forcing her to eat many hot chili peppers.

Immigration agents searched the family home on Monday, and found Nona hiding in
a closet under the stairs. Prosecutors said she confirmed the story Samirah had
told them. Both servants held temporary work visas that had expired.

Mr. and Mrs. Sabhnani, who have two daughters away at college and a younger son
and daughter living at home, were held without bail yesterday pending a bail
hearing scheduled for Thursday.

Demetri M. Jones, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District,
told Magistrate Tomlinson that the couple were a flight risk and should be held
without bail for the duration of their prosecution because they had extensive
business and family contacts throughout Asia.

But the defendants' lawyers said the couple were highly unlikely to flee since
they had two homes here, a flourishing business, and four children born in the
United States. ''What we have here is one person's version of what happened,''
Mr. Ross said. ''There are no allegations of slave trading. This is basically an
assault allegation by one person.''

He said the case would prove to be ''much more involved and complicated'' than
the initial story told by the two servants to federal agents.

It is unusual for the employers of domestic servants to be charged under a 2000
federal law that bans human trafficking. Most prosecutions under that law have
involved traffickers in prostitution.

Human rights advocates have said that domestic workers are often kept hidden
away, and are rarely willing to risk deportation by seeking help.

Magistrate Tomlinson asked the lawyers to produce an accounting of the family's
assets at Thursday's bail hearing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); SLAVERY (90%); MAGISTRATES (89%); BAIL (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%);
ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); REFUGEES (78%); TORTURE (78%); CONTUSIONS (77%);
LAWYERS (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); JUDGES (71%); PERFUMES & COLOGNES (71%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (68%) Domestic Service; Illegal Immigrants; Slave Labor  ;
Immigration and Refugees; Domestic Service

COMPANY: DUNKIN' BRANDS GROUP INC (69%)

TICKER: DNKN (NASDAQ) (69%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS722515 SNACK & NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BARS (69%); SIC5812 EATING
PLACES (69%)

PERSON: Varsha Mahendar Sabhnani; Mahendar Murlidhar Sabhnani; Paul Vitello

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Muttontown (NY)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              855 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror Suspect Testifies of Torture in Custody

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


A former Baltimore resident, who was transferred last fall from secret C.I.A.
custody to detention in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, denied to a military hearing that
he was an extremist and asserted that he had been tortured while in government
custody, according to a transcript the Pentagon released Tuesday.

''I am not Al Qaeda,'' the detainee, Majid Khan, 27, said, according to the
heavily redacted transcript of the hearing held behind closed doors at
Guantanamo on April 15.

''Why would I want to destroy my 18-year-old wife's life by widowing her,'' he
said, ''and letting her raise my daughter without a father?'' Mr. Khan was
captured while living in Pakistan in 2003.

Military officials have identified him as one of their ''high value detainees.''
They have said they believe that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the mastermind of the
Sept. 11 attacks, selected Mr. Khan to study the feasibility of blowing up
gasoline stations and poisoning reservoirs in the United States.

Though Mr. Khan has not been charged with those offenses or any others, the
officials have claimed that one of his selling points as a would-be terrorist
was a thorough command of English, gained in high school in Maryland, where his
Pakistani family owned gas stations.

His language skills were on full display in the transcript of the military
hearing, held to determine whether he is being properly held as an enemy
combatant.

Mr. Khan repeatedly demanded a lawyer. He complained about the conditions at
Guantanamo -- at one point deriding the detention camp for its flat basketballs
and scolding officials for their ''cheap branded, unscented deodorant soap.''

He declared that the proceedings were rigged. ''I personally am not satisfied
with the process itself,'' he said when the president of the three-officer
military tribunal asked if he had any questions. ''I would rather have fair
trial.''

Mr. Khan also took advantage of procedures to have written statements introduced
from witnesses, several of whom denied some important details of the
government's accusations. One witness, who has been convicted in a terror case,
said it was ''an absolute lie'' that he had ever told government investigators,
as they have asserted, that Mr. Khan told him he wanted to be a martyr.

The hearing of the combatant status review tribunal was held before a panel of
three military officers whose names were not released. The transcript did not
include any summary of the classified evidence against Mr. Khan, which was
presented in secret.

Mr. Khan's case has drawn wide notice, partly because of his extensive American
ties and partly because his lawyers at the Center for Constitutional Rights have
emphasized assertions that he was tortured in American custody.

Though it appeared that many of Mr. Khan's accusations of torture had been
redacted, the transcript included a written statement from his father, Ali Khan,
that was submitted as part of the case.

The father asserted that another of his sons who had been in custody for a time
along with Majid said Americans had used torture tactics on Majid that included
binding his hands and feet in a chair and tightening the bonds every hour.

Asked about those accusations, Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman, said that
''the United States does not conduct or condone torture,'' and that ''the
agency's terrorist interrogation program has been implemented lawfully.''

The transcript included details of what Mr. Khan described as mental torture
after he was transferred to Guantanamo. He described isolation and said he had
been so desolate that he had cut and chewed an artery in his arm two times.

He also said his beard had been forcibly shaved twice by Guantanamo guards, an
act considered humiliating by some Muslims.

In response, a Pentagon spokesman, Cmdr. Jeffrey D. Gordon, said, ''Majid Khan
has been treated humanely while in Department of Defense custody.''

Gitanjali Gutierrez, Mr. Khan's lawyer at the Center for Constitutional Rights,
said the transcript underscored concerns she had been raising in court about the
treatment of Mr. Khan, a client she has never been permitted to meet because of
government regulations.

She said the transcript, and the redactions of sections dealing with torture
accusations, ''shows that the United States has disregarded the fundamental rule
of law'' in barring a man who has asserted his innocence from being able to
defend himself fully.

''If he's done something wrong, the government needs to come forth and charge
him and let him proceed in open court,'' Ms. Gutierrez said.

Commander Gordon said that Majid Khan's offenses ''may be chargeable'' under a
separate war crimes legal process, but that prosecutors were evaluating many
cases before reviewing his.

At the hearing, Mr. Khan often returned to his view that he was facing unfair
legal odds.

''I admit I can't prove that I'm not Al Qaeda,'' he said. ''It is very difficult
to prove that someone is not Al Qaeda.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Majid Khan is in detention in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. He is shown
here in 1999 during his senior year in high school in Baltimore. (Photo by The
Khan Family, Center for Constitutional Rights, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); MILITARY BASES
(78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); LAWYERS (74%); NAVIES (73%); POISONINGS (72%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(71%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (69%); BASKETBALL (66%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (66%);
INVESTIGATIONS (60%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Torture

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (59%) Central Intelligence Agency  ;
Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Majid Khan; William Glaberson

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (88%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (94%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              856 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Hussein Gone, Other Iraqi Trials Lose Impact

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1337 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, May 16


When the man Iraqis know as Chemical Ali made a final plea of innocence to the
Iraqi High Tribunal last week, the court's public galleries were all but empty,
and there was not a single Iraqi or foreign reporter on hand.

Ali Hassan al-Majid, Saddam Hussein's cousin, was once the most feared man in
Iraq after Mr. Hussein himself. Mr. Majid earned his grim sobriquet for his role
as the overseer of the so-called Anfal campaign of the late 1980s, in which tens
of thousands of Iraqi Kurds were killed, many of them in poison gas attacks.

Yet by the final day of testimony at his nine-month trial, Mr. Majid and five
fellow defendants, facing possible death sentences, were figures in what in
effect was a sideshow. After Mr. Hussein was hanged on Dec. 30 in a previous
case, the Anfal case lost its principal defendant, and with him much of the
courtroom uproar that fascinated Iraqis in the 13 months that Mr. Hussein spent
in the dock.

Deprived of the example set by Mr. Hussein, who harangued judges and used the
courtroom as a forum for attacking Iraq's American ''occupiers,'' Mr. Majid and
his co-defendants became more compliant. They listened more attentively to
prosecution evidence, raised legal points and acted more like men on trial for
their lives than as defiant legatees of an ousted government.

In one crucial respect, however, they remained true to Mr. Hussein: Like him,
they pleaded innocent of any involvement in atrocities in the Anfal offensives,
which took their name, at Mr. Hussein's direction, from an Arabic word meaning
''spoils of war.'' In closing pleas, they said they had nothing to do with the
chemical attacks, village demolitions, deportations, torture and mass executions
of men, women and children that Kurdish survivors described in excruciating
detail in 59 days of testimony.

For Mr. Majid, in particular, the plea seemed hard to sustain in face of
prosecution evidence, which included documents linking him to the repression,
and a stunning series of tape recordings in which Mr. Hussein and Mr. Majid were
heard discussing plans for the use of chemical weapons against the Kurds.
Prosecutors said that at least 50,000 Kurds died in a series of eight Anfal
offensives in 1987 and 1988.

Still, the 61-year-old Mr. Majid, who was assigned by Mr. Hussein to head the
Baath Party's ''northern bureau'' in Mosul in 1987 and given plenary powers for
the Anfal campaign, protested that he knew nothing about the poison gas attacks.
''I never issued an order for the use of these weapons; I never heard of them
being used; and I have no knowledge of who used them, if in fact they were
used,'' he said.

Whether Mr. Majid's plea will carry any weight with the five-judge panel seems
doubtful. The court, established under the close tutelage of the American
Justice Department in 2004, has come under increasing pressure from Iraq's new
rulers, led by the Shiite and Kurdish officials who dominate in the government
of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.

Pressure from Mr. Maliki's office led to the replacement of the first chief
judge in the Anfal trial, after he told Mr. Hussein in the opening days of the
trial last fall that he could not be described as ''a dictator.'' And it was Mr.
Maliki who insisted, in the face of American protests, on carrying out the
execution of Mr. Hussein only five days after an appeals court upheld his death
sentence in the so-called Dujail trial, which centered on the executions of 148
Shiite men and boys after an abortive assassination attempt against Mr. Hussein
in 1982.

Three other former officials were also hanged for their role in the Dujail
repression. One, Taha Yassin Ramadan, a former vice president, was sentenced to
life imprisonment by the trial court, but the appeals chamber, under government
pressure, sent the verdict back to the trial court with a finding that Mr.
Ramadan should be hanged. The trial chamber quickly complied.

After the judges adjourned the Anfal trial, court officials predicted a date in
mid-June for sentencing, and predicted that any death sentences would be carried
out by midsummer. The other defendants are former Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmed,
northern military commander at the time of the Anfal attacks; Sabid Abdul Aziz
al-Douri, chief of Mr. Hussein's military intelligence service; Farhan
al-Jubouri, military intelligence chief in northern Iraq; former Gen. Hussein
Rashid, the Iraqi Army's deputy operations chief; and Taher Tawfiq al-Aani, Mr.
Majid's assistant as secretary of the northern bureau. All are charged with war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

Court officials have said that they envision several more trials, including a
series of cases that will center on the Shiite uprising against Mr. Hussein
after Iraqi forces were driven from Kuwait in 1991. Shiite leaders say as many
as 150,000 people were killed during the uprising, many of them lined up at mass
graves in the desert and shot.

But already, after only two trials, there are questions about how far Iraq's new
Shiite-dominated government can carry the process of holding Hussein-era
officials to account. American financing for the court has been reduced. And
with Mr. Hussein dead, interest in the process among Iraqis, and beyond Iraq,
has dwindled.

With tens of thousands of dead since the American invasion, and almost every day
punctuated by the mass killings caused by roadside bombs and suicide attacks,
the horrors of the Hussein era, in the minds of many Iraqis, have receded before
the chaos that has ensued.

Mr. Majid and his co-defendants have not abandoned courtroom theatrics
altogether. Several of the defendants, including Mr. Majid, appeared for the
final testimony in the traditional Arab garb of dishdasha robe, kaffiyeh
headdresses and black rope headbands that have been an emblem of patriotic
defiance in the court for former officials who rarely appeared in anything but
the military-style uniforms of the Baath Party while they were still in power.

And Mr. Majid was concerned enough about a possible death sentence that he
coupled his protestation of innocence with a fallback argument based in the
cruel realpolitik of the Hussein era that seemed to acknowledge, if only
obliquely, that harsh punishments had been ordered against the Kurds.

''Thanks be to God, what took place in Kurdistan in 1987 and 1988 only happened
after the Iranians invaded Iraq and occupied an area the size of Lebanon, so the
state had to do what it did,'' he said.

The reference was to the eight-year war between Iraq and Iran, ending in 1988,
in which Kurdish guerrillas known as pesh merga allied themselves with Iranian
forces against Iraq. It was this that the man identified by prosecutors as Mr.
Hussein in the tape recordings of high-level meetings in Baghdad that were
played in the court cited as cause for using chemical weapons, along with
confident assurances to his associates that the weapons would ''kill
thousands.''

In their closing pleas, several defendants resorted to what legal experts at the
trial described the tactic as a ''Nuremberg defense,'' a reference to Nazi
leaders who pleaded at their trials after World War II that atrocities of which
they were accused were carried out under orders.

With Mr. Hussein gone from the court, the Anfal defendants argued that any
actions they took were not their responsibility, but the result of following
orders from Baghdad -- in effect, from Mr. Hussein -- and that they would have
been summarily executed if they had demurred.

Mr. Hashim, the 57-year-old former general, who served as defense minister
during the American-led invasion in 2003, adopted a pleading tone as he made his
final remarks. ''As a soldier, if I receive an order from my superiors to
undertake a specific mission, what option do I have?'' he said. ''Let any fair
person tell me that. There are no options one, two or three, only the choice to
implement the order, or not to implement it -- and if I'd made that choice, it
would have been the end of me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A cemetery in Sewsenan, a Kurdish village in Iraq, holds the
remains of people killed in a chemical attack by Saddam Hussein's forces in
1988. (Photo by Max Becherer/Polaris, for The New York Times)
 Ali Hassan al-Majid, also known as Chemical Ali, during his trial last year in
Baghdad. He made a final plea of innocence last week. (Pool Photo by David
Furst)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); DEPORTATION (72%); TERRORISM (70%) United States
Armament and Defense; United States International Relations; Trials; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism; Kurds

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) John F Burns; Saddam Hussein; Ali Hassan Al- Majid

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              857 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Albany Agrees on Law Against Sexual and Labor Trafficking

BYLINE: By DANNY HAKIM and NICHOLAS CONFESSORE

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 16


State lawmakers and Gov. Eliot Spitzer said Wednesday that they had agreed to
make labor- and sex-trafficking felonies, breaking a deadlock on an issue many
thought should have been resolved long ago.

Although there are federal laws against human trafficking -- essentially a
modern form of slavery -- some state lawmakers and advocacy groups say they are
insufficient. Federal law enforcement has focused mostly on the largest criminal
trafficking rings, rather than smaller operations like sweatshops and brothels,
advocacy groups say.

Moreover, although local law enforcement officials are most likely to stumble
across victims of trafficking, the advocacy groups say, the absence of a state
trafficking law has provided little incentive for local prosecutors to tackle
such cases.

''New York is finally joining the ranks of other states in ensuring that those
who exploit innocent people and children and cause extreme suffering are subject
to strict punishment under state law,'' Governor Spitzer said in a statement.

At least 29 states already have laws specifically addressing human trafficking.
The State Department has estimated that 14,500 to 17,500 people a year are
brought into the United States and then used for forced labor or sex, although
experts say such statistics are inexact estimates.

Efforts during the past two years to get a trafficking law in New York stalled,
partly because Senate Republicans objected to provisions for services for the
victims in legislation passed by Assembly Democrats. But advocates said the
agreement reached between Mr. Spitzer and the Legislature would give New York
one of the toughest and most comprehensive laws in the nation.

''This bill will be the model for any state law on trafficking in the country,''
said Taina Bien-Aime, the executive director of Equality Now, which has pushed
for a trafficking law.

According to a press release from the governor's office, the laws would make sex
trafficking and labor trafficking separate felonies. A conviction of sex
trafficking would carry a penalty of 3 to 25 years in prison, while a labor
trafficking conviction would bring 3 to 7 years, according to the press release.

The law would clarify existing statutes to make it a felony to knowingly sell
''travel-related services to facilitate prostitution,'' no matter whether
prostitution is legal in the state or country being visited.

Coercing victims into prostitution by force would be included as a felony sex
trafficking offense, as would tricking people into entering the country by
promising them jobs or providing them with illegal drugs, and then forcing them
into sexual servitude.

''If you don't have a definition that includes deception, and then you find that
woman three months later in a brothel, it's very hard to prove force or
coercion,'' Ms. Bien-Aime said. ''But she would still be a trafficking victim.''

The law would provide a broad package of services to victims of sexual
trafficking, including allowing those who are in the United States illegally to
receive state aid for housing, mental health, drug treatment and other services.
Legislative leaders did not provide cost figures.

In a statement, Michael E. Bongiorno, the district attorney for Rockland County,
said the law ''will provide local law enforcement and prosecutors with the tools
they need to successfully investigate and prosecute human trafficking cases.''

The matter is one of the few substantive settlements lawmakers have reached in
recent days.

The agreement was announced Wednesday during a public meeting of the governor
and Legislative leaders in the Capitol. After being criticized for negotiating
the budget largely behind closed doors, the governor has been trying to operate
more openly in recent weeks. Still, he is not finding much common ground with
the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, the state's top Republican.

Trouble started almost as soon as the meeting began, when Assembly Speaker
Sheldon Silver and Malcolm Smith, the Senate minority leader, invited several
Democrats to come to the table and make speeches about human trafficking before
the cameras.

Mr. Bruno said the speech-making was a waste of time.

''Why would we need to spend our time and spin our wheels, when there are very
important issues that I'd like to get to and this one's done?'' Mr. Bruno said.

After another Republican lawmaker raised a similar objection, Mr. Spitzer, in a
rare peace-making mode, joked, ''One might conclude we're more needy than you
are.''

Lawmakers went on to discuss a number of issues, from reinstating legislation
that would permit the building of new power plants to overhauling the Wicks Law,
which requires multiple contractors on public construction projects.

But there appears to be significant disagreement and a lack of good will.

''I'm impressed as hell with everything that I've heard, but we're not getting a
bill done,'' Mr. Bruno said of the speeches, adding, ''This is terrific, but
it's a lot of wasted time.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); SEX TRAFFICKING
(91%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (91%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); PROSTITUTION (89%); SLAVERY (89%);
GOVERNORS (89%); FELONIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); FORCED LABOR (78%);
GARMENT WORKERS (78%); SWEATSHOPS (78%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (78%); CRIMINAL LAW
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (74%); ILLEGAL
DRUGS (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%) Sexual Slavery; Labor; Sentences (Criminal);
Law and Legislation

PERSON: ELIOT SPITZER (90%) Danny Hakim; Nicholas Confessore; Eliot (Gov)
Spitzer

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York State

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              860 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Say Gunfire From NATO Soldiers Wounded 5 Civilians

BYLINE: By TAIMOOR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, May 16


NATO soldiers driving through this southern city shot and wounded five civilians
late Tuesday, local residents and police officials said Wednesday. The
spokeswoman for the NATO forces, Lt. Col. Angela Billings, said, though, that
they had no information that such shootings had occurred.

The incident comes amid heightened concern about the high number of civilian
casualties in Afghanistan, as NATO and American troops battle a widespread
insurgency across southern and eastern Afghanistan. There are almost daily
reports of clashes with insurgents and airstrikes on suspected insurgent
positions that have reportedly killed civilians, as well as shootings of
civilians on the roads and at checkpoints.

Kandahar's police chief, Esmatullah Alizai, and a doctor at a hospital here
confirmed that five people were wounded in the incident and said NATO soldiers
were responsible for the shooting.

Residents said three people had been shot in the center of town, and two more in
the area near the hospital, a mile away, as a military convoy moved through the
town.

A 15-year-old student, Qudrat Shah, one of the wounded, lay in a hospital, shot
through the thigh. He said a patrol of three military vehicles was driving past
when the soldiers opened fire.

''My brother and I were walking home and I.S.A.F. shot me in the thigh,'' he
said, referring to NATO's International Security Assistance Force. ''The
I.S.A.F. convoy was passing through, and I was walking on foot with my brother.
I was not on the road, I was far from the road.''

He said he also saw three other people who were shot, including a 10-year-old
boy who was shot in the arm.

''This is not fair, there was not any suicide attack on them at that time,
nothing happened to them, but they intentionally shot the citizens,'' said
Qudrat's father, Halim, who is a shopkeeper.

Afghan officials also said Wednesday that three Taliban commanders, who were
among the five released from detention in exchange for an Italian journalist
kidnapped in March, were killed earlier this week along with the top Taliban
operational commander, Mullah Dadullah, Agence France-Presse reported.

One was Mullah Shah Mansoor, a brother of Mullah Dadullah, and the others were
Mullah Hamdullah and Mullah Ghaffar, an Afghan intelligence official told the
news agency.

Colonel Billings, the NATO spokeswoman, said she could not confirm the report.

The circumstances of Mullah Dadullah's death remain unclear, with conflicting
reports emerging of where and how he was killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (92%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (91%); ARMED
FORCES (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
RELIGION (89%); TALIBAN (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); JOURNALISM (76%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (71%); POLICE FORCES (59%) Terrorism; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (52%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) North Atlantic Treaty
Organization

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (52%)

PERSON: Taimoor Shah

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kandahar (Afghanistan)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              861 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawyers on Haditha Panel Peer Into Fog of War

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 16


On its face, the military hearing that ended here Tuesday concerned just one
issue: whether an inexperienced Marine lawyer's failure to question the killing
of Iraqi civilians in Haditha 18 months ago constituted a criminal dereliction
of duty.

In fact, the seven-day hearing opened a rare public window onto a debate about
how the Marine Corps is fighting in Iraq against a ruthless insurgency that uses
civilians as cover and disregards the laws of conflict taught in the United
States.

The presiding officer, Maj. Thomas McCann, seemed disconcerted about the
testimony he had heard from several officers, from the general in charge of the
Second Marine Division down to the first lieutenant whose men killed 24
civilians in Haditha on Nov. 19, 2005. Several officers described civilian
deaths as unfortunate but justifiable if they occurred during combat.

On Friday Major McCann, an experienced Marine lawyer, interjected some
unsettling questions about how many civilian deaths it would take to constitute
a violation of military regulations.

Alluding to Haditha, he asked, ''At what point do we have to scratch our heads
that we killed a lot more civilians than enemy?''

Because so many witnesses had testified that civilian deaths from ''combat
action'' need not be investigated, Major McCann said, ''I'm trying to figure out
what authority they are citing.''

The witness testifying then, Col. Keith R. Anderson, a senior Marine Reserve
lawyer now with the Department of the Navy, delivered a succinct and telling
answer. ''There is no authority,'' he said. ''I think it's just a mind-set.''

The two officers had tackled some of the same issues that had troubled military
investigators, including Maj. Gen. Eldon A. Bargewell of the Army, who bluntly
criticized Marine commanders in a secret report last year for tolerating large
numbers of civilian deaths in combat operations.

''All levels of command,'' including the American command in Baghdad, ''tended
to view civilian casualties, even in significant numbers, as routine and as the
natural and intended result of insurgent tactics,'' General Bargewell wrote.

The report suggested that Marine commanders -- from Maj. Gen. Steve Johnson, the
commander of ground forces in Anbar Province, to First Lt. William T. Kallop,
leader of Company K's Third Platoon -- created ''an unintended command climate''
that did not encourage compliance with the laws of armed conflict.

Testimony in the hearing last week, convened to determine whether Capt. Randy W.
Stone had violated military laws for not investigating the civilian deaths, bore
out many of General Bargewell's main findings.

Maj. Carroll J. Connolly, for instance, a lawyer for the Marine regiment
commanded then by Col. Stephen W. Davis, said he saw no need to investigate the
civilian deaths in Haditha because they had come during combat with enemy
fighters.

When Major McCann, the investigating officer, asked what the legal basis was for
drawing that conclusion, Major Connolly, who was granted immunity from
prosecution for his testimony, said he could not think of any.

Many legal experts said the killing of women and children required investigation
regardless of whether it occurred in combat.

''The best course of action would be to immediately do some sort of
investigation to see how these people came to be dead,'' said H. Wayne Elliott,
former chief of the international law division of the Army's Judge Advocate
General's Legal Center and School in Charlottesville, Va.

Mr. Elliott, a retired Army lieutenant colonel, also pointed out that
investigating the Haditha killings would be required to comply with Marine
commanders' requirements to report significant civilian deaths up the chain of
command. ''How can you report it,'' he asked, ''if you don't see an obligation
to investigate it in the first place?''

It was questions like those that Major McCann repeatedly seemed to grapple with.

At another point in the proceeding last week, he questioned a Marine battalion
intelligence officer, Capt. Jeffrey S. Dinsmore, who had inspected the scene at
Haditha.

''If there had been 150 bodies N.K.I.A. that day,'' Major McCann asked, using
the military's abbreviation for noncombatants killed in action, ''where would we
be, in your mind?''

Captain Dinsmore, a 21-year veteran testifying by telephone from Iraq, offered a
relatively impassioned response. He said the Iraq war rarely provided clear
lines between combatants and civilians. The marines in Haditha that day, under
small-arms fire in a profoundly hostile Sunni Arab region, could either abide by
the laws of war and risk being killed, or could take aggressive steps to protect
themselves and their squad members, and risk committing a war crime.

''The reality is then and the reality is now, you let loose marines in a T.I.C.
against a hostile situation, taking small-arms fire,'' Captain Dinsmore said,
referring to ''troops in contact,'' ''they don't have the training nor do they
have the presence of mind to differentiate between civilians and insurgents. It
stinks.''

Military and civilian lawyers said the Marine Corps was unlikely to charge the
division commander, Maj. Gen. Richard A. Huck, with a crime related to Haditha,
despite the general's testimony last week that he knew about the deaths hours
after they occurred but did not ask for follow-up reporting.

But given the widespread misperception throughout his division's ranks that
civilian deaths were not cause for great concern, military justice experts said
that prosecutors could have charged other officers as well.

Gary D. Solis, who teaches the laws of war at Georgetown University, said that
General Huck could have been charged but that ''I can see the argument against
it as well.'' Mr. Solis also said that the general's chief of staff, a colonel,
should be reprimanded for not telling the general about questions from a Time
magazine reporter that amounted to a war crime allegation.

Instead of being charged with dereliction charges similar to those facing
Captain Stone, three other Marine officers -- Lieutenant Kallop, the Third
Platoon leader; Maj. Dana G. Hyatt, a battalion civil affairs officer; and Major
Connolly -- were granted immunity from prosecution in exchange for their
testimony against Captain Stone.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
LAW OF WAR (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); TERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); MARINE BIOLOGY (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); NAVIES (78%); GENOCIDE (74%); DEATHS
& DEATH RATES (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (57%) Marine Corps (US)

PERSON: Thomas (Maj) Mccann; Paul Von Zielbauer

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Camp Pendleton (Calif); Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              877 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 26, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Deports Man Accused of Ties to Attacker in '05 Bombing

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 513 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 25


The British authorities, grappling with ways to contain suspected terrorists, on
Friday deported a Jamaican-born Muslim preacher and convert to Islam accused of
influencing one of the attackers in the London bombings of July 2005.

The preacher, Abdullah el-Faisal, 43, formerly the imam of the Brixton mosque in
South London, was placed under police guard on a flight to Kingston, Jamaica,
the Home Office said. He was barred from returning to Britain.

Mr. Faisal had been convicted in February 2003 of soliciting murder and inciting
racial hatred in English- and Arabic-language tapes of speeches urging his
followers to kill Hindus, Christians, Jews and American citizens.

He was deported after his seven-year sentence reached a point at which he could
have applied for parole. John Reid, Britain's home secretary, said in a
statement, ''Foreign nationals who abuse our hospitality and break our laws can
expect to be deported after they have served a prison sentence.''

The deportation coincided with efforts by the British police to track down three
men in their 20s who absconded this week from so-called control orders -- a form
of limited house arrest that required them to report daily to the authorities.

Their disappearance illuminated the challenges facing the British authorities in
cases where, unlike that of Mr. Faisal, the government seeks to restrict some
terrorist suspects without pushing for a full trial. Control orders were
introduced in 2005 after judges ruled against the previous practice of holding
foreign-born terrorist suspects indefinitely without charge.

At the time, the government said that a group of detainees at the Belmarsh
maximum-security prison in London were a threat to society but that they could
not be prosecuted under existing rules of evidence. Britain's most senior judges
ruled, however, that the government's commitment to European human-rights laws
meant that the authorities could not continue to hold the detainees.

The disappearance of the three men further challenged the practice of control
orders, with critics calling the measure both unfair and ineffective. There has
been no indication that the three fugitives, who disappeared Monday and Tuesday,
have been found. British officials said the men had been detained to prevent
them from going to Iraq to join the insurgency against the American-led
coalition.

After the July 7, 2005, bombings, Mr. Faisal was identified in official British
accounts of the attack as a strong influence on Germaine Lindsay, also a
Jamaican-born convert to Islam. Mr. Lindsay was one of four suicide bombers who
killed 52 people in the London attacks.

During Mr. Faisal's trial, prosecutors played a videotape showing him telling
150 young followers after the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States that the
Koran justified attacks on non-Muslims.

He was also heard to promise teenage Muslim boys that their reward in paradise
would be 72 virgins if they died as religious martyrs.

Mr. Faisal converted to Islam after studies in Saudi Arabia, and moved to
Britain in the early 1990s.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (91%); DEPORTATION (91%); SENTENCING
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); PRISONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); PAROLE (78%);
CORRECTIONS (76%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (75%); JUDGES (75%); HOUSE ARREST (75%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (73%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%);
ARRESTS (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); MISSING PERSONS (72%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES
(70%); MURDER (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (95%); KINGSTON, JAMAICA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); JAMAICA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              897 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

International Justice on Trial

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 316 words


The trial of Charles Taylor, former president of Liberia, is looking like the
trial of Slobodan Milosevic, former leader of Yugoslavia, and that is too bad.

Mr. Taylor, the first African leader to be tried in an international court for
crimes against humanity, refused to show up at the opening of his trial in The
Hague. He fired his lawyer and dismissed the proceedings as a charade. Before
that, his lawyer argued that his witnesses were afraid to testify, or could not
testify because of United Nations bans on their travel. And so, most likely, it
will continue, with Mr. Taylor, like Mr. Milosevic, trying to deflect attention
from his crimes by casting doubts on the validity and efficacy of international
justice.

That would be unfortunate. This was an extraordinarily vicious leader on a
continent that still suffers terribly at the hands of men like him. His rebel
army in Liberia recruited children and was responsible for unspeakable horrors
during a 14-year civil war. Liberia, however, decided against a war crimes court
and opted instead for a truth and reconciliation process. As a result, Mr.
Taylor is not charged with the crimes he committed against his people, but those
he abetted by supporting the equally inhuman and now deceased Foday Sankoh in
Sierra Leone, whose forces were notorious for mass rapes, amputations and other
horrors.

Mr. Taylor's trial was transferred to The Hague for security reasons, but the
move weakened one of the primary purposes of such tribunals, which is to show
that no one is above justice enforced in the places where injustice occurred. So
far, the record is not great. The Milosevic trial was long, costly and
inconclusive. Saddam Hussein's legally shoddy trial ended in an Internet circus
of an execution. Washington is openly hostile to the International Criminal
Court. International justice itself is on trial once again. We hope it wins.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (89%); LAWYERS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WITNESSES (78%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); CIVIL WAR (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (72%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SIERRA LEONE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              899 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 13, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Alas, Poor Art Market: A Multimillion-Dollar Head Case

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section E; Column 2; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CULTURE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 7


Presumably it was pure coincidence.

On June 4 the former Liberian gangster and strongman Charles G. Taylor went on
trial in The Hague for war crimes in which diamond trafficking played a major
role. Just days earlier the British artist Damien Hirst unveiled a platinum
human skull covered in 8,601 diamonds and offered it for sale for $:50 million,
or close to $100 million.

But if coincidence, is it fair to make the link? Should every starry-eyed young
couple looking for an engagement ring have to worry about how diamonds are mined
in Africa? Need Mr. Hirst feel guilty that Mr. Taylor is charged with supplying
weapons to gangs terrorizing Sierra Leone in the 1990s in exchange for diamonds?

Mr. Hirst's London gallery, White Cube, thought it wise to address the issue,
noting that the skull's diamonds ''are all ethically sourced, each with written
guarantees in compliance with United Nations resolutions.'' Bentley & Skinner,
the Mayfair jewelers that made the skull, added the assurance that the diamonds
were ''conflict-free.''

So that's fine.

The concept of ethically sourced diamonds -- or oil or weapons or even imported
T-shirts -- may be a bit far-fetched, but it sufficed to turn news media
attention here away from human rights to the far more respectable subject of
money: if sold, Mr. Hirst's skull will be the most expensive new work of art
ever made.

Now that's the stuff of headlines.

It is no secret that the art market has become drunk with money lately, with
major auctions routinely raising record prices for artists old and new. Never
before have contemporary artists, from London to Leipzig, New York to Shanghai,
been at the center of such speculative fever.

But $100 million for a diamond skull that cost $23.6 million ($:12 million) to
make? Even Russian oligarchs and hedge-fund billionaires might think twice. The
work, by the way, is called ''For the Love of God.'' Indeed.

Still, along with chutzpah, it shows that Mr. Hirst is a shining symbol of our
times, a man who perhaps more than any artist since Andy Warhol has used
marketing to turn his fertile imagination into an extraordinary business. And as
the natural leader of a group that came to be known as the Young British
Artists, or Y.B.A.'s, who emerged here in the 1990s, he has paved the way for
many others.

He made his name by pickling sharks, cows, sheep and the like, but his real
achievement was to break the power of London's traditional galleries. Initially
sponsored by the dealer and collector Charles Saatchi, himself a former
advertising magnate, Mr. Hirst soon became an art entrepreneur in his own right.
And having created his brand, he found he could sell almost anything.

Now 42, he still pickles animals in formaldehyde, but he also sells spin
paintings, enlarged anatomical figures, pharmaceutical products displayed in
cupboards, butterfly collages and, in White Cube's current ''Beyond Belief''
show, which includes the diamond skull, paintings of the birth of his son
through Caesarean section and large oils of malignant tumors.

Apart from their salability and the fact that many of these works are made by
Mr. Hirst's studio assistants (or his jewelers), what they have in common, White
Cube tells us, is his exploration of ''the fundamental themes of human existence
-- life, death, truth, love, immortality and art itself.''

Thus ''For the Love of God'' is presented in the tradition of memento mori --
those skulls placed in classical paintings to remind us of what lies ahead --
and as a homage to the Aztecs (Mr. Hirst now spends part of every year in
Mexico), who attached precious stones to skulls and even made entire skulls with
crystal.

In other words, Mr. Hirst's piece is packaged as a concept.

It is also an object. Seen under a single spotlight in a darkened room of White
Cube's Mayfair gallery, the skull is entirely covered with small diamonds,
including the nostrils, while one mega-diamond, weighing 52.40 carats, sits on
its forehead.

We are told that the skull belonged to a European who died at about 35, sometime
between 1720 and 1810. His cranium -- or rather its platinum cast -- now
sparkles like a strobe ball in a disco.

Is it beautiful? Compared with what? Like the crown jewels, it is what it is: a
highly skilled exercise in extravagance. Knowing its asking price adds to its
wow factor: imagine opening a suitcase with a $100 million worth of bills. Wow!

And talking (again) of money, White Cube says that three or four collectors have
shown interest in acquiring the skull. And one, according to British news media
reports, is the pop singer George Michael.

But those who lack resources or security guards have not been forgotten: Mr.
Hirst is offering limited editions of silkscreen prints of it, costing from
$2,000 to $20,000. (The most expensive 250 prints are sprinkled with diamond
dust.)

Well, clearly museums that are reduced to selling postcards, T-shirts and coffee
mugs of Renaissance masterpieces have something to learn.

But in fairness, Mr. Hirst is just playing the game. It is a game played by
collectors and dealers at art fairs throughout the year; it is a game finessed
as never before by Sotheby's and Christie's; it is a game in which, in the words
of Nick Cohen, a rare British journalist to trash Mr. Hirst's publicity coup,
''the price tag is the art.''

Will the bubble burst? If it does, it will be no fault of the artists; it will
be because stock markets take a dive, and collectors retrench. But it may do art
itself no harm. Mr. Cohen, for one, is looking forward to the day Mr. Hirst
takes a fall.

Mr. Hirst ''isn't criticizing the excess, not even ironically,'' Mr. Cohen wrote
in The Evening Standard here, ''but rolling in it and loving it. The sooner he
goes out of fashion, the better.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Damien Hirst's ''For the Love of God,'' covered in 8,601
diamonds. (Photo by Prudence Cuming Associates Ltd., via Getty Images)(pg. E1)
 Damien Hirst, whose ''For the Love of God'' cost $23.6 million to make. (Photo
by Suzanne Plunkett/Bloomberg News)(pg. E4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DIAMOND MARKETS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%);
MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (89%); JEWELRY (77%); AUCTIONS (77%); FINE JEWELRY (77%);
ARMS TRADE (76%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (71%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (70%); HEDGE
FUNDS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: CHARLES SAATCHI (78%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(56%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (56%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (90%); UNITED KINGDOM (88%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); NETHERLANDS
(73%); AFRICA (72%); UNITED STATES (56%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              906 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Civil Union Board Hears Bias Charge

BYLINE: By TINA KELLEY

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, June 18


The commission that monitors how well civil unions are working for New Jersey's
same-sex couples met for the first time on Monday and heard about the first
official discrimination complaint filed to the state.

In October, the State Supreme Court ordered the Legislature to create a law
extending the same rights and benefits to same-sex couples as heterosexual
couples. The Legislature responded by creating a separate status, civil unions,
stopping short of calling them  marriages.

J. Frank Vespa-Papaleo, director of the New Jersey Division on Civil Rights,
said that since the law took effect in February, his office had received about
360 inquiries -- but only one complaint -- from people who said they might  have
been discriminated against.

Steven Goldstein, chairman of Garden State Equality, a statewide gay-rights
organization, said that his group had received 148 discrimination complaints and
that people who had called his office with complaints were often shocked that
they would not be protected under the civil union law.

''Couples have expectations, but they find that the law is not the panacea they
though it was,'' Mr. Goldstein said.

He added, ''We encourage people to get civil unions, to get what they can, but
the law is deeply flawed and it's not working.''

The review commission, which was established by the legislation, must  report to
the Legislature every six months.

Mr. Vespa-Papaleo, who on Monday was elected  chairman of the 11-member Civil
Union Review Commission, told the commission that the state received its first
formal complaint on Wednesday.

In that complaint, Robert S. Kleid, a physician's assistant from Atlantic
Highlands, said that his employers, Tri-State Professional Employment
Organization, based in Manhattan, and Minimed Care of Chester, N.J., had denied
him the chance to apply for health benefits for his civil union partner.

In a copy of the complaint, Mr. Kleid said that Tri-State's regional accounts
manager said that because the company was based in New York, New Jersey's civil
union law did not apply.

In a phone interview, Mr. Kleid said he was very angry when he could not get
benefits for his partner of seven years. ''This is the law now, and people have
spent years on this, going to court and planning strategies, finally getting the
Supreme Court to recognize it,'' he said. ''I felt I just can't walk away from
this.''

Mr. Vespa-Papaleo's office will investigate the complaint to see if there is
sufficient evidence of discrimination.

He noted that in similar cases, New Jersey employees were found to be eligible
for family leaves allowed in the state, even if their employers were based in
other states.

Tri-State did not  respond to phone messages left on Monday.

Joe A. Komosinski, the state's registrar, said that on  Friday, there had been
1,092 civil unions in the state, 671 between women and 421 between men; an
additional 40 couples who had civil unions or marriages in other states had
their commitments reaffirmed in New Jersey.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); COHABITATION (90%);
DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS
(90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); MARRIAGE LAW (89%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EVIDENCE (72%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (63%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (96%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              916 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Serbia: No. 3 War Crimes Fugitive Arrested

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 153 words


Zdravko Tolimir, a former Bosnian Serb general charged with genocide and crimes
against humanity by the international war crimes tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, was arrested on the Bosnia-Serbia border, the police said. General
Tolimir, above, was a top aide to the Bosnian Serbs' wartime military commander,
Gen. Ratko Mladic, during the 1995 massacre of nearly 8,000 unarmed Muslim men
and boys at Srebrenica and is considered the third-most-wanted war crimes
suspect still at large in the Balkans, after General Mladic and the Bosnian Serb
wartime political leader, Radovan Karadzic. General Tolimir, who was reported to
have organized General Mladic's escape from justice, was arrested after a sweep
of the border region that included helicopters and antiterrorist units, the
Bosnian Serb police said. He was charged in 2005 with genocide, extermination,
murder, persecution and forcible transfer and deportation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); GENOCIDE (91%); ARRESTS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (88%);
DEPORTATION (73%); TERRORISM (70%); HELICOPTERS (51%); COUNTERTERRORISM (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (95%);
EUROPE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              917 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Study Finds Police Training Plays Key Role in Shootings

BYLINE: By BENEDICT CAREY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 956 words


In making snap decisions about whether to shoot a potentially armed suspect,
police officers are far less influenced by racial bias than students or
community members forced to make the same decision, a large study has found.

The study, which was based on video simulations of armed and unarmed
confrontations, found that racial stereotypes influenced the reaction times of
both officers and civilians, but swayed the ultimate decision to fire only in
civilian participants.

The findings, while offering little solace to the relatives of Sean Bell, Amadou
Diallo and other minority victims of police gunfire in New York City, suggest
that the impact of race on police behavior is subtler than previously
understood, and is strongly shaped by professional training.

In previous research, investigators have found evidence that the police use
greater force to restrain minority suspects than white ones. And in the wake of
the Rodney G. King beating in 1991 in California, an investigation of the Los
Angeles Police Department concluded that officers with antiblack attitudes were
more likely to be promoted than others.

But the new study, reported yesterday in The Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, is the first to rigorously compare the influence of race on such
life-and-death decisions in officers and in non-officers.

''We don't mean to suggest that this is conclusive evidence that there is no
racial bias in police officers' decisions to shoot,'' said Joshua Correll, a
psychologist at the University of Chicago and lead author of the study. ''But
we've run these tests with thousands of people now, and we've never seen this
ability to restrain behavior in any group other than police officers.''

Dr. Correll said that the findings were unexpected, given that the police were
exposed to the usual racial stereotypes in popular culture, as well as in roll
calls, confrontations on the beat and other cruelties of the system up close.
His co-authors were Bernd Wittenbrink of the University of Chicago; Bernadette
Park, Charles Judd and Melody Sadler of the University of Colorado in Boulder;
and Tracie Keesee of the Denver Police Department.

Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, which
has called for an investigation of the Sean Bell shooting, said the study was
good news, both for police departments and for those who advocate for equal
justice. Mr. Bell, a groom-to-be, was killed in November when five officers
fired 50 shots at his car as he left a bachelor party in Queens.

''It demonstrates that people can be trained not to rely on racially biased cues
in deciding to pull the trigger,'' Ms. Lieberman said of the new study. But the
findings, she added, ''should compel departments with histories of shooting
unarmed black men to undertake a re-examination of their firearms training.''

The research was conducted in 2004, and included 157 officers from the Denver
Police Department, 113 officers from departments around the country, and a
diverse group of 245 adults from the Denver area. The police officers and the
civilians were drawn to represent blacks, whites and Latinos, but the sample was
not nationally representative.

In one experiment, participants watched a video screen as a series of 50
threatening images flashed by, one after another: men, half of them black and
half white, each shown once while armed and once while holding something
innocuous, like a can of Coca-Cola or a cellphone. The participants hit a button
to shoot or to hold fire for each image they saw.

The researchers measured reaction times down to the millisecond, and found a
clear effect of stereotyping. Both officers and civilians took 10 to 20
milliseconds longer to make a decision when they saw either an unarmed black
man, or an armed white man, compared to the other images. This tiny twitch of
time reflects the cultural expectation that it is black men who are more likely
to have a gun, experts say, and some studies suggest that blacks as well as
whites are susceptible to it.

But when it mattered -- pull the trigger or not -- the police officers tuned out
race. They shot at about 13 percent of the unarmed black men and roughly the
same number of the unarmed white men. By contrast, the civilians shot at about
35 percent of the unarmed black men and 29 percent of unarmed white men.

To check the results, the researchers ran the entire trial again, and speeded
the rate that the images flashed by. The results were the same. Compared to the
public at large, the authors concluded, police officers had a ''less
trigger-happy orientation.''

Ms. Keesee, a commander, has patrolled all over Denver, and said that in some
areas suspicions of police racism ran high.

''Whenever there's a shooting of a black suspect by a white officer,'' she said,
''it has a significant effect on the community, and the elephant in the room,
the big question, is, Do you train your officers to shoot black males? This
affirms that we're on the right track.''

Ronald Weitzer, a sociologist at George Washington University who was not
involved in the research, called the result a major finding.

''It suggests that police officers are far more circumspect than they're usually
given credit for,'' Dr. Weitzer said. ''But at the same time there's the age-old
problem of the lab studies versus the real world.'' Officers may be tired,
afraid or unable to see clearly, or all of those things, when a partner starts
firing.

''Or let's say officers might respond to a situation and suddenly are surrounded
by onlookers, bystanders who are yelling at them; that is going to make you more
tense,'' Dr. Weitzer said. ''It's not possible to capture all that in a study
like this.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (91%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); FIREARMS (75%); EXECUTIVES (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (54%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); DENVER, CO, USA
(78%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (69%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); COLORADO, USA (79%);
ILLINOIS, USA (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              918 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Genocide Trial Finishes After 5 Years

BYLINE: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 138 words


Col. Theoneste Bagosora, left, considered to have been the military organizer of
the Rwandan genocide, pleaded for his name to be cleared in the closing
arguments of his five-year trial at the United Nations tribunal court in Arusha,
Tanzania. ''I didn't kill anyone, nor give any order to kill anyone,'' he told
the court. Colonel Bagosora, 66, who has been in prison for 10 years, was the
cabinet director for the Defense Ministry at the start of the slaughter by Hutu
of 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu in 1994. He and three other senior army
officers on trial with him since 2002, Gratien Kabiligi, Aloys Ntabakuze and
Anatole Nsengiyumva, are charged with genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. A date for the verdict has not been announced, but the court's
presidency has said it does not expect it before 2008.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMIES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(87%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              920 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian President To Release Rebels In Exchange Effort

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 297 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, June 1


The government transferred jailed leftist rebels to a holding center on Friday
as part of President Alvaro Uribe's bid to win freedom for 60 rebel-held
hostages, including three American defense contractors and a former presidential
candidate, Ingrid Betancourt.

Mr. Uribe said the prisoners must demobilize, promise not to return to crime and
be under the supervision of a foreign government or the Roman Catholic Church to
qualify for release on Thursday.

''This is advancing the national government's goal of freeing all the kidnapped
people who are in the power of illegal armed groups,'' Mr. Uribe's office said
in a statement. The government hopes its ''humanitarian gesture'' will prompt an
in-kind response from the guerrillas.

A spokeswoman for the national penitentiary institute said about 190 rebels from
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, would be moved to a center
in Boyaca Province while their release applications were reviewed.

Around 1,000 rebel prisoners applied for release, but only 200 -- mainly those
imprisoned on minor offenses -- would be eligible, said Gen. Eduardo Morales,
head of Colombia's prison system.

Many jailed rebels have rejected the release, however, saying they will accept
it only through negotiations between the FARC and the government.

''We are not prepared to negotiate our principles,'' FARC members in Giron
prison in northeast Colombia said in a statement. Talks between the sides over a
possible exchange of imprisoned rebels for the hostages have ground to a halt.

Mr. Uribe's plan to release rebels unilaterally comes amid a scandal linking
some of his congressional backers to death squads. Families of the kidnapped
also have lambasted Mr. Uribe for not doing enough to win the release of their
loved ones.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (77%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (77%); RELIGION
(71%); SCANDALS (70%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (57%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(57%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (56%)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (90%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              928 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Italy Braces for Legal Fight Over Secret C.I.A. Program

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER and ELISABETTA POVOLEDO; Paolo Biondani contributed
reporting from Milan, and Elaine Sciolino from Florence.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1535 words

DATELINE: ROME, June 7


There is no dispute over the central event of Feb. 17, 2003, on Via Guerzoni in
Milan: an imam, known as Abu Omar and eyed as a terrorism suspect, vanished
while walking to his mosque.

And no one is seriously denying what he and Italian prosecutors now allege: that
this was the work of the Central Intelligence Agency, part of the contentious
American program of ''extraordinary rendition,'' in which terrorism suspects are
seized and sent for interrogation to other countries, including some in which
torture is practiced. A hundred or more terrorism suspects have similarly
disappeared worldwide since the 9/11 attacks.

The real dispute has played out over the attempt here in Italy to call this a
crime.

On Friday, the same day that President Bush arrives here, a trial opens in Milan
charging not only 25 C.I.A. operatives but Italy's former intelligence chief
with breaking Italian laws by abducting the imam. If it goes ahead -- legal
challenges could delay the start until the fall -- it will be the first such
trial anywhere.

But even if it does go ahead, it is far from certain that there will ever be any
legal conclusion to a secretive and complicated case that risks poisoning ties
between the United States and Italy, deep embarrassment for both countries and,
possibly, full-scale scandal here.

American officials have stated blankly that they will never extradite the C.I.A.
operatives. And the government of Prime Minister Romano Prodi, trying to derail
the case, has charged that the chief prosecutor, Armando Spataro, overstepped
his bounds and violated state secrecy laws as he gathered evidence. The
suggestion is that a trial risks exposing Italy's most closely held security
secrets.

Mr. Spataro fired back, saying he had an obligation to prosecute law-breaking
even in the name of fighting terrorism. Investigators say the abduction also
ruined a long investigation by the Italian police into Abu Omar, whose real name
is Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, and a suspected network of militants.

''Kidnapping Abu Omar was a serious crime,'' Mr. Spataro said, ''and did serious
damage to our fight against terrorism.''

Now, the nation's Constitutional Court is deciding whether Mr. Spataro did,
indeed, violate secrecy laws by wiretapping Italian secret agents and using
documents from a safe house used by agents. Mr. Spataro contends that his work
complied fully with the law.

The decision could have a decisive impact on the trial, suppressing crucial
evidence or halting the proceedings.

With a decision not expected until the fall, one of the first orders of business
on Friday will be arguments on whether to suspend the criminal trial in the
abduction until then.

If the trial does go forward, it will tantalize with a possible glimpse of the
darker side of the American fight against terrorism -- broadly, whether the Bush
administration overreached, overstepping the laws of allies like Italy, since
the 9/11 attacks. There has been no similar trial, and for the United States, it
risks exposing details of a program it has acknowledged only broadly and refuses
to discuss specifically.

For Italy, the stakes are perhaps more immediate. Among those charged is Nicolo
Pollari, who was in charge of the nation's military intelligence, a powerful
defendant whose job was roughly equivalent to that of the C.I.A. director.

As might be expected from such a figure, Mr. Pollari is playing for keeps. His
list of potential witnesses includes Silvio Berlusconi, who was prime minister
at the time of the abduction, and Mr. Prodi, along with top aides to the two
men.

Mr. Berlusconi and three aides could testify, Mr. Pollari's lawyer wrote in a
legal brief, that Mr. Pollari opposed, ''with absolute firmness, any possibility
of projects for illegal activity even with the aim of fighting terrorism (and
particularly any activity of renditions).''

Asked whether someone higher in the Italian government than Mr. Pollari had
assented to the abduction, the lawyer, Titta Madia, said dryly, ''Evidently, it
wasn't the doorman.''

In fact, the case here is the only documented rendition in Western Europe in
which suspects were not handed over outright to American officials. The reason
it seems to have happened only in Italy is not clear, and officials here broadly
agree that there were more dangerous militants in Europe at the time.

But Mr. Nasr represented enough of a threat that he also was under investigation
by the Italian antiterrorism police at the time. Suspected of being a veteran of
Afghan training camps and the Balkan wars, he was said to have had a role in
recruiting and financing militants in Europe.

''He was involved in activity that represented a serious danger to our national
security,'' said Claudio Scajola, chairman of the parliamentary committee on the
secret services.

On Feb. 17, 2003, Mr. Nasr disappeared on his way to a mosque considered then to
be the center of radical Islamic activity in Milan. There was little news of him
until he was released from prison in Egypt in February. He said he had been
jailed all that time, apart from a few weeks in 2004. He said he was tortured
after the C.I.A. flew him to Cairo.

''Egypt's government did what it always does: carry out Washington's orders,''
Mr. Nasr told the German magazine Der Spiegel. ''The dirty work to get me to
talk was to be done here. That is why they tortured me, hooked up electric wires
to my genitals, hung me on the wall in a solitary cell for days, subjected me to
unbearably loud music through headphones.

''In the first 14 months, I would have confessed to anything,'' he said.

(Shortly after his release, Mr. Nasr agreed to a request from The New York Times
for an interview but then canceled the night before because, he and his lawyer
said, an Italian television station had offered to pay for an exclusive
interview.)

But during the time Mr. Nasr's whereabouts were unknown, prosecutors in Milan,
led by Mr. Spataro, a veteran of domestic terrorism cases, meticulously pieced
together the case. In the end, he won the indictment of 25 C.I.A. operatives,
plus an American Air Force colonel, Mr. Pollari and other Italian agents.

The work was simplified to some degree by the sloppiness of the American
intelligence operatives, who were traced through cellphones, bills for rental
cars, expensive meals and $500-a-night hotels.

Legal experts speculate that this sloppiness was a sign that the Americans had
no fear of getting caught, meaning that there was high-level permission from the
Italian government for Mr. Nasr's abduction.

But secret recordings and testimony made public have not provided concrete
suggestions of the culpability of any official higher than Mr. Pollari. He
contends that other documents exist proving his innocence, which the government
says cannot be released on state secrecy grounds.

Testimony also shows some resistance in the C.I.A., specifically from the
station chief in Milan at the time, Robert Seldon Lady. A deposition from a
military intelligence agent, Stefano D'Ambrosio, recounts a conversation he said
he had with Mr. Lady before the abduction, in which Mr. Lady said he opposed the
rendition. Mr. Lady's stated reason was that the Italian police, already
investigating Mr. Nasr, could keep watching him for more information.

Some bureaucratic infighting appeared to exist, too. In the conversation, Mr.
Lady blamed the top C.I.A. officer in Italy at the time, Jeffrey Castelli, for
the rendition.

''I believe that he spoke to me about it as a personal outlet and to manifest to
me, for future reference, his objection,'' Mr. D'Ambrosio said in his deposition
about Mr. Lady's conversation with him.

Mr. Lady, through his lawyer, refused a request for an interview.

Given the level of detail that could emerge about one of America's most secret
programs, the trial has potentially deep ramifications for ties between the
United States and Italy.

Mr. Berlusconi's staunchly pro-American government refused to demand the
extradition of the C.I.A. operatives, but so, too, has Mr. Prodi's government,
which has generally cooler relations with Washington.

Some Italian critics argue that it is not in the national interest to have such
a trial, and they hope that the Constitutional Court kills the case.

''No foreign secret services will speak to Italian secret services, because the
Italian secret services are no longer secret,'' argued Luigi Pannella, a lawyer
for one of the Italian defendants.

Others argue that the C.I.A. operatives, and possibly Mr. Pollari, were merely
acting on orders, and that any trial should focus on those who ordered the
abduction.

But many say the trial must go forward on one basic ground: an Italian law may
have been broken in the case of Mr. Nasr's disappearance, and the question of
any links Mr. Nasr had to terrorism groups should have been settled in a trial
by the laws of Italy, not by a foreign power kidnapping him.

''It's a question of principle,'' said Caterina Interlandi, the judge who issued
the indictments. ''Today, it's Abu Omar. Tomorrow, it could be my daughter.
These are fundamental human rights, and we have to respect them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr has accused the C.I.A. of playing a
role in his abduction in 2003. (Photo by Nasser Nasser/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%);
EVIDENCE (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); SCANDALS
(71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (64%); WIRETAPPING (63%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%)

PERSON: ROMANO PRODI (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: ROME, ITALY (79%)

COUNTRY: ITALY (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              933 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Ruling for Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 558 words


For years, President Bush has made the grandiose claim that the Congressional
authorization to attack Afghanistan after 9/11 was a declaration of a ''war on
terror'' that gave him the power to decide who the combatants are and throw them
into military prisons forever.

Yesterday, in a powerful 2-to-1 decision, a panel of the United States Court of
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit utterly rejected the president's claims. The
majority made clear how threatening the administration's policies are to the
Constitution and the rule of law -- and how far the administration has already
gone down that treacherous road.

Mr. Bush, the majority said, does not claim these powers for dire emergencies
but ''maintains that the authority to order the military to seize and detain
certain civilians is an inherent power of the presidency, which he and his
successors may exercise as they please.''

The prisoner in this case, a citizen of Qatar named Ali al-Marri, was living in
the United States legally when he was arrested and charged with being an Al
Qaeda terrorist. In 2003, Mr. Bush declared Mr. Marri an enemy combatant, took
him from civilian authorities and threw him into a military brig where he
remains today without charges being filed.

The court did not say Mr. Marri was innocent, nor that he must be set free. It
said that the law does not give Mr. Bush the power to seize a civilian living in
the United States and declare him to be an enemy combatant based on whatever
definition he chooses to apply. If Mr. Marri is to be kept in prison, it said,
he must be tried and convicted in a civilian court.

The ruling said the Constitution and numerous precedents made it clear that
foreigners living legally in this country have the same right to due process as
any American citizen. It found no merit in the president's claim that the
Congressional approval of the use of military force in Afghanistan gave him
authority to change that or that he has ''the inherent authority'' to do it on
his own. Sanctioning that kind of authority ''would have disastrous consequences
for the Constitution -- and for the country,'' the judges said.

The judges said their ruling applied only to people living legally in the United
States and not to the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. But the court's
powerful arguments may be relevant to a large number of those men. Steven
Shapiro, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said the ruling
would not help those prisoners who were captured on a battlefield and properly
imprisoned as combatants. But there are hundreds of prisoners who were not taken
on a battlefield but instead were picked up by the military or intelligence
agents around the world and classified as combatants because of their
association with Al Qaeda. The ruling said that was not an adequate definition
of combatant.

This ruling is another strong argument for bringing Mr. Bush's detention camps
under the rule of law. Congress can do that by repealing the odious Military
Commissions Act of 2006, which endorsed Mr. Bush's twisted system of indefinite
detentions, by closing Guantanamo Bay and by allowing the courts to sort out the
prisoners -- not according to the whims of one president with an obvious disdain
for the balance of powers, but by the rules of justice that have guided this
nation for more than 200 years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); PRISONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); RULE OF LAW (75%); AL-QAEDA (72%); APPEALS COURTS
(71%); ARRESTS (71%); APPROVALS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (63%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (66%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              934 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

JUDGES SAY U.S. CAN'T HOLD MAN AS 'COMBATANT'

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1403 words


The federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., ruled yesterday that the president
may not declare civilians in this country to be ''enemy combatants'' and have
the military hold them indefinitely. The ruling was a stinging rejection of one
of the Bush administration's central assertions about the scope of executive
authority to combat terrorism.

The ruling came in the case of Ali al-Marri, a citizen of Qatar now in military
custody in Charleston, S.C., who is the only person on the American mainland
known to be held as an enemy combatant. The court said the administration may
charge Mr. Marri with a crime, deport him or hold him as a material witness in
connection with a grand jury investigation.

''But military detention of al-Marri must cease,'' Judge Diana Gribbon Motz
wrote for the majority of a divided three-judge panel.

The court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, said a
fundamental principle is at stake: military detention of someone who had
lawfully entered the United States and established connections here, it said,
violates the Constitution.

''To sanction such presidential authority to order the military to seize and
indefinitely detain civilians,'' Judge Motz wrote, ''even if the president calls
them 'enemy combatants,' would have disastrous consequences for the Constitution
-- and the country.''

''We refuse to recognize a claim to power,'' Judge Motz added, ''that would so
alter the constitutional foundations of our republic.''

In a statement, the Justice Department said it would ask the full Fourth Circuit
to rehear the case, which could eventually reach the Supreme Court. The
statement added that Mr. Marri represented a danger to the United States.

''Al-Marri is an individual who trained at Osama bin Laden's terrorist training
camp in Afghanistan,'' the Justice Department statement said. ''In the summer of
2001, he met with Khalid Shaykh Muhammed, the mastermind of the September 11th
attacks, and entered the United States just before September 11 to serve as an
Al Qaeda sleeper agent and to explore methods of disrupting the U.S. financial
system.''

''The president has made clear,'' the statement continued, ''that he intends to
use all available tools at his disposal to protect Americans from further Al
Qaeda attack, including the capture and detention of Al Qaeda agents who enter
our borders.''

Mr. Marri was arrested on Dec. 12, 2001, in Peoria, Ill., where he was living
with his family and studying computer science at Bradley University. He was
charged with credit-card fraud and lying to federal agents, and he was on the
verge of a trial on those charges when he was moved into military detention in
2003. He has been held for the last four years at the Navy brig in Charleston.

Mr. Marri's transfer to military custody, Judge Motz wrote, is ''puzzling at
best.'' The usual reason offered for the indefinite detention without charges of
enemy combatants is to immobilize them and prevent them from returning to the
battlefield. But Mr. Marri was already held pending his criminal trial.

Judge Motz suggested that the government's purpose in moving Mr. Marri to
military custody was one the Supreme Court held improper in a 2004 decision,
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, that of subjecting him to harsh interrogation.

For his first 16 months in the brig, Mr. Marri was allowed no contact with his
family or lawyers. He was, a lawsuit filed on his behalf in 2005 said, denied
basic necessities and subjected to extreme sensory deprivation. Interrogators
threatened to send him to Egypt or Saudi Arabia, the lawsuit said, ''where, they
told him, he would be tortured and sodomized and where his wife would be raped
in front of him.''

Judge Motz, joined by Judge Roger L. Gregory, wrote that Mr. Marri might well be
guilty of serious crimes. But she said the government could not circumvent the
civilian criminal justice system through military detention. The court reversed
a lower-court decision that had denied Mr. Marri's challenge to his detention.

Two other men have been held as enemy combatants on the American mainland since
the Sept. 11 attacks. One, Yaser Hamdi, was freed and sent to Saudi Arabia after
the Supreme Court allowed him to challenge his detention in 2004. The other,
Jose Padilla, was transferred to the criminal justice system last year. He is
now on trial on terrorism charges in federal court in Miami.

All three judges yesterday agreed that a new law, the Military Commissions Act,
did not defeat the court's jurisdiction. The law says the federal courts have no
jurisdiction to hear challenges from any noncitizen ''who has been determined by
the United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant.''

Unlike the men held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, Mr. Marri has not yet received even
the cursory review of his designation as enemy combatant, performed by a
military panel known as a combatant status review tribunal. The Military
Commissions Act, Judge Motz concluded, ''was not intended to, and does not,
apply to aliens like al-Marri, who have legally entered, and are seized while
legally residing in, the United States.''

The majority and the dissenting judge, Judge Henry Hudson, visiting from the
Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, differed mainly on
whether civilians may ever be classified as enemy combatants.

Because Mr. Marri was not alleged to have fought with the Taliban or the armed
forces of any enemy nation or to have engaged in combat with United States
forces, Judge Motz wrote, Mr. Bush was powerless to have the military detain Mr.
Marri any more than he could have ordered the military detentions of ''the
Unabomber or the perpetrators of the Oklahoma City bombing.''

In dissent, Judge Hudson wrote that Mr. Bush ''had the authority to detain
al-Marri as an enemy combatant or belligerent'' because ''he is the type of
stealth warrior used by Al Qaeda to perpetrate terrorist acts against the United
States.''

Judges Motz and Gregory were appointed by President Bill Clinton, and Judge
Hudson by Mr. Bush.

Jonathan Hafetz, one of Mr. Marri's lawyers and the litigation director of the
Liberty and National Security Project of the Brennan Center for Justice at New
York University School of Law, said a contrary ruling could have had devastating
consequences.

Under the administration's theory, Mr. Hafetz said, ''the executive could
effectively disappear people by picking up any immigrant in this country,
locking them in a military jail and holding the keys to the courthouse. This is
exactly what separates a country that is democratic and committed to the rule of
law from a country that is a police state.''

The decision appears unlikely to have any immediate effect on the men held at
Guantanamo. Judge Motz emphasized that the court's analysis was limited to those
with substantial connections to the United States who had been seized and
detained within its borders.

Still, White House critics said the ruling was only the latest in a series of
setbacks for the administration.

''Last Monday, two military judges handpicked to preside over the Guantanamo Bay
trials rejected the claim that a presidential order alone was sufficient to give
the courts jurisdiction over the detainees,'' said Jennifer Daskal, advocacy
director of the United States Program of Human Rights Watch. ''And today, one of
the nation's most conservative courts squarely rejected the president's
unprecedented assertion that he, alone, could hand out the label of 'enemy
combatant' without any sort of independent court review.''

The appeals court yesterday ordered the trial judge in the case to issue a writ
of habeas corpus directing the secretary of defense to release Mr. Marri from
military custody ''within a reasonable period of time to be set by the district
court.'' The government can, Judge Motz wrote, transfer Mr. Marri to civilian
authorities to face criminal charges, initiate deportation proceedings against
him, hold him as a material witness in connection with a grand jury proceeding
or detain him for a limited time under a provision of the U.S.A. Patriot Act.

But the military cannot hold him, Judge Motz wrote. ''The president cannot
eliminate,'' she wrote, ''constitutional protections with the stroke of a pen by
proclaiming a civilian, even a criminal civilian, an enemy combatant subject to
indefinite military detention.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ali al-Marri, a citizen of Qatar, has been held in military
custody in Charleston, S.C., for four years. (Photo by Peoria Journal Star, via
Associated Press)(pg. A20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
SUPREME COURTS (78%); JUDGES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); DEPORTATION (74%); WITNESSES
(73%); GRAND JURY (70%); ARRESTS (70%); CREDIT CARDS (70%); INVESTIGATIONS
(69%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (50%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (56%)

CITY: PEORIA, IL, USA (90%); RICHMOND, VA, USA (73%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (72%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              935 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WHAT'S ON TONIGHT

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

SECTION: Section E; Column 6; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 429 words


7 P.M. (Cinemax) HAVE YOU SEEN ANDY? -- In August 1976 Andy Puglisi, 10 (middle,
in turtleneck), disappeared from a public pool in Lawrence, Mass., where he was
playing with dozens of children, including Melanie Perkins. In this documentary
Ms.

Perkins, now a filmmaker, looks for answers through interviews with other
neighborhood children, Andy's family, police officers and forensics experts, and
uncovers new evidence in this still unsolved case.  8 P.M. (NBC) AMERICA'S GOT
TALENT -- Tonight the show's celebrity judges, David Hasselhoff, Piers Morgan
and Sharon Osbourne, decide which Los Angeles auditioners will advance to the
Las Vegas callbacks. Jerry Springer is host.  8 P.M. (Fox) ON THE LOT -- The
director David Frankel (''The Devil Wears Prada'') is guest judge alongside the
regulars Carrie Fisher and Garry Marshall.   8 P.M. (ABC) FAST CARS &
SUPERSTARS: THE GILLETTE YOUNG GUNS CELEBRITY RACE -- Serena Williams may be a
whiz on the tennis court, but racing apparently isn't in her blood, leaving her
the first celebrity driver to be taken off the track in this reality series.
Tonight the former N.B.A. player John Salley, the W.W.E. wrestler John Cena and
the singer Jewel put their pedals to the metal under the tutelage of the Nascar
racer Carl Edwards.  9 P.M. (BBC America) MI-5 -- Tonight the team of
counterterrorism officers led by Tom Quinn goes after terrorists who have seized
the Turkish embassy in London and hit close to home, taking Zoe Reynolds
hostage.  9 P.M. (Logo) KATE CLINTON: 25TH ANNIVERSARY TOUR -- Ms. Clinton, who
calls herself ''a faith-based, tax-paying, America-loving political humorist and
family entertainer,'' performs from her ''It's Come to This'' tour, sponsored by
the National Center for Lesbian Rights.  10 P.M. (A&E) CRISS ANGEL MINDFREAK --
In a torturous double header Mr. Angel lies on a bed of broken glass as a
steamroller goes over his body; at 10:30 he tries to escape a caged truck filled
with explosives while locked in a mailbag.  10 P.M. (WE) SECRET LIVES OF WOMEN
-- A look at cougars: older women who, um, prey on younger men.   10 P.M.
(Oxygen) BAD GIRLS ROAD TRIP -- In this new series, Leslie, Aimee and Zara from
Season 1 embark on a road trip, with stops at each woman's hometown, to find
even worse contestants for Season 2.  10:30 P.M. (13) THE RHYTHM OF MY SOUL:
KENTUCKY ROOTS MUSIC -- A history of Kentucky roots music -- a melange of
country, gospel, mountain and bluegrass -- through film clips of Bill Monroe,
Loretta Lynn and Ricky Skaggs, shown picking a mandolin at 8.   KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (91%); NETWORK TELEVISION (90%); WOMEN (89%);
CELEBRITIES (89%); MUSIC (86%); TERRORISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); SPORTS & RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (77%); FORENSICS (76%); ARTISTS &
PERFORMERS (75%); AUTO RACING (72%); SPONSORSHIP (72%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS
(72%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (72%); REALITY TELEVISION (70%); HOSTAGE TAKING (69%);
NASCAR RACING (67%); TENNIS (67%); SPORTS (67%); COUNTERTERRORISM (64%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (50%); LGBT RIGHTS (50%); RELIGION (50%); GAYS & LESBIANS
(50%); ANNIVERSARIES (50%)

PERSON: SERENA WILLIAMS (51%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              938 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 13, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Tribunal Sentences Serb To 35 Years For War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 12


The United Nations war crimes court established to hear cases from the former
Yugoslavia found a former henchman of president Slobodan Milosevic guilty on
Tuesday of multiple crimes while leading a Serbian separatist rebellion and
handed down a sentence of 35 years.

Milan Martic, 52, listened motionless as the three judges called him ''one of
the most important and influential political figures'' of the Serbian ministate
of Krajina, which broke off from Croatia in the early 1990s as Yugoslavia fell
apart.

They convicted Mr. Martic of crimes against humanity, including murder,
persecution and torture of Croatian civilians, and of war crimes, including
plunder and wanton destruction of civilian sites, churches, schools and entire
villages. The campaign to drive non-Serbs out of Krajina caused hundreds of
deaths and created tens of thousands of refugees.

Mr. Martic was also found guilty of ordering an unjustified two-day rocket
attack on the Croatian capital, Zagreb, in 1995. In the days after the attacks,
Mr. Martic boasted to reporters that he had given the orders.

The defense had demanded an acquittal and described Mr. Martic as a hero and a
protector of the Serbian population, while prosecutors had pressed for a life
sentence.

The 35-year prison term is high by the standards of the tribunal, which has
completed proceedings against more than 100 of those accused. Mr. Martic has
already been in detention for five years, since he surrendered to the tribunal
in 2002. But the judges gave him little credit for turning himself in, because
by then he had been on the run for seven years, they wrote.

During his 13-month trial, Mr. Martic, a former policeman and an ardent Serbian
nationalist, showed no remorse. He tried to justify the violent actions of the
police and paramilitary groups he directed as minister of defense and minister
of the interior and eventually as president of the self-styled republic of
Krajina.

The ministate, which occupied one-third of Croatia, lasted from 1991 to 1995,
when the Croatian military, backed by American advisers, restored Zagreb's
control.

The judgment also cited the Serbian leadership in Belgrade for planning a
Greater Serbia to include all ethnic Serbs, of which Krajina was to have been a
part. Belgrade sent funds, supplies and forces to the Krajina separatists.

Evidence had established that Slobodan Milosevic, who died shortly before his
four-year trial at the tribunal ended, ''covertly'' intended to seize control of
swaths of land in Bosnia and Croatia, the judgment said, by using paramilitary
groups to provoke violence, after which the Belgrade army would intervene to
secure and unify the territories.

The plan eventually failed after intervention from the West. But the judgment
said Mr. Martic was a key part of that plan. It quoted Mr. Martic as saying in
1994 that he would ''speed up the process of unification'' and ''pass on the
baton to our all-Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); SENTENCING (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(89%); ARMIES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(78%); VERDICTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ACQUITTAL (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); PRISONS (71%);
MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); ZAGREB, CROATIA (90%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (97%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              939 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 14, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Panel Says Liberian Ex-Leader's Wealth Hasn't Vanished

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and MARLISE SIMONS; Lydia Polgreen reported from
Dakar, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, June 13


When Charles G. Taylor's long-awaited trial on 11 war crimes and crimes against
humanity opened in The Hague on June 4, Mr. Taylor upended the proceedings by
refusing to appear, saying he was too poor to afford his own defense and unhappy
with the one provided by the court, despite having amassed a personal fortune
estimated at half a billion dollars while in power in Liberia.

But a confidential report by a panel of experts advising the United Nations
Security Council suggests that Mr. Taylor may still have access to considerable
wealth, salted away in investments in Nigeria and Liberia.

The Nigerian government refused to allow the panel, a group of financial
analysts and specialists in the timber and diamond trades, to travel to Nigeria
to investigate Mr. Taylor's finances, according to the report. Nor have Nigeria
and Liberia frozen assets believed to be connected to Mr. Taylor, in part
because they have not done so for several other prominent local officials whose
assets the United Nations has said should be frozen as well.

The report, which was sent to the Security Council on Wednesday, found evidence
documenting payments Mr. Taylor received during his presidency from a timber
company that was connected to an arms dealer convicted last year in a Dutch
court of smuggling weapons for Mr. Taylor. There was also evidence suggesting
that Mr. Taylor retained links to one of Liberia's biggest cellphone companies.

Mr. Taylor's claims of penury are a surprising turn of events for a man believed
to have stolen hundreds of millions of dollars from Liberia and neighboring
Sierra Leone, which he dragged into a civil war that lasted more than a decade.
Mr. Taylor built a fortune in kickbacks from sales of the rich array of natural
resources from both countries.

A court spokesman said that Mr. Taylor still had a court-appointed lawyer, Karim
Khan, and that although Mr. Taylor said in a letter to the court on June 4 that
he was firing Mr. Khan, he cannot. Only the court can make that change, the
spokesman said. Mr. Taylor also said in his letter that he wanted to defend
himself. But for that he will have to ask the court's permission, and it may not
be given, the spokesman said.

The court spokesman also said that a second defense lawyer was expected to join
Mr. Khan. The Taylor defense team, paid by the court, at present includes two
legal assistants and two researchers.

No one knows what happened to Mr. Taylor's money. In the Nigerian city of
Calabar, where Mr. Taylor lived in exile for three years under a deal in which
he gave up power in 2003, he lived in style with a handful of luxurious villas
for himself and his entourage.

In an earlier report last year, the United Nations panel of experts said
evidence suggested that Mr. Taylor had ''made significant investments in
Nigeria, such as in real estate,'' the report said.

But efforts to trace his fortune have bumped up against resistance in Nigeria,
where the panel of experts says he has made a number of investments, and
Liberia, where he is connected, through intermediaries, to one of the country's
biggest cellphone networks.

When Mr. Taylor was arrested as he tried to flee Nigeria last March, he had with
him a large amount of cash, but that money has also disappeared, the report
said.

In his time as a warlord and later as president of Liberia, Mr. Taylor extracted
millions in exchange for tax breaks and a wide range of other favors for
businessmen who hauled off billions' worth of treasure from Sierra Leone and
Liberia in the nearly two decades they spent embroiled in interconnected civil
wars.

He built his first fortune as a government official in the 1980s, pocketing
close to $1 million before fleeing an embezzling charge. He ended up in the
United States, where he was arrested for extradition to Liberia but mysteriously
escaped a Massachusetts prison.

After several years of wandering around Africa, including a spell in a Libyan
militia training camp, he launched his offensive on Liberia from Ivory Coast in
1989. By wresting control of the most mineral- and timber-rich regions of the
country, he gained, by some estimates, $100 million a year in the early 1990s.

The report details of one such deal between Mr. Taylor and Natura Holding, which
hauled thousands of tons of hardwoods from Liberia during the civil war.
According to a 2001 statement of account from the Ministry of Finance of Liberia
unearthed by researchers, a subsidiary of the timber company, Natura, was
credited for paying $2 million in taxes on July 17, 2000. The next day, a
deposit from Natura for almost the same amount appeared in Mr. Taylor's personal
account, according to a bank statement.

''Millions more may have been deposited into Taylor's accounts, but definitive
information on the ownership of these bank accounts has been difficult to
obtain,'' the report said.

He is believed to have entered into similar deals with the Oriental Timber
Company, which was partly owned by Guus van Kouwenhoven, a Dutch businessman who
was convicted in a Dutch court in 2006 of smuggling arms for Mr. Taylor. He was
but one of a number of businessmen suspected of helping funnel arms for Mr.
Taylor's insurgents and later his army to fuel the civil wars in Liberia and
Sierra Leone.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
ILLEGAL WEAPONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); WEALTHY
PEOPLE (76%); ARMS TRADE (74%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (71%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (69%);
FORESTRY & LOGGING TRADE (69%); SMUGGLING (66%); DIAMOND MARKETS (54%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (57%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (90%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              941 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka's Scars Trace Lines of War Without End

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Kavitha Kumar contributed reporting from Bangalore,
India.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1375 words

DATELINE: JAFFNA, Sri Lanka


The nights here are once again broken by artillery fire across the black lagoon.
The road out of this peninsula has been closed since last August, making the
area nearly inaccessible. Though food and fuel manage to arrive, shopkeepers are
reluctant to keep stocks, not knowing when they may have to close up and run.

By 7 p.m., barely sundown, stray dogs have the run of Jaffna's streets. The
city's people are indoors well before an 8 o'clock curfew. Soldiers linger at
the edges of the alleys.

''Anytime, anything can happen,'' said Ravindran Ramanathan, a tailor. ''People
are afraid of everything.'' At least 15,000 are waiting to get on government
ships to the relative safety of Colombo, the capital.

This is Jaffna, the picturesque prize of Sri Lanka's ethnic civil war, girding
for a new storm. The army commander for the area, Maj. Gen. G. A. Chandrasiri,
said he expected a major battle for Jaffna before the August monsoon.

No other place in Sri Lanka is so scarred because no place carries Jaffna's
special curse: it is the heart of the homeland that the Tamil Tigers have fought
to carve out, and the trophy that soldiers and rebels have fought over for
nearly 25 years.

A 2002 cease-fire, which had stanched the bloodshed for a time, has collapsed.
For a year, fighting has spread across the island between the Sri Lankan
military, dominated by the ethnic Sinhalese majority, and the separatist force
called the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.

According to the Defense Ministry, more than 4,800 people, civilians and
fighters, have been killed since December 2005. Though the number is not
entirely reliable, it points to a significantly lethal period even by the
standards of this long, ugly war.

It is likely to continue. Peace talks are nowhere on the horizon. Gotabhaya
Rajapakse, Sri Lanka's influential defense secretary, says the military is under
instructions to eliminate the rebel leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, and
eradicate his organization once and for all.

''That's our main aim, to destroy the leadership,'' Mr. Rajapakse said in an
interview in May. The job, he said, would take two to three years.

Pressure from abroad has done little to temper either side's ambitions. The
Tamil Tigers, banned in many countries, including the United States, upped the
ante this spring by carrying out air raids with modified two-seater propeller
planes. Britain and the United States, which extended a hand after the
devastating tsunami of December 2004, have suspended aid.

Jaffna is no stranger to war. Its temples and churches bear the pockmarks of
battles past. Its people are familiar with running and dying.

But today the weapons of war are dirtier than ever. Targeted killings and
land-mine attacks in crowded civilian areas are common. The Tamil Tigers
regularly deploy suicide bombers. Journalists, diplomats and aid workers face
hostile scrutiny for any criticism of the security forces. On a Sunday morning
in April, a young reporter for a Tamil-language newspaper in Jaffna was shot and
killed as he rode his bicycle to work. In May, fliers appeared at Jaffna
University, containing a hit list of people accused of being rebel sympathizers.

That is not all. A new fear also stalks Jaffna, more ominous than any its people
recall from the past: mysterious abductions usually carried out during the
curfew hours. No one is quite sure who is being taken, for what reason, by whom.
Sometimes, bodies turn up on the street. More often, they do not turn up at all.

One night in early May, well into the curfew, C. Kuharajan's son, Kanan, 18, was
watching television on the floor of his parents' bedroom, when four armed men
pushed open the front door of their house and demanded that Kanan come with them
for questioning.

His captors refused to identify themselves -- '' 'None of your business,' ''
Kanan's father recalled them saying. Nor would they explain where they were
taking his son or why. The gunmen, all in civilian clothes and with pistols,
promised to return him soon.

That was on May 4. Kanan, a high school senior, has not been heard from since.

According to his family, Kanan had been active in a high school group affiliated
with the student union at Jaffna University, which security forces describe as a
den of antigovernment activity. But Mr. Kuharajan said his son was under strict
instructions to avoid anything political. He said he planned to send Kanan
abroad to study next fall.

After a month of waiting and searching, Mr. Kuharajan wondered why those who
abducted his son did not question him at the house, or at least arrest him and
take him to jail. ''That's the terrible thing,'' he said, ''snatching children
from parents' hands.''

The Human Rights Commission, a government agency, said it received 805
complaints of abductions in Jaffna from December 2005 to April 2007; the army
says it is aware of 230 abductions.

Occasionally, someone survives to tell of the horror. In January, a university
student named Arunagirinathan Niruparaj was plucked from his village, taken to
what he later identified as a series of military camps and interrogated about
links to the rebels.

He said his captors hung him upside down from the ceiling and beat his feet.
They covered his head with a plastic bag soaked in gasoline. They rammed a stick
into his anus.

After seven days, they left him on the side of a railway track. By then, he was
experiencing kidney failure, one of his ears was damaged and he could not keep
down any food. In April, Mr. Niruparaj, 26, fled to Chennai, in southern India.
He maintains that he has no links to the rebels. No one has been arrested for
his kidnapping.

The reports of abductions have prompted sharp criticism even from Sri Lanka's
allies, including Richard A. Boucher, the assistant secretary of state for South
and Central Asian affairs, who met with General Chandrasiri during a visit here
in May. In the weeks after Mr. Boucher's visit, reports of abductions plummeted.

General Chandrasiri, in an interview, first said the abductions were the work of
pro-government Tamil paramilitary groups who, as he put it, try to ''eliminate''
Tamil Tiger operatives. He later acknowledged that some people in the security
forces could also be involved. ''I'm not saying all our people are clean,'' he
said. ''Our duty is to catch them and punish them.''

Most of those abducted, he added, are not innocent civilians, but known Tamil
Tiger operatives. As for Mr. Kuharajan's son, the general said he had personally
resolved to find him. ''I don't want, internationally, anybody to think every
day we are killing people,'' he said.

Not far from the general's office, another kind of uncertainty hovers over a
Roman Catholic church, now home to a small number of the roughly 300,000 people
who have been displaced by the conflict.

At this church, some families have fled their homes as many as four times since
the war began. The last time was in August, after rebels and soldiers clashed in
their village, Allaipiddy, driving its residents into a local church. When it,
too, was shelled, a priest, the Rev. Thiruchchelvan Nihal Jim Brown, knelt
before the troops and then, waving a white flag, led the villagers here.

Days later, Father Brown, who had rebuked the Sri Lankan Navy for attacking the
village, disappeared. He has not been heard from since.

The families here somehow carry on. The men cannot fish anymore because the
coast is occupied by soldiers. Food aid has not come for weeks. Women have sold
their gold bangles for rice. Or they have gone without eating, saving what
little there is for their children.

One mother, Sathyaseelan Thilaka, had been eating so little that she could no
longer produce enough breast milk for her youngest child, a 4-month-old boy born
in the camp for displaced persons at the church.

Mrs. Sathyaseelan, 39, said she had reared four children through this war. Never
before had she been without milk. This morning, she sent the older children to
school without breakfast. She had eaten nothing herself, and it was almost
sundown.

An emergency assessment by the United Nations found signs of an increase in
child malnutrition in Jaffna. The government has blocked the study's release.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sathyaseelan Thilaka, right, driven from her home in Jaffna,
has had so little to eat that she cannot produce breast milk for her infant son.

 A Sri Lankan soldier blocked traffic last month on the main road in Jaffna to
allow a military convoy to pass through the city at high speed. (Photographs by
J. Adam Huggins for The New York Times)(pg. A14)  Map of Sri Lanka highlighting
Jaffna: Soldiers and rebels have fought over Jaffna for nearly 25 years. (pg.
A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); ARMIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); NATURAL DISASTERS (73%); LANDMINES (73%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); DOGS (71%); TSUNAMIS (68%); PEACE PROCESS
(67%); TALKS & MEETINGS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (55%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              943 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Captures Man Accused Of Labor Abuse

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, June 17


The Chinese police have captured a man accused of holding workers in virtual
slavery, state news media reported Sunday in a national uproar over teenagers
and men forced to work in brutal, furnacelike brick kilns.

The man, Heng Tinghan, is accused of holding workers in a kiln in Hongtong
County in the northern province of Shanxi. One worker, who was mentally
impaired, died after being beaten by one of Mr. Heng's helpers, and the police
rescued 31 workers, who were thin and scarred.

The police caught Mr. Heng late Saturday after a nationwide manhunt, the
official Xinhua news agency reported.

He has become a central villain in a national drama over the kidnapping of
hundreds of children, most in their teens but some as young as 8, forced or
cheated into grueling labor in kilns, mines and foundries across Shanxi and the
neighboring Henan Province.

When caught in Hubei Province in central China, Mr. Heng apologized for
mistreating workers but refused to accept blame for the death of the mentally
impaired man, a Hubei newspaper reported.

''I felt it was a fairly small thing, just hitting and swearing at the workers
and not giving them wages,'' Mr. Heng said, according to The Shiyan Evening
News. ''The dead man had nothing to do with me.''

The scandal has tarnished the governing Communist Party's promises to build a
''harmonious'' society with improved rights and income for hundreds of millions
of poor farmers.

The China Youth Daily called the coercion a ''shocking disgrace'' that exposed
officials' failure to enforce labor laws. State television has reported that
owners of the primitive brick-making operations ran them like prisons, with
fierce dogs and beatings to deter escapes.

A police sweep in Shanxi and Henan has freed 568 people from kilns and other
work sites, including 22 under the age of 18 in Shanxi, Xinhua reported. Wang
Bingbing, the owner of the kiln that Mr. Heng leased, was detained in late May.

Local news reports said that from March 2006, Mr. Heng, the kiln's foreman, had
coerced people to work at the site or cheated them to lure them there and then
forced them to work 16-hour days and live off mostly steamed bread.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ADOLESCENTS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); SCANDALS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (68%); LABOR &
EMPLOYMENT LAW (50%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (97%); SHANXI, CHINA (94%); CENTRAL CHINA (93%);
HUBEI, CHINA (92%); HENAN, CHINA (92%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              944 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Arrests A Fugitive Tied to Crimes In Kosovo

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 17


A Serbian police general indicted on charges of crimes against humanity after
being accused of ordering the killings of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo in 1998 and
1999, was arrested Sunday and sent to face the charges at the war crimes
tribunal in The Hague.

The general, Vlastimir Djordjevic, is the second Serbian fugitive to be arrested
in three weeks, a change of course by Serbia's new government after a previous
record of inaction and defiance.

The arrest further raises the possibility that the tribunal's most wanted
fugitive, Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serbs' wartime military leader, might
at some point be taken into custody.

General Djordjevic was arrested in the coastal resort town of Budva in
neighboring Montenegro, said Rasim Ljajic, chief of Serbia's council for
cooperation with The Hague.

''It was a joint action of Serbian and Montenegrin police and of the Hague
tribunal,'' Mr. Ljajic said. ''He is on his way to The Hague.''

A spokesman for the Hague tribunal confirmed that General Djordjevic had been
detained and would be handed over soon to the tribunal.

The arrest appears to confirm Serbia's new willingness to engage with the West
in the hope of joining the European Union and NATO.

General Djordjevic was indicted in October 2003, accused of ordering a crackdown
on ethnic Albanian separatist guerrillas in the Serbian province of Kosovo.

At least 10,000 civilians, overwhelmingly ethnic Albanians, died in the Kosovo
conflict, which prompted NATO's first war and ended with the United Nations
taking control of the province eight years ago.

The Hague's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, is to report to the United
Nations Security Council on Monday about Serbia's cooperation with the court,
her last report before stepping down in September.

The arrest of Zdravko Tolimir, another fugitive, at the end of May helped prompt
talks about closer ties between Serbia and the European Union, but the union has
said it wants more fugitives behind bars before it signs a deal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (93%); INDICTMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); WAR
CRIMES (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (70%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (96%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); NETHERLANDS (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); ALBANIA
(94%); KOSOVO (94%); MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (68%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company


                              949 of 956 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

HUSSEIN'S COUSIN SENTENCED TO DIE FOR KURD ATTACKS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1494 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, June 24


As the judge pronounced five death sentences on the man Iraqis know as Chemical
Ali, the defendant seemed on Sunday to be a shadow of the merciless enforcer who
oversaw poison gas attacks that killed thousands of Kurdish villagers in Iraq's
northern uplands nearly 20 years ago.

At the age of 61, severely weakened by diabetes, the defendant, Ali Hassan
al-Majid, leaned heavily on a walking stick for the 18 minutes it took the judge
to read guilty verdicts on counts of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Unlike his cousin Saddam Hussein, whose shouted defiance nearly
drowned out the judge who sent him to the gallows last year, Mr. Majid offered
no protest until the judge ordered bailiffs to lead him from the iron-ribbed
cage that serves as a dock.

''Thanks be to God, now I'm leaving,'' he said gruffly, as he turned to limp
from the courtroom in the old Baath Party headquarters, a place where his
reputation as a man who relished handing out summary sentences to Kurds, Shiites
and other supposed  enemies of the old government -- and overseeing the
executions himself, with a ghoulish pleasure evident in official videos -- made
him almost as feared as Mr. Hussein.

If the pattern set in Mr. Hussein's case is a guide, Mr. Majid's automatic
appeal could be completed in little more than a month, with his hanging soon
after. Including two other high-ranking  officials who were sentenced Sunday,
seven top officials have now received death sentences for crimes committed
during Mr. Hussein's 24 years in power.

Four have been executed, including Mr. Hussein in December and his half-brother,
Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, who went to the gallows  at the turn of the year.

The two other men condemned to death on Sunday were former high-ranking army
officers. Sultan Hashem Ahmed, the general who commanded the  First Army Corps
during the attacks on the Kurds in 1988 and  served as defense minister during
the American-led invasion of 2003, received three death sentences on the same
counts as Mr. Majid. Hussein Rashid al-Tikriti, a deputy chief of staff, also
received three death sentences.

Although Iraqi military officers have traditionally claimed the right to face a
firing squad when sentenced to death, the court ordered both to be hanged.

The end of the Anfal trial -- the word was chosen by Mr. Hussein for his
campaigns against the Kurds, and means ''spoils of war'' in Arabic -- came at a
time when Iraqi public interest in the trials has flagged. Only a handful of
Iraqi reporters attended the  session on Sunday, and none from the country's
Kurdish newspapers. There was only a handful of Western reporters, too.

The court's glass-fronted V.I.P. gallery was packed with Kurdish politicians,
but even they reacted impassively, according to one of those seated with them.
Their quiet exchanges after the verdicts may have spoken for the pain the Anfal
campaign still arouses among Kurds, who say that as many as 180,000 of their
people were killed when Iraqi forces bombed and razed hundreds of villages,
rounding up survivors and subjecting them to torture, starvation and, in many
cases, to executions at mass graves dug by bulldozers. Mr. Hussein led other
defendants at the Anfal trial in  contending that Kurds provoked the attacks by
fighting on Iran's side during the Iran-Iraq war that ended in 1988.

Still, the Kurds' phlegmatic reaction at the verdicts contrasted starkly with
the jubilant hugging in the gallery with which prominent figures from the new
Iraqi ruling class -- mostly Shiites and Kurds, who bore the brunt of Mr.
Hussein's repression -- greeted the former ruler's death sentence in November.

One difference is that Mr. Hussein himself, removed as a defendant in the Anfal
trial after his hanging, is gone. But another is the exhaustion with the war
here, and the growing inclination of Iraqis -- even Iraqis whose families
suffered grievously under Mr. Hussein -- to say that life was never as miserable
as it has become under the daily cycle of suicide bombings and death-squad
killings, and the deprivation of basic public services like electricity,
hospitals and schooling. The desire for revenge, or retribution, has been muted.

The slow grinding of the legal process has played its part, too. The first major
trial was the Dujail case, involving the killing of 148 Shiite men and boys
after an abortive assassination attempt against Mr. Hussein in 1982, which ended
with the verdict that sent Mr. Hussein to the gallows.

It lasted a year. The trial for the Kurdish attacks that began as the Dujail
trial concluded after 10 months on Sunday. The single courtroom built for the
trials has security precautions so stringent that American officials have said
that getting into the White House is less fraught.

Plainclothes American guards with automatic rifles patrol marbled corridors
inside the building, and American troops stand sentry in sandbagged watchtowers
outside. High above, unmanned aerial drones keep watch. With American Justice
Department lawyers providing much of the expertise that sustains the court, the
arrangements have cost American taxpayers at least $150 million, and Iraqi court
officials say they have been told that future financing is likely to be sharply
cut.

Still, Iraqi court officials said after the  verdicts that the trials would
continue, starting in July. The next case will be the so-called Intifada trial,
involving the suppression of a Shiite uprising across southern Iraq in 1991 that
followed the Persian Gulf war, in which, Shiite officials say, at least 150,000
people were killed. Defendants will include two men considered to have been
among Mr. Hussein's most ruthless aides: his secretary and chief bodyguard, Abid
Hamid Mahmud al-Tikriti, and his half-brother, Sabawi Ibrahim Hassan al-Tikriti,
a former director of two of Mr. Hussein's feared security agencies, the
Mukhabarat and the General Security Directorate.

At least 10 other trials are being prepared, Iraqi officials say. One will focus
on the poison gas attacks in March 1988 that devastated the town of Halabja in
Iraqi Kurdistan, where as many as 5,000 people are said to have been killed.
That attack, more than anything else, drew international attention to the plight
of the Kurds under Mr. Hussein. It was separated from the Anfal trial because of
its notoriety, and its deep resonance among the Kurds.

Other trials will center on the killing of prominent religious and political
figures under Mr. Hussein; the killing of hundreds of members of a prominent
Kurdish political family, the Barzanis, in the 1980s; the persecution of the
Shiite marsh dwellers of southern Iraq; and an incident in 1993, when another
half-brother of Mr. Hussein's, Watban Ibrahim al-Hassan al-Tikriti, arrested
dozens of Baghdad market-sellers for alleged profiteering in foodstuffs, then
had them hanged from lampposts after trials that lasted less than a day.

For the Kurds, the Anfal verdict's significance was heightened by the fact that
five of the six defendants were found guilty of genocide. While Western
legal-monitoring groups have expressed doubts whether the Anfal campaign met the
international legal definition of genocide, in the sense of a systematic attempt
to wipe out an entire ethnic or religious group, Kurdish officials in Iraq had
said that guilty findings on the genocide charges would add momentum to the
claim by Iraqi Kurds that their  survival can be assured only by an entrenched
autonomy within Iraq.

The main surprise in the  verdicts was that two defendants, both high-ranking
officials of Mr. Hussein's military intelligence directorate, were given life
imprisonment instead of death. They were Sabir  Abdul-Aziz al-Douri and Farhan
Motlak al-Jabouri. Both were found guilty of close involvement in the Anfal
attacks.

A sixth defendant, Tahir Tawfiq al-Ani, who was an aide to Mr. Majid as
secretary of the Baath Party's northern bureau, was found not guilty by the
judges and ordered released, in accordance with the urging of prosecutors who
told the court that there was no evidence to convict him. He left the court
hastily, without a smile. Mr. Ahmed and Mr. Rashid, the generals, spoke out as
they were sentenced, but were quickly ordered removed from the court by the
chief judge, Mohammed Ureibi al-Khalifa.

Mr. Ahmed first entered American public consciousness in March 1991, when he led
the Iraqi military delegation that met American generals on Iraq's border with
Kuwait to sign agreements ending the Persian Gulf war. The heavyset former
defense minister  pleaded unsuccessfully for permission to address the judges
after his death sentences were read. ''I won't say anything; I will just leave
you to the mercy of God,'' he said, as bailiffs took him from the dock.

Mr. Rashid was more vociferous. ''Thanks be to God, we are being executed
because we defended our country against thieves and criminals,'' he shouted.
''We defended Iraq.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At their trial, clockwise from left: Hussein Rashid al-Tikriti,
Sabir Abdul-Aziz al-Douri, Farhan Motlak al-Jabouri, Tahir Tawfiq al-Ani, Sultan
Hashem Ahmed and Ali Hassan al-Majid. (pg. A10)
 Ali Hassan al-Majid listened to the judge's verdict yesterday. (pg. A1)(Pool
photos by Joseph Eid)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); SENTENCING (90%); ARMIES (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (89%); CAPITAL CRIMES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (62%); DIABETES (56%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2007


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
