
                              4 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 5, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is the Human Rights Era Ending?

BYLINE:  By Michael Ignatieff;  Michael Ignatieff is professor of human rights
policy at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Since the end of the cold war, human rights has become the dominant moral
vocabulary in foreign affairs. The question after Sept. 11 is whether the era of
human rights has come and gone.

If that sounds alarmist, consider some of the evidence. Western pressure on
China to honor human rights, never especially effective, has stopped altogether.
Chinese support for the war on terror has secured Western silence about
repression in the Xinjiang region. China now says it has a problem there with
Islamic fundamentalists and terrorists, and it is straining to link them to Al
Qaeda.

Meanwhile, Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany, presented with evidence of
Qaeda involvement in Chechnya, calls for a "differentiated evaluation" of
Russian policy there. This new evaluation seems certain to involve forgetting
that Moscow's war against terror has actually been waged against a whole people,
costing tens of thousands of lives.

A similar chill is settling over world politics. Australia's government uses the
threat of terrorism to justify incarcerating Afghan refugees in a desert
compound. Tajikistan and Uzbekistan have leveraged their provision of bases and
intelligence into a carte blanche for domestic repression. Egypt, which for many
years has used detention without trial, military courts and torture to keep
control of militants, now demands an even freer hand. Sudan, which was under
attack from a coalition of liberals and black churches determined to end slavery
and stop Khartoum's war against the south, is now accepted as an ally against
Osama bin Laden. And President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe has decided that his
longtime political opponents are really "terrorists."

Human Rights Watch has condemned these developments as opportunism, but
something more durable than that may be at work. Rome has been attacked, and
Rome is fighting to re-establish its security and its hegemony. This may
permanently demote human rights in the hierarchy of America's foreign policy
priorities.

Of course, just because the United States has other priorities doesn't have to
mean that, in global terms, the era of this movement is over. Human rights has
gone global by going local, anchoring itself in struggles for justice that can
survive without American inspiration or leadership. The movement does not have
its headquarters in Washington. But if Washington turns away, the movement loses
the one government whose power can be decisive in stopping human rights abuses.

Activists may not see it this way, but their influence may have peaked in the
1990's. That was the decade when new constitutions brought human rights
principles to the states created in the Soviet breakup, when United Nations
agencies finally got the courage to tackle violations by member states, when
America's State Department actively promoted human rights and democracy abroad.
This was the era of humanitarian intervention in Bosnia, Kosovo and East Timor,
the heyday of the United Nations tribunals in The Hague and Arusha, Tanzania.

In the humanitarian interventions of the 1990's, political figures like Prime
Minister Tony Blair of Britain believed that they were ushering in a new era,
backing human rights principles with political will and military steel. In
reality, it was only an interregnum, made possible because Western militaries
had spare capacity and time to do human rights work. Now with America launched
on an indefinite military campaign against terrorists, will there be the
political energy necessary to mount humanitarian interventions? The intellectual
and political climate of a war on terror now resembles the atmosphere of the
cold war. Then the imperative of countering Soviet and Chinese imperial advances
trumped concern for the abuses of authoritarian governments in the Western camp.
The new element in determining American foreign policy is what assets -- bases,
intelligence and diplomatic leverage -- it can bring to bear against Al Qaeda.

Some veterans of the human rights campaigns of the cold war refuse to admit that
the climate is any worse now than it was then. But in the Reagan years, the
movement merely risked being unpopular. In the Bush era, it risks irrelevance.

Divided between horror at the attacks and alarm at being enlisted as moral
cheerleaders in a war on terror, many European human rights groups are sitting
on the sidelines. American groups like Human Rights Watch have turned themselves
into war reporters, subjecting American military conduct to tough scrutiny on
issues ranging from prisoner detention to collateral damage. Still others have
teamed up with civil libertarians to defend rights and freedoms at home.

But the movement will have to engage soon in the battle of ideas: it has to
challenge directly the claim that national security trumps human rights. The
argument to make is that human rights is the best guarantor of national
security. The United States, to encourage the building of secure states that do
not harbor or export terror, will have to do more than secure base agreements.
It will have to pressure these countries to provide basic political rights and
due process. As the cold war should have taught us, cozying up to friendly
authoritarians is a poor bet in the long term. America is still paying a price
for its backing of the shah of Iran. In the Arab world today, the United States
looks as if it is on the side of Louis XVI in 1789; come the revolution in Egypt
or Saudi Arabia, American influence may be swept away.

The human rights movement is not in the business of preserving American power.
But it should be concerned about stability, about moving strategically vital
states like Egypt and Saudi Arabia from closed to open societies without
delivering them up to religious fundamentalists. Nobody's rights in Egypt will
be furthered if the state collapses into anarchy or fundamentalist absolutism.
If the movement hopes to have a future, it has to advocate its objectives --
freedom, participation, due process -- in a way that addresses the necessity to
create political stability. This doesn't mean suddenly going silent about
arbitrary arrests and military courts. It means moving from denunciation alone
to engagement, working with local activists, and with the parts of the
government that will listen, moving these societies back from the precipice.

The movement aims at defending the rights of ordinary people. To do this, it has
to help them construct strong civil societies and viable states. If it can't
find new ways of achieving that goal, it will be remembered as a fashionable
cause of the dim and distant 1990's.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Jonathon Rosen)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); POLITICS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%);
LIBERALISM (78%); TORTURE (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); FUNDAMENTALISM (76%);
HIJACKING (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); RELIGION (75%); REFUGEES (73%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (66%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (62%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%); GERHARD SCHRODER (54%) IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); XINJIANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); SUDAN
(79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%); GERMANY (79%);
KOSOVO (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); EGYPT (79%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. to Open Rights Review With U.S. On Sidelines

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 774 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 16


The United Nations' chief human rights body, composed of 53 nations, will begin
on Monday its annual review of abuses worldwide facing concerns that the
international commitment to human rights is being eroded by the war against
terrorism.

Human rights campaigners have accused the United States, Russia, China and other
countries of adopting security measures that jeopardize basic rights.

The Commission on Human Rights is also under pressure to take action during its
six-week session to help stem the rising Palestinian-Israeli violence, to
censure Zimbabwe for its electoral practices and to condemn Russia over reports
of atrocities in Chechnya.

For the first time since the commission was founded in 1947, the United States
will not be a member. In a vote last May, the United States lost its seat -- to
its surprise and fury, especially because more than a dozen countries on the
commission, including Sudan, have dubious human rights records. The Bush
administration has been seeking to have the seat restored, which appears likely
to happen next year.

The absence of the United States has cast doubt on the survival of efforts it
has long led to take countries like China and Cuba to task for abuses against
their citizens. It can participate as an observer, but it cannot vote.

"Many burning issues can't be resolved without the active participation of the
United States," said Krzysztof Jakubowski, Poland's delegate to the United
Nations in Geneva, and the incoming chairman of the commission. "The United
States is the symbol of the fight for human rights, and I come from a country
where the understanding of this is profound."

The United States, which is reproved annually for its use of the death penalty,
is also likely to be criticized this year for its treatment of captured Al Qaeda
and Taliban fighters at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Station, in Cuba, and its
proposal that suspected foreign terrorists be tried by military tribunals.

"The United States government has cynically used the banner of terrorism to
support rewriting of international humanitarian law to suit its own purposes,"
said Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights Watch.

Mary Robinson, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, has called
for the United States to recognize its captives at Guantanamo Bay as prisoners
of war and to send them before a "competent tribunal" instead of acting
unilaterally.

That position, widely endorsed by European countries, received support last week
from a panel of the Organization of American States, which issued a finding that
the detainees fell under the Geneva Conventions' wartime protections.

Amnesty International is also urging countries to take up the matter of the
hundreds of people held in the United States after a sweep for possible suspects
after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

Rights campaigners say they are worried that Russia is hiding behind the
terrorism issue as an excuse to cover up rights violations in Chechnya. They
criticize Russia for failing to act on two previous commission recommendations
to investigate abuses in the province and to punish those responsible.

Last year, Cuba dodged outright censure but was stung by criticism of its
detention of dissidents and suppression of political opposition. In a
retaliatory measure, Cuba could try to condemn the United States' treatment of
detainees at its Guantanamo Bay base.

Using a procedural maneuver, China has largely evaded full-fledged debate on its
human rights record in the last decade. With the United States sidelined, it is
unclear whether any country will pursue the uphill effort to hold China to
account for its repression of religious groups and minorities in Tibet and other
areas.

China has already taken the offensive by issuing a report last week criticizing
the American military buildup as a violation of human rights. That followed a
release of the annual State Department human rights report in the United States
that accused China of using terrorism as a pretext for clamping down on Muslims
in the Xinjiang region.

The issue that overshadows all others is whether its members can do anything to
calm the boiling Middle East crisis. Human rights groups have said that
Palestinians and Israelis have both singled out civilians for attacks, but the
groups have directed their most severe criticism at Israel.

Mr. Brody of Human Rights Watch said Israel had used "excessive and
indiscriminate force" intended "to maximize civilian casualties."

Both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International want the United Nations rights
panel to make sending monitors to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip a priority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (97%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW OF WAR
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); POWS & MIAS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); AL-QAEDA (72%);
NAVIES (72%); TALIBAN (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (67%); MILITARY COURTS (67%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (63%); ARMED
FORCES (62%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CUBA (94%); CHINA (93%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); POLAND (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); ISRAEL
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              6 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Fears 'Bloc' Voters Are Abetting Rights Abuses

BYLINE:   By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 27


As the United Nations body charged with assessing human rights around the world
ended its annual session this week, rights advocates complained that,
increasingly, nations with repressive governments, including China and Iran, had
managed to evade serious examination of their records.

Rory Mungoven, of Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, said that the
United Nations Commission on Human Rights had become "hostage to a group of
human rights abusers who defended themselves and others from scrutiny,"
referring to voting alliances that blocked efforts to condemn countries like
Zimbabwe.

The high commissioner for human rights, Mary Robinson, said on Friday that it
was a "very worrying" session, and she was concerned that "bloc" voting was
weakening the commission's role.

The commission's rotating roster of 53 member nations, which includes Algeria,
China, Cuba, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Sudan and Syria -- all countries with
questionable rights records -- should reconsider their approach, she said.
Increasingly, voting alliances are emerging to prevent the commission from
singling out individual countries for criticism.

The only major success during the session that rights campaigners cited was the
rebuke of Cuba. Latin American countries took the lead in devising a resolution
urging Cuba to provide greater rights to its citizens -- a move that drew a
furious response from Fidel Castro's government, which cut off relations with
the resolution's sponsor, Uruguay, and stirred up a diplomatic dispute between
Cuba and its longtime ally Mexico, which supported the resolution.

Kevin Moley, the American ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, said, "We
have seen that Fidel Castro takes this well-deserved criticism seriously."

The United States had been the sponsor of previous resolutions on Cuba, but was
only an observer to this session, having been ousted from the commission in a
surprise vote last year.

Even before the six-week gathering began, it was clear that China would avoid
the annual resolution, sponsored for much of the last decade by the United
States, to criticize its treatment of Tibetans, some Muslim groups and other
religious minorities.

A resolution, sponsored by European countries, to condemn Russia's record in
Chechnya, where it has been accused of executions, torture and disappearances of
civilians, was narrowly defeated.

In the previous two years, Russia had been taken to task for its actions there,
but ignored commission calls for an independent investigation into alleged
abuses.

This failure underlined a recurring question at this year's session -- whether
combating terrorism can excuse curbs on human rights. Russia vigorously
maintained it was fighting terror in Chechnya, a breakaway republic.

That view helped sink a resolution, proposed by Mexico, that antiterrorist
measures conform with international humanitarian law.

Mrs. Robinson had urged that the commission send a signal that "human rights
should not be sacrificed in the fight against terrorism," but the motion was
withdrawn in the closing hours of the meeting on Friday.

Human rights advocates criticized the move. "From Illinois in the United States
to Xinjiang in China, counterterrorist measures have placed human rights at
risk," said a coalition of advocacy groups. "The commission's silence on this
critical issue sends a dangerous signal in the fight against terrorism --
anything goes."

Mariclaire Acosta, the head of Mexico's delegation, denied that American
pressure had defeated the resolution. She attributed its failure instead to
Algeria's insistence on an amendment, ostensibly to denounce terrorists, that
"would have led to a terrible debate and a lot of division, which the commission
couldn't afford."

While the commission deplored human rights abuses in Iraq, Myanmar and Sudan,
among other countries, for the first time in nearly two decades it voted to take
Iran off its worst-offenders list.

The commission repeatedly criticized Israel for its military operations in the
West Bank. Israel's ambassador, Yaakov Levy, protested the "disproportionate"
time devoted to one country, and denounced what he called the "one-sided" nature
of many amendments.

Elections later this spring at the United Nations in New York will select the
next roster of countries to serve on the commission.

The United States expects to regain the seat it had occupied every year, except
this one, since the commission got under way in 1947.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 30, 2002



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the annual
session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights referred incorrectly to
a result of Uruguay's sponsorship of a resolution urging Cuba to grant its
citizens more freedom. Uruguay, responding to Cuba's criticism, suspended
relations. Cuba did not break them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%);
TORTURE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); LAW OF WAR (73%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (65%); INVESTIGATIONS (64%); RELIGION (61%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); UNITED NATIONS
HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (83%) UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH;
UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (52%) OLSON, ELIZABETH; ROBINSON, MARY

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); MEXICO (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); URUGUAY (79%);
TIBET (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); SYRIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (78%);
CHINA (58%)

REGION: CHINA;  IRAN

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Human Rights Official Won't Seek Another Term

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 18


The United Nations' top human rights official, Mary Robinson, unexpectedly
declared today that she would not be a candidate for a new term when her
appointment expires in September.

Mrs. Robinson, a former president of Ireland, made the announcement on the
opening day of the annual session of the Commission on Human Rights, the United
Nations' chief monitor of rights abuses worldwide.

Mrs. Robinson was known to be interested in serving another term, but her
outspokenness on human rights issues had increasingly irritated some of the
major powers, including the United States, Russia and China.

The United Nations secretary general makes the appointment based on
recommendations from his aides and member countries.

"She paid a price for her willingness to confront publicly big governments like
the United States and Russia when they violate human rights," said Reed Brody,
advocacy director of Human Rights Watch, based in New York.

Mrs. Robinson, 57, had expressed concern over what she termed the
"disproportionate" number of civilian casualties during the American airstrikes
in Afghanistan and the treatment of Taliban and Al Qaeda prisoners held by the
United States at the Guantanamo Bay detention center in Cuba.

She had also been criticized over the outcome of the United Nations conference
on racism in Durban, South Africa, last summer. The United States and Israel
walked out on grounds over criticisms of Israel in conference documents.

The United States also opposed attempts to require reparations for slavery. The
depth of American anger was reflected in an article, titled "Durban Debacle," by
Rep. Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, in a recent issue of the foreign policy
journal of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.

Today in Washington, a senior Bush administration official said, "We made clear,
quietly, our views that she shouldn't be renewed."

Mrs. Robinson further alienated Washington by insisting publicly, as she did in
her speech today, that the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks had jeopardized
human rights norms and standards. This has been regarded as implicit criticism
of some American actions to stamp out terrorism. At the State Department, the
spokesman Richard A. Boucher told reporters, "We wish her well in her future
endeavors."

In her speech today, Mrs. Robinson renewed her call for human rights standards
to be applied in how "those who are arrested or detained are treated." The
Geneva Conventions on the treatment of prisoners of war "should be applied in
times of stress," she said. "That's the whole value in having these safeguards."

She also criticized the Russians in connection with allegations of atrocities in
Chechnya, and the Chinese for repression of religious and other minorities.

Mrs. Robinson had also opened the annual session a year ago by announcing that
she would step down when her term ended in September, believing she could do
more in the private sector. She complained of under-financing for the human
rights office in Geneva as demands grew, but Secretary General Kofi Annan
persuaded her to stay another year.

Mr. Annan, in Costa Rica today, was asked today about Mrs. Robinson's plans to
step down. He alluded to the controversy that his commissioner for human rights
had sometimes generated.

"She's put human rights on the map, and she'd put lots of energy, creativity and
courage into very difficult work," Mr. Annan said. "It's the kind of work that
every day you make some friends -- and some enemies. Whatever you say offends
somebody, but she has brought her drive and application and integrity to the
office, and she can leave in the full knowledge that she has made a major
contribution."

No successor has been named, but Mrs. Robinson left the door open to continue in
the job by sidestepping questions about whether she could be convinced to stay.

"I know there are many who would wish for me to stay on," she added.

Mrs. Robinson's announcement came as the 53-country rights commission was
preparing to review critical human rights situations, including the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and conflicts in Zimbabwe, Chechnya and Colombia.

It was the first time in the commission's half-century history that the United
States was not a member. It was pushed aside last year in a surprise election,
with other Western countries vying for the seat traditionally held by the United
States. However, Washington expects to reclaim the slot next year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); POWS &
MIAS (72%); TALIBAN (72%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (70%); AL-QAEDA (67%); RACE &
RACISM (65%); FOREIGN POLICY (64%); LAW SCHOOLS (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AL-QAEDA (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (58%) ROBINSON, MARY; OLSON, ELIZABETH

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); CUBA (92%);
ISRAEL (92%); IRELAND (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (75%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHINA

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Evades U.N. Criticism of Rights Abuses

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 13


China escaped a resolution this year criticizing how it treats its citizens, but
Cuba found itself once again in the international dock this week as the United
Nations began its annual review of human rights abuses around the world.

At the annual session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, no
country stepped forward to take China to task over its human rights record after
the usual sponsor of such measures, the United States, lost its seat on the
panel in an upset vote last fall. This is the first time the United States has
not served as a member since the 53-nation group began in 1947, although it
retains observer status.

Human Rights Watch, based in New York, said it had tracked increased human
rights violations in China over the last year. The group attributed the lack of
scrutiny to a "lamentable lack of political will" and accused the 15-country
European Union of dodging its responsibility to criticize Beijing. It was only
the second time in the last decade that China had evaded being criticized for
violating rights, particularly those of Tibetans.

This week, Amnesty International said that China executed more people in 2001
than all other countries combined, but Beijing rejected that tally and said the
lack of a resolution this year was a recognition of its commitment to human
rights.

While China usually has been able to hide behind a procedural maneuver to avoid
a full-blown debate on its rights record, nearly every year has been marked by a
drama over whether Beijing could muster the votes to block the measure. The
Chinese government has lobbied fiercely every year to avoid being accused of
being a human rights abuser along with Iran, Iraq, Russia, Israel and Zimbabwe,
among others.

Kevin Moley, the head of the American delegation observing the proceedings, said
Washington had vigorously sought a sponsor for a resolution censuring China. "We
asked in every European capital," he said on Thursday, and he admitted that the
Bush administration was disappointed over the refusal of any country to act.

Cuba, however, was singled out by nine Latin American countries, which lodged a
resolution on Wednesday urging Havana to comply with human rights norms,
including accepting a visit by a United Nations rights monitor. While the
resolution is milder than versions offered in previous years, Havana reacted
angrily, even before the United States added itself to the list of 17 sponsoring
countries on Friday. As an observer, Washington can still co-sponsor a
resolution, although it cannot vote.

For weeks before, Cuban officials accused the United States of behind-the-scenes
maneuvering to craft a hostile resolution. Mr. Moley, who is also the American
ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, denied that the Bush administration
had coordinated the effort, led by Uruguay, saying that the resolution was a
"clear sign of disenchantment with Cuba" by its neighbors.

The resolution does not refer directly to the longstanding United States trade
embargo of Cuba, but notes that Havana has made progress in "fulfilling the
social rights of its people," a reference to its health and education programs,
"despite an adverse international environment." But Cuba now needs to make
"similar advances" in political rights, the resolution said.

Cuba's one-party political system has been accused of denying citizens free
speech and freedoms of press and assembly, and of jailing members of the
opposition.

Uruguay's ambassador, Carlos Perez del Castillo, said the Latin American
countries had acted on their own, saying the resolution was "a seriously
thought-out product."

"We are not condemning Cuba," he said. "We have been witness to the condemnation
of Cuba with a lot of confrontation and without any effect. We want to try a
different approach, but it is up to the government of Cuba to show willingness
to cooperate."

Peru, Guatemala, Argentina, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Costa Rica and
Panama were the other Latin American cosponsors that joined in calling for the
government of Fidel Castro to permit a rights monitor to visit Cuba and assess
the situation.

The day after the resolution was introduced, it was lambasted by Cuba's foreign
minister, Felipe Perez. At a news conference in Havana, he declared that his
government would never agree to a visit by a human rights monitor, and he
reiterated accusations of American pressure.

"They're dreaming if they think that Cuba would let an inspector in the service
of the United States government come here under these conditions," he said.

He said the resolution was meant to justify Washington's continuing trade
embargo because earlier reasons, like Cuba's military presence in Africa and its
support of left-wing guerrillas in Latin America, no longer existed.

Last year, a resolution sponsored by the Czech Republic against Cuba was
narrowly approved, 22 to 20, with 10 countries abstaining. A vote on the latest
resolution is expected next week.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LOBBYING (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%);
AMNESTY (69%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%); EUROPEAN
UNION (56%) UNITED NATIONS; UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS; AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL; HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (58%) CASTRO, FIDEL (PRES); OLSON, ELIZABETH

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%); HAVANA, CUBA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (97%); CUBA (95%); LATIN AMERICA (92%);
EUROPE (92%); URUGUAY (79%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); ISRAEL (79%); TIBET (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: CUBA;  LATIN AMERICA;  CHINA

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Report Criticizes Allies in Antiterror Campaign for Human Rights Abuses

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


Many of the Bush administration's strategic allies in the war on terror abused
human rights in their own countries last year, from Pakistan to the Central
Asian states and Saudi Arabia, the State Department's annual report on the
subject said today.

In the wide-ranging, Congressionally mandated review, the department accused the
Israeli and Palestinian security forces of "numerous, serious human rights
abuses" during worsening violence there and also found abuses by Russia, China,
Zimbabwe, Colombia and President Bush's "axis of evil" of Iran, Iraq and North
Korea.

The survey of nearly 200 countries found successes chiefly in Afghanistan, with
the end of the Taliban's five-year rule, which had relegated women "to a state
of nonexistence in society," and Peru, where a transitional government and its
elected replacement made strides in fighting corruption and human rights abuses.

The day when the human rights report is released is the one time each year when
American diplomacy takes a hard, public and often unflattering look at countries
that may not share American values but are vital to United States military and
strategic interests around the world. This year the contrasts are unusually
sharp.

For example, the report said that Pakistan, a vital ally after Sept. 11, had
made improvements in some areas but that the police still had raped and abused
citizens and "no officer has been convicted and very few have been arrested."

In Uzbekistan, the former Soviet republic where hundreds of American troops were
based on missions related to the war in Afghanistan last fall, the report said,
the security forces tortured and harassed citizens and arrested people on false
charges, "particularly Muslims suspected of extremist sympathies, frequently
planting narcotics, weapons or banned literature on them."

Turkey, another antiterror ally, respected citizens' rights in most areas, but
"torture, beatings and other abuses by security forces" were widespread, the
report found.

Saudi Arabia, long a strategic ally in the Arab world, was faulted for detaining
critics of the government without charges, drugging foreign prisoners, opening
private mail and severely limiting speech and press freedoms.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said the administration would "fully explore
the new opportunities that have been created by international cooperation
against terrorism to establish, expand and deepen discussions with other
governments on human rights issues."

In a news briefing, Lorne Craner, the assistant secretary of state for
democracy, human rights and labor, noted that governments in places like
Pakistan and Uzbekistan and other Central Asian states had opened themselves to
more extensive government-to-government contacts after Sept. 11. He said
increased American aid had gone for programs like building an independent
printing press in Kyrgyzstan and promoting civil society in Uzbekistan.

But under repeated questioning about Saudi Arabia, Mr. Craner was not able to
point to similar specific examples of change, saying only, "We're getting
there."

Alex Arriaga, director of government relations for Amnesty International,
credited the report for its general candor about problem areas but said the
challenge was to translate such criticism into practical results.

"The major problem is that while the reports themselves may be generally good,
and in many cases they're honest in their assessment," she said, "it does seem
to be somewhat more lenient to countries that are current allies. But the bigger
issue is that there continues to be a disconnect between human rights reports
and actual foreign policy."

In Colombia, where the Bush administration hopes to use concern over terrorism
to build support in Congress for direct aid to the government to fight leftist
rebels, the report found that security forces continued serious abuses,
including extrajudicial killings. The report also said leftist rebel groups
there "regularly attacked civilian populations."

In the Middle East, the report took pains to put the violence in the context of
repeated Palestinian attacks on Israelis, but noted that Israeli restrictions on
the movement of Palestinians stopped thousands from getting to work and cited
"credible anecdotal evidence" that as many as several thousand Palestinians had
encountered abuse at checkpoints.

The report also accused Israel of "sometimes excessive or indiscriminate fire
toward Palestinian civilian areas." At the same time, it said, "Palestinians
attacked Israelis, including settlers, other civilians and soldiers on a daily
basis in the occupied territories and Israel proper."

The report also toned down past criticism of Egypt's military tribunals in the
wake of the Bush administration's own announcement that it might use such
tribunals to try suspected terrorists. One section, included in the 2000 report
and deleted in the 2001 report, said, "The military courts do not ensure
civilian defendants due process before an independent tribunal."

In China, the report said, religious persecution worsened last year, with the
authorities "quick to suppress any person or group, whether religious, political
or social, that they perceived to be a threat to government power," while
Russia's record on freedom of the press and human rights in Chechnya remained
poor.

The report said federal security forces in Chechnya "demonstrated little respect
for basic human rights, and there were credible reports of serious violations,
including numerous reports of extrajudicial killings by both the government and
Chechen fighters."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); TORTURE (89%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
TALIBAN (78%); SEX OFFENSES (76%); ARRESTS (76%); RESEARCH REPORTS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); MISSING PERSONS (72%); CORRECTIONS (69%); ARMED
FORCES (66%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (64%); RELIGION (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS

ORGANIZATION: ;STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); PURDUM, TODD S

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PAKISTAN (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); CENTRAL ASIA
(93%); ASIA (93%); UZBEKISTAN (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); IRAQ
(79%); TURKEY (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); KYRGYZSTAN
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY;  SAUDI ARABIA;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Rights Meeting, Anxiety That Terror Fight Takes Lead

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 23


One year ago, terrorism was barely noted by officials from the 53 countries who
gather here annually for the Commission on Human Rights. But as the main United
Nations rights body opened its review this year, terrorism was reshaping the
debate.

That worries rights campaigners, some of whom say that invoking terrorism allows
countries with questionable records to escape condemnation by the commission.

"One cannot pick and choose countries where abuses will be allowed to go ignored
simply because they're being committed by allies in the fight against
terrorism," said Irene Kahn, secretary general of Amnesty International. "If
this happens, the whole notion of human rights as a global standard is damaged."

A debate over terrorism and human rights was broached here at the opening
session this week, when Mary Robinson, the United Nations human rights
commissioner, noted that "international human rights are at some risk of being
undermined" in the aftermath of Sept. 11. Measures to thwart terrorism risk
violating such fundamental rights as the right to a fair trial, she said.

European countries have urged solidarity in the fight against terrorism, and
emphasized that counterterrorism measures should not undercut basic rights.

"There is no trade-off between effective action and the protection of human
rights," Sweden's foreign minister, Anna Lindh, told the commission. "On the
contrary, respect for human rights, democracy and social justice contribute to
global stability and prevent acts of terrorism."

The United States, which was voted off the commission last year and is attending
as an observer, took public issue with the contention that fighting terrorism is
tied to correcting problems like poverty and discrimination. Both Mrs. Robinson
and the United Nations high commissioner for refugees, Ruud Lubbers, have
questioned whether the battle against terrorism can be won without more economic
development.

Poverty does not legitimize terrorism, responded the American delegate, Kevin
Moley. "We must be careful not to allow the ills of the world to be used to
justify terrorism or support for terrorist organizations," he told the panel.

The deep-seated ambivalence of many countries surfaced when an effort to have a
special one-day session to examine the question of terrorism and human rights
died for lack of support. Rights campaigners believe the session could have
addressed whether the rights issue is fading in international importance as
countries create "shadow" justice systems with measures that restrict
traditional rights.

Along with other groups, Amnesty International has been critical of the American
plan to try detainees in military tribunals, and it reported last week that
about 1,100 people had been detained in the United States without charges.

It is the larger powers that rights advocates fear will benefit the most from
the antiterrorism climate. In an independent report released on Friday, Amnesty
International accused China of using terrorism as an excuse to crack down on its
Muslim Uighur minority.

China's human rights record has been scrutinized by the commission only once in
the last decade, as it has ducked examination of its policies in Tibet and on
religious groups through a procedural maneuver. Beijing intensively lobbied
commission members to avoid the public embarrassment of debate and censure.

This year, with the censure resolution's usual chief sponsor, the United States,
on the sidelines, there appears to be no political will to move against China.

The true test facing the commission, Mrs. Kahn believes, will be whether it
takes steps to condemn Russia for its actions in Chechnya. Two earlier
resolutions calling for an inquiry into Moscow's actions have essentially been
ignored.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (96%); TERRORISM (94%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (74%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(66%); MILITARY WEAPONS (63%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (63%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%) HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION (UN); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: ;ROBINSON, MARY (COMR)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

WHITE HOUSE SEEKS TO RESUME AIDING INDONESIA'S ARMY

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER and JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1474 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 28


The United States is pressing hard to resume assistance to the Indonesian
military in an effort to re-establish American influence here in the world's
most populous Muslim nation after nearly a decade of keeping its distance from
the Indonesian Army because of its human rights abuses.

The arrest here this month of a suspected operative of Al Qaeda strengthened the
Bush administration's determination to re-engage with Indonesia's army, despite
its lack of reform. The administration is using the arrest to support its
argument that Indonesia, a reluctant partner in the crackdown on terrorism,
should be rewarded for its support with military aid.

The suspect, Omar al-Faruq, was turned over to the United States and is being
held at an undisclosed location. He is a Kuwaiti in his mid-30's who trained at
Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan, American officials said. While living here, he
raised money for an Islamic charity, some of which was funneled to Al Qaeda, one
official said.

In 1993 the Clinton administration, concerned about human rights violations, cut
off American weapons sales to Indonesia. In 1999, after widespread accusations
of involvement by the Indonesian military in violence against civilians during
East Timor's struggle for independence, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, amended foreign aid legislation to impose tougher restrictions on
military aid.

But now the Bush administration is pushing Congress to provide financing for a
new "command and control" unit for the Indonesian Army. It is intended,
administration officials said, for peacekeeping tasks in places like the Maluku
islands, where there have been recent accusations that the military is engaged
in rights abuses.

Congressional opposition to the plan has weakened, and a senior administration
official said money for nonlethal equipment like radios and computers was likely
to be approved in the coming weeks.

The administration and Senator Leahy, who has been the main Congressional
opponent to restoring aid to the Indonesian Army, are close to an agreement that
would allow some Indonesian officers to receive noncombatant training in the
United States, administration officials said.

Also, they said Congress was likely to approve funds for the creation of an
antiterror unit in the Indonesian police force.

The army remains the most powerful national institution in Indonesia as the
country weathers a turbulent transition to democracy. Though slightly diminished
from its former stature, the military has succeeded in fending off efforts to
make it accountable for human rights abuses.

It has also ben criticized for operating a vast business empire , which includes
airlines, hotels, banks and insurance companies, as well as prostitution and
illegal logging in tropical forests, Western military officials say.

Accusations that the military engages in rights abuses have continued. In a
sectarian conflict between Muslims and Christians in the Maluku islands, the
military turned a blind eye to a rampaging Islamic militia, Laskar Jihad,
earlier this year, and in the last several years some military officers have
been involved in training the group, Western military officials said.

In the province of Aceh, the military was encouraged last week by its new
commander, Gen. Endriartono Sutarto, to "crush" separatist rebels. The army has
been accused by human rights groups of being involved in widespread killings of
civilians in the province.

Although a few officers accused of killing civilians in East Timor in 1999 are
now on trial, the most senior generals are not in court, and the military has
withheld its full cooperation.

An influential Indonesian intellectual, Jusuf Wanandi, who is close to Deputy
Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, said he had warned the Bush administration
not to rush into restoring military assistance and thus give the military its
"credibility back." Human rights abuses are as "bad now as they have ever been,"
and any new assistance should be tied to specific reforms, Mr. Wanandi said in
an interview.

The American ambassador, Ralph L. Boyce, expressed some reservations. He said in
an interview that until the army showed some accountability for past human
rights abuses, military aid should be limited.

"We very much want to have a normal military-to-military relationship," he said,
"but we need something serious on the accountability front to indicate that the
Indonesian military really is on the road to reform."

General Endriartono, the new armed forces chief, did tell his commanders in his
maiden speech that they must "always respect the principles of democracy" and
human rights "in our thoughts, our attitudes and our actions."

American officials here said it was the first time they had heard a senior
Indonesian military commander speak so directly about human rights. But the
Americans said that he was more a realist than a reformer and that fundamental
change was unlikely.

The Indonesian military is covetous of its sovereignty and its senior officers
resent the United States telling them what to do, said Lt. Gen. Agus Widjojo,
the military's senior member of the 500-seat lower house of Parliament, in which
the military is guaranteed 38 seats. The United States, he said in an interview,
needs Indonesia more than Indonesia needs the United States.

In any case, he added, the Indonesian Army wants weapons and combat equipment,
not training in human rights.

The Indonesian military's special role began with its birth as a guerrilla army
in the 1940's to fight against Dutch colonial rule. After independence in 1945,
its role was enshrined in the policy known as "dual function." The army would
not only defend the country, but also play an active role in running it.

Although that was abandoned as official policy after the long-ruling military
dictator Suharto was ousted in 1998, the armed forces contend that they remain
the guarantors of stability and unity in this country, which is spread out over
thousands of miles and islands. Civilian control of the military remains an
elusive goal. The defense minister is a civilian, but the armed forces commander
is still a member of the cabinet.

The prospects for civilian control in the foreseeable future are "zero," a
Western military attache said.

Indonesian military officers are businessmen -- big businessmen -- through
hundreds of yayasans, or foundations, originally set up to provide for the
soldiers' welfare: scholarships, health care and widow's benefits. But they have
broadened into holdings across the business spectrum.

The army special forces, Kopasses, for example, owns a shopping mall near its
headquarters, and the reserve, Kostrad, owns Mandala Airline, a domestic airline
with a poor safety record.

Military officials contend that the business operations are conducted, at least
in part, out of necessity. Only 35 percent of the military's budget comes from
the government, and the rest from the business ventures. Local commanders use
the money to buy food and shelter for their troops, as well as to enrich
themselves.

"The problem isn't that they are in business," said a Western military attache.
"The problem is they want to be filthy rich, like the rest of the elites in this
country."

A general whose base pay is six million rupiah a month -- roughly $700 -- can
easily multiply that fifteenfold from business operations.

The military businesses are largely free from public scrutiny.

In one of the few exceptions, two years ago, as head of the army, General
Endriartono, asked for an external audit of its largest foundation, Yayasan
Kartika Eka Paksi.

The foundation's net worth of roughly $50 million ranks it with the largest
companies in Indonesia, larger than British American Tobacco and nearly five
times the size of Proctor & Gamble Indonesia, according to the audit, a copy of
which was provided to The New York Times.

The foundation has 11 subsidiaries and 22 affiliated companies. Those include
logging and plywood operations, a major bank, a pharmaceutical company, and a
tiny airline, which flies from Jakarta to Sulawesi.

But as for the traditional military role of defense against aggression from
outside forces, the Indonesian military is largely focused on enemies within.

"The Indonesian military is more concerned about internal stability than
external threats," said General Widjojo, the member of Parliament.

That has given rise to the human rights abuses against civilian populations,
which continue, Western military officials say, in Aceh, the Maluku islands and
Irian Jaya.

A Western military attache here said he favored sending some Indonesian military
officers to the United States for training but at the same time said he did not
want to see the Leahy restrictions repealed. "They are going to learn nothing if
we don't force them to hold the line on human rights tribunals," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A parade on March 6 featuring soldiers in camouflage celebrated
the 41st anniversary of the Indonesian Army reserve, known as the Kostrad.; Gen.
Endriartono Sutarto, commander of the Indonesian military. (Photographs by Imaji
Press)(pg. A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ARMIES (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); PEACEKEEPING
(77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); FUNDRAISING (75%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (73%);
APPROVALS (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%);
POLICE FORCES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%);
LEGISLATION (70%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (60%); ILLEGAL LOGGING (60%); INSURANCE
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (56%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (56%)

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (58%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (73%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); TIMOR-LESTE
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Fate Of Qaeda Prisoners

BYLINE:  By William F. Schulz;  William F. Schulz is executive director of
Amnesty International USA.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 685 words


Even as representatives of the International Red Cross go to work in Guantanamo
Bay, interviewing Taliban and Qaeda prisoners and inspecting their cage-like
cells, many Americans seem to find this concern for the prisoners hard to
understand. After all, some of these men may well be responsible, directly or
not, for the horror of Sept. 11 and for terrible crimes during Taliban rule. So
what if they are subjected to some discomfort, particularly in light of the
observation by Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
that some of them "would gnaw hydraulic lines in the back of a C-17 to bring it
down"? Why should anyone care?

The Red Cross is not alone in its concern for the treatment of these men. Mary
Robinson, United Nations high commissioner for human rights, has said they
should be treated in accordance with international law. Human rights groups have
raised questions about the prisoners' conditions. My own organization, Amnesty
International, expressed concern last week that some prisoners were being
hooded, shackled or sedated during the 27-hour trip from Afghanistan to Cuba and
then would be held in 6-by-8-foot cages open to the elements.

It is important to recognize that human rights organizations do not act out of
sympathy for prisoners guilty of crimes. Amnesty International denounced the
Taliban for its repressive rule from the moment it came to power in 1996, even
while the United States government was initially welcoming the overthrow of the
mujahadeen. One of the most dangerous problems in the world today is that those
who commit human rights violations so frequently get away with them. It is
therefore critical that everyone responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks and for
human rights crimes in Afghanistan be brought to justice.

How that happens, however, will ultimately help determine the success of the war
on terrorism. President Bush has made it clear that this is a war not just to
protect national security but also to defend principles of freedom and the rule
of law. It is those very principles, as embodied, for example, in the Geneva
Conventions on prisoners of war and civilian protection and in the United
Nations Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons Under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment, that require prisoners to be treated humanely.

To the extent that the United States has decided to accord Taliban and Qaeda
detainees at least some of the rights of prisoners of war, it should be
commended. But the International Red Cross has declared that they should be
treated as prisoners of war until proven otherwise, and to the extent that the
United States ignores that ruling and disregards international standards, we
compromise the very integrity of the struggle we are waging. The danger is that
we hand the enemies of the rule of law -- those who are looking for any
opportunity to convince the world of our hypocrisy -- a perfect excuse and an
easy victory.

And we do two things more. We provide cover to other governments to ignore human
rights standards and in the process make their regions of the world less stable.
If the United States does not abide by human rights rules, why should others?
And, perhaps most compelling, we may subject our own troops to greater peril.

President Bush has said that the war on terrorism will be a long one and
American servicemen and women may be called upon for years to risk their lives
overseas. If that is the case, it is almost inevitable that some of them will be
captured one day.  Surely the odds of retrieving them unharmed will be greater
if we have not been guilty of violating the very human rights standards that
constitute the best hope for their protection.

All police and military officers have the right to take appropriate measures to
protect themselves from prisoners who pose a danger. Reasonable restraint is
fully justified. No one expects prisoners of war to be housed in a Hilton. What
is required is that they not be brutalized. Showing respect for the human rights
of our adversaries is one of the surest ways to make the world safer for
ourselves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); POWS & MIAS
(89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); PRISONS (78%);
LAW OF WAR (78%); HIJACKING (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%); MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (74%); AL-QAEDA (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES
(84%); AL-QAEDA (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (57%);
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL;
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) SCHULZ, WILLIAM F

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Study Hints at Mass Killing of the Taliban

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: DASHT-I-LAILI, Afghanistan


A tangle of abandoned clothes, half-covered in sand, lies just off the desert
track. Pieces of white bone are strewn among the mess and the smell of decaying
bodies drifts over the site.

In a country ravaged by 23 years of war, the war dead lie forgotten in many
places of Afghanistan. But this spot in Dasht-i-Laili, a desert that stretches
west from the town of Shibarghan in northern Afghanistan, hides what are
suspected to be large-scale killings committed five months ago by Afghan allies
of the United States in the war against the Taliban.

For months, Afghans here have spoken of Taliban prisoners buried in the desert.
Now, the Boston-based organization Physicians for Human Rights has confirmed in
a report shown to The New York Times that there are recent human remains at a
large site in the desert just a few miles outside Shibarghan.

Physicians for Human Rights, which has experience in investigating mass graves
in the Balkans, has called for urgent measures, including an international
force, to secure the desert site and others in the north and investigate what it
suspects was the mass killing of Taliban prisoners last November. That was when
the Taliban's Northern Alliance foes took control of northern Afghanistan after
American bombs had weakened the Taliban.

Hundreds of Taliban soldiers surrendered at the town of Kunduz in November and
are thought to have been killed by troops of the Uzbek leader, Gen. Abdul Rashid
Dostum, and buried in at least two spots about a mile apart in this desert.

Taliban prisoners being held in Shibarghan prison since November confirmed in
interviews this month that many of their fellow prisoners died during their
transfer from Kunduz to Shibarghan, most of them from suffocation in the
shipping containers used to transport them. Several passing drivers reported
seeing soldiers unloading bodies in.

Forensic specialists from Physicians for Human Rights examined one of the sites
in February and confirmed the presence of human remains, in particular the bones
of young men, lying on the surface and scavenged by dogs. A team from the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights also visited one of the desert sites
in March, according to United Nations officials in the northern town of
Mazar-i-Sharif.

On March 1, Leonard S. Rubinstein, the executive director of Physicians for
Human Rights, wrote to the leader of the interim Afghan government, Hamid
Karzai, with a separate appeal to secure the site.

This week, Dasht-i-Laili will be visited by a team from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan -- which, under a mandate approved by the
Security Council, is charged with investigating human rights violations.

In November, thousands of Afghan and foreign Taliban fighters surrendered to the
Northern Alliance. Some 400 of the foreign prisoners fought a pitched battle
with General Dostum's troops in the Qala Jangi fort just outside Mazar; other
men taken prisoner on the outskirts of Kunduz were trucked some 180 miles west
through Mazar to Shibarghan.

Many were put in sealed shipping containers and died from suffocation on the
way, witnesses and survivors have said. There are also credible accounts,
including from people close to General Dostum's circle and some of his own
soldiers, that troops opened fire on three containers full of prisoners, killing
many inside.

"It's not one or two people," said Feda Mohammed Iaqin, the deputy police chief
in Mazar-i-Sharif. "They killed a lot of people and everybody in the city, of
every ethnicity, knows about it." Mr. Iaqin, an ethnic Tajik, is the brother of
General Dostum's main rival in the north, Gen. Ostad Atta Muhammad, but he was
confirming what is widely rumored in the city even among ethnic Uzbeks.

Senior officials in General Dostum's administration have admitted that some
prisoners died after their surrender. The head of the prison, Gen. Jura Beg,
said in December that about 40 prisoners had died on the journey and been buried
in Dasht-i-Laili.

But Uzbek officials have denied any mass killings. Majid Rouzi, General Dostum's
deputy in charge of security in the north, said he was present when prisoners
were transferred for the journey to Shibarghan. "I did not see anyone with so
much as a bloody nose," he said. "It is just propaganda by our enemies.,"

Turkmens living in the village of Bakaul Khorasan, just half a mile from one of
the sites, said they had lived for several months with an overpowering smell
from the bodies.

"A few months ago, we noticed a very bad smell," said Durdi Klich, 62, a farmer
living in the village. "We decided to cover the site with more earth but the
soldiers would not let us and they did it themselves," he said in an interview
this month.

In 1997, when some 3,000 Taliban soldiers were killed in fighting in
Mazar-i-Sharif against General Dostum's forces, many of them were buried in
graves in Dasht-i-Laili.

When the Taliban retook Mazar the next year they killed thousands in reprisals,
most of them ethnic Hazaras, some of whom were also dumped in the desert,
villagers said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A trench containing unexploded munitions and human remains in a
desert near Shibarghan, in Afghanistan. (Physicians for Human Rights) Map of
Afghanistan highlighting Dasht-i-Laili: The desert of Dasht-i-Laili may contain
mass graves of Taliban.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); FORENSICS (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); DOGS (75%); HIJACKING
(75%); INTERVIEWS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); APPROVALS (67%);
TERRORISM (66%); EXECUTIVES (64%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  PRISONERS
OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) TALIBAN
(AFGHAN GROUP); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS; NORTHERN ALLIANCE (ANTI-TALIBAN
FORCE)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (56%) ;GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: SHERGHAN, AFGHANISTAN (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); MAZAR-E SHARIF,
AFGHANISTAN (79%); BOSTON, MA, USA (76%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); UZBEKISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SHIBARGHAN (AFGHANISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: HUMAN RIGHTS;
U.N. Gets a Litany of Antiterror Plans

BYLINE:  By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 11


Some reports submitted to the United Nations on what members are doing to combat
terrorism underscore warnings from human rights groups that some governments
could use the campaign to settle personal scores.

The reports were ordered by the Security Council after the attacks of Sept. 11,
and the chairman of the Council's new counterterrorism committee, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock of Britain, said on Thursday that the 117 responses received so far
were an "extremely good start" toward a cooperative approach.

But the two dozen reports made public show that some of the least democratic
governments have claimed some of the toughest measures against terrorists.

Syria, whose government killed thousands in the process of crushing an Islamic
opposition in 1982, reported that it "has always condemned terrorism in all its
forms."

At the same time, Syria said it adhered to a convention among Arab countries
that distinguished between terrorism and "legitimate struggle against foreign
occupation," a phrase that effectively excluded all Palestinian organizations
that attack Israel from the terrorist label.

In its report, North Korea said it had made "every possible effort to eliminate
terrorism in the world." Its report also complained that "imposing the label of
'terrorist' on countries advocating for sovereign equality, violating their
sovereignty and inflicting immeasurable pain on the people by resorting to
arbitrary armed intervention, sanctions, etc., should in no way be tolerated."

Myanmar declared that "there are no terrorist groups within Myanmar," raising
questions about how the government could be so categorical.

For human rights organizations, such statements reflect the potential pitfalls
of a battle in which there is no common definition of the enemy. Zimbabwe, for
example, has labeled journalists who report on political violence terrorists.

In a speech in Boston last Sunday, Mary Robinson, the United Nations high
commissioner for human rights, noted that in developed democracies, the
potential conflict of security and civil liberties in a time of crisis had been
the subject of vigorous debate since Sept. 11.

It is worrisome, she said, "when that debate is absent or when, as has occurred
in some countries, the international duty to act against terrorism is used to
suppress the legitimate expression of grievances and to justify the oppression
of minorities."

Even from countries with generally positive reputations, some statements had
worrisome overtones. From Gabon, for example: "Monitoring has been strengthened
with respect to high-risk individuals and groups belonging to foreign
communities likely to breach Gabonese internal security."

Officials on the counterterrorism committee said that such problems were to be
expected in the early stages of so novel an exercise, and that one reason for
the reports was to identify them. Most of the 117 countries that have filed
reports, they said, focused on identifying the instruments and policies they had
to combat terrorism.

The reports were in response to specific questions about the legislative,
administrative and other measures that countries had taken to combat the
financing of international terrorist organizations and the movement of
terrorists.

The responses made public so far (available on the Web at www.un
.org/Docs/sc/committees/1373/) range from a 59-page catalog of Norway's laws and
policies to a one-page response from Venezuela.

Some included a history. Israel's report began by recalling that "the state of
Israel has been threatened by terrorism since its independence." Others
discussed issues specific to their countries, like Switzerland, which declared
that it "wishes in particular to prevent its financial market from being used
for criminal purposes."

The report submitted by the United States not only listed a broad range of
actions taken since Sept. 11 but, according to Ted McNamara, the State
Department official coordinating action on the resolution, was meant to provide
a model for other countries on adapting their own laws to fight international
terrorism.

Sir Jeremy, the chairman of the committee, said the purpose of the reports was
to give a "stimulant and catalyst" for shaping a global consensus. Over the next
90 days, he said, the reports will be analyzed by experts and by the committee,
and their findings will be shared with every country. But he acknowledged that "
human rights is a sensitive area as against our committee."

Last month Bacre Ndiaye, the head of the New York office of the high
commissioner for human rights, urged the committee to take efforts "to avoid
innocent people becoming the victims of counterterrorism measures."

"There is evidence that some governments are now introducing measures that may
erode core human rights safeguards," Mr. Ndiaye said. "In some countries,
nonviolent activities have been considered as terrorism, and excessive measures
have been taken to suppress or restrict individual rights, including the
presumption of innocence, the right to a fair trial, freedom from torture,
privacy rights, freedom of expression and assembly, and the right to seek
asylum."

He did not name names. But Human Rights Watch, based in New York, has created a
separate page on its Web site (www.hrw.org) called "Opportunism in the Face of
Tragedy," where it lists dubious actions taken by governments in the name of
fighting terrorism.

Among those on the list who have invoked the American campaign against terrorism
are China, in its struggle with Muslims in its northwest seeking independence,
and Russia, in its war in Chechnya.

The list also includes Uzbekistan, which has justified the arrests of thousands
of Muslims as part of a campaign against the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, a
group linked by the United States to Al Qaeda.

The Human Rights Watch list also includes some actions taken against
Palestinians by Israel. That conflict has fueled the sharpest debate in the
United Nations on the distinction between a "national liberation struggle" and
terrorism, which in turn has been the major obstacle to a convention on
international terrorism that the General Assembly has been working on for many
months.

While acknowledging the problems, Sir Jeremy said the definition of terrorism
and the monitoring of civil liberties were not the real tasks of his committee.

"It won't be function of the committee to define terrorism for the U.N. system,"
he said. But he added that "a line has to be teased out" between legitimate
resistance and terrorism. "We're going to be practical in all this," he said,
focusing the committee's efforts on helping less developed shape legal and
administrative tools against terrorism.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (75%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); ADMINISTRATIVE
LAW (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); WRITERS (63%); RELIGION (54%) TERRORISM;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: SCHMEMANN, SERGE

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (93%); SYRIA (92%); UNITED STATES (91%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SYRIA;  NORTH KOREA;  MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 2, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Releases Colombia Aid, Citing Progress on Rights

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 576 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


The State Department reported today that Colombia is making progress in
deterring human rights crimes by the armed forces and right-wing paramilitary
groups, clearing the way for the release of $62 million in American military
aid.

The certification drew immediate criticism from human rights groups and was met
with some skepticism in Congress. Lawmakers had established the procedure to
curb abuses against civilians in Colombia, which is the third largest recipient
of American aid.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell determined that the Colombian armed forces
are suspending and prosecuting military officers implicated in human rights
crimes, breaking links with paramilitary groups and capturing their leaders, his
spokesman said.

Mr. Powell's decision frees up the first portion of a $104 million military aid
package this year. Congress has required a second certification sometime after
June 1 to release the remaining funds.

The move came as no surprise from an administration that has increasingly warned
of the dangers posed to Colombia by narcotics traffickers and their "terrorist"
allies on both the political left and right.

The civil conflict in the country is more than three decades old, but has
intensified in recent years as rebel groups have been fueled by money from drug
trafficking. Peace talks with the government recently broke down as the rebels
continued a campaign of kidnapping and violence.

Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said a vast majority of
human rights crimes in Colombia were committed not by the military but by the
the country's two leftist insurgencies -- the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia and the National Liberation Army -- and the main paramilitary
organization, the Self-Defense Forces of Colombia. But, he said, the government
must do better to protect civilians.

"Despite some real progress, both we and the government of Colombia recognize
that the protection of human rights in Colombia needs improvement," Mr. Boucher
said.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, who is chairman of the appropriations subcommittee
that oversees foreign assistance, countered that Colombia's record was
"disappointing."

Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, added, "This certification has more to do with
the fact that U.S. aid was running out, than with sufficient progress on human
rights."

Mr. Leahy and several leading human rights groups charged that the Colombian
government has done little to arrest and prosecute paramilitary leaders and
their military allies. The groups accuse Colombian officers of sharing
intelligence, coordinating roadblocks and remaining in close communication with
the Self-Defense Forces during their scorched earth, anti-insurgency drives.

Critics cited the case of Gen. Rodrigo Quinones Cardenas, a former regional
commander whom they accuse of involvement in massacres at El Salado and Chengue,
and the deaths of numerous community leaders. Under pressure from the Bush
administration, General Quinones was recently sent abroad as a military attache.

While administration officials held up the case as a sign of progress, critics
said it signaled continuing impunity for military officers working with the
Self-Defense Forces.

"The administration is proposing millions in counterterrorism aid to Colombia
even as the Colombian military refuses to break ties with a designated terrorist
group," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, the director of the Americas program at Human
Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%);
PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%); NATIONAL
LIBERATION ARMY (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
APPROPRIATIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); NARCOTERRORISM (72%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); PEACE PROCESS (71%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (67%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (56%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Police Doubts About Attack Cast Cloud on Rights Group

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1407 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, May 5


The alert from Amnesty International flashed across the Internet, warning that
an American human rights worker monitoring Guatemala was facing threats to her
life.

Calling for "urgent action," the bulletin of April 25 said that Barbara Bocek,
who had reported for the international watchdog organization since 1997, had
been left bound, gagged and blindfolded in her car by two men who said she would
die if she returned to the Central American country.

The Amnesty appeal set off an unusual alarm because it said Ms. Bocek was
attacked not in Guatemala, but near her home in Washington State. At a time when
human rights workers are under increasing attack in Guatemala, one of the most
respected international human rights organizations was alleging that thugs
linked to a deadly network of former military officials there were operating on
American soil.

But police officers in Washington who investigated said the evidence did not
support Ms. Bocek's account. They are not pursuing the case.

"I think it was staged," said Detective Randy Pieper of the Clallam County
Sheriff's Office Major Crimes Unit. "I'm positive."

The doubts American law enforcement officers raised about Ms. Bocek's claims
represent an important challenge for Amnesty. The group, founded in 1961, bases
its reputation on dispassionate investigation of rights violations around the
world. Governments whose abuses are exposed by Amnesty and other rights monitors
frequently seek to defend themselves by accusing the groups of political bias
and inaccurate reporting.

In Guatemala, during a three-decade civil war in which 200,000 people were
killed, Amnesty doggedly defended rights workers and rallied its members to
demand justice from the government, especially for mass killings of civilians by
the rightist military. Ms. Bocek's work included reporting on a resurgence of
violence in recent years, after peace accords in 1996.

Officials at Amnesty International U.S.A., the American branch of the
organization that put out the alert, said this weekend that they had no reason
to doubt Ms. Bocek's credibility or her account. The officials said they stood
by their warning about the perils she was facing, but were continuing to
investigate her case.

"Amnesty International takes every report on alleged human rights abuses
extremely seriously," said Charles Brown, a deputy executive director at Amnesty
U.S.A. "When one of our own people receives threats, we are going to take that
particularly seriously."

Mr. Brown said the alert about Ms. Bocek was based largely on her description of
threats. Amnesty officials acknowledged that they had not spoken with the police
in Washington and were unaware that the police had doubts.

In nearly three hours of telephone interviews in recent days, Ms. Bocek also
stood by her account.

"No, I am not making this up," she said calmly. She has left her home and was
speaking from an undisclosed location, citing security concerns. "Why would
anybody make it up? I am not looking for publicity."

Ms. Bocek has told American local and federal law enforcement authorities of
some 15 threats she said she had received in the United States since May last
year. Last month, Amnesty highlighted her work at their annual meeting in
Seattle, praising her dedication.

An official at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which has been involved in
Ms. Bocek's case since last May, said the case was active and would not comment
on it.

Ms. Bocek, 48, said she had a doctorate in anthropology from Stanford and moved
to Guatemala in 1992 to work with the Peace Corps and later other social
projects in Mayan villages. She became a volunteer country specialist for
Amnesty in 1997 after she moved, for family reasons, to Washington state, where
she works with a local Indian tribe. Amnesty has about 100 unpaid specialists
who monitor human rights part time around the world.

A chronology compiled by Amnesty shows that the reported threats against Ms.
Bocek began in May of last year, about a week after she wrote an opinion piece
for the Baltimore Sun, focusing on the trial of Guatemalan military officers for
the murder of a Roman Catholic bishop, Juan Gerardi, who was a leading human
rights advocate.

On June 11, Ms. Bocek said, gunmen tried to abduct her from the Camino Real
hotel in Guatemala City. After that, she reported receiving calls and finding
threatening notes and a strange knife in her Washington home.

Nonetheless, she agreed on March 7 to return to Guatemala to give a statement to
prosecutors about the attempted abduction.

Three days later, Ms. Bocek said, she was driving home from her office just
after 7 p.m. when she pulled over to check out a noise from the right front
wheel of her car. She said that while she crouched on the gravel and moss along
the narrow shoulder, a car with its lights off pulled up.

"The first thing they said was 'If you go to Guatemala you will not return,' "
she said, adding that the two men spoke Spanish with the accents of Guatemalan
natives.

"I would have said anything to keep them from hurting me," she said. "But they
stuffed a gag in my mouth. They didn't give me time to say anything. When they
did that, I felt one of my teeth break."

She said she did not look at the men, out of fear. They pushed her to the
ground, tied her hands with wire behind her and then tied them to her feet,
which were taped together. They left her bound in the car.

"The last thing they said was, 'When and if you get loose, we'll be a long way
away,' " she said.

Deputy Brian King of the Clallam County Sheriff's Department said he came across
Ms. Bocek's car around midnight, and broke the driver's window to open the door
and free her. But, he said, she did not appear to be tied tightly, and her gag
was neatly covered with strips of electrical tape.

"If you saw the way her feet were done, it was basically one or two passes of
electrical tape which you could pull apart if you were there for four hours,"
Deputy King said.

Ms. Bocek was taken to a hospital, where she was examined by doctors and
interviewed by one of Deputy King's colleagues. She declined to stay at a
women's shelter and went home, Deputy King said.

Investigators who examined the scene said they could not find any marks on the
grass or gravel to show more than one person walking around Ms. Bocek's vehicle.
They said the only other tire tracks they found appeared to indicate that Ms.
Bocek had backed up her own vehicle 100 feet.

"Unless they can levitate, we can't find anything consistent with that many
people milling around," Detective Pieper said.

Deputy King added that Ms. Bocek's recollection of the sequence of events
quickly grew vague.

"It is like she has no desire to help us find the bad guys," he said, "to even
give us a hint or a clue. She did everything in her power not to be able to
identify these people."

Ms. Bocek said no one from the sheriff's office informed her of their questions.
"If he had all these doubts about me, why didn't he just ask me?" Ms. Bocek
said. "All I can do is say what happened. I can't force anybody to believe it."

A summary of a psychological evaluation of Ms. Bocek done late last year by Judy
Okawa, a clinical psychologist in Falls Church, Va., who directs a program for
torture survivors, concluded that she had authentic symptoms of trauma. The
summary, provided by Amnesty officials, said her account of the threats she
received seemed credible.

Reports of Ms. Bocek's attempted abduction in Guatemala last year generated
outrage among human rights advocates. Ms. Bocek told authorities there that two
men took her at gunpoint from her hotel room and bound her with medical tape in
a stairway, leaving her with the promise to return.

Francisco Soberon, a member of the Amnesty delegation staying at the hotel, said
he discovered Ms. Bocek bound and groggy in the stairwell.

"I am convinced and can reaffirm to anyone what I saw," he said in a telephone
interview from Peru.

Manuel Rios, the resident manager of the Camino Real Hotel, recalled the
incident but declined to provide details. But he did say, "Everything points to
her having done a self-kidnapping."

Ms. Bocek said she remains willing to cooperate with authorities in Guatemala
but will not travel there. She said her experiences gave her a new appreciation
of the dangers faced by rights workers in the country.

"Now that it has happened to me," she said, "I know what they are going through
all the more."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graffiti in Guatemala City referring to Juan Gerardi, a Roman
Catholic bishop who was killed in 1998. Barbara Bocek of Amnesty International
says she was threatened after she wrote about the subsequent trial. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); SHERIFFS (73%); POLICE
FORCES (73%); VIOLENT CRIME (73%); EXECUTIVES (68%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLICE;  ASSAULTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; BOCEK, BARBARA

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (73%)

REGION: GUATEMALA;  WASHINGTON (STATE)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. on Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 178 words


To the Editor:

It is not true that piles of human rights complaints are stacked in the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, as Anne Bayefsky
asserts (Op-Ed, May 22).

In fact, between May 2000 and May 24, 2002, the office dealt with 103,117
complaints under a procedure supervised by the 53-member Commission on Human
Rights; 80 percent of complainants to the United Nations treaty bodies get a
reply within one week.

Many of the recommendations that Ms. Bayefsky makes have previously been carried
out. Guidance is offered regularly to complainants, and there are efficient
working arrangements to ensure that complaints are channeled to the most
effective procedure for the complainant. But we cannot, as Ms. Bayefsky
suggests, compel complainants to choose a particular procedure.

We have a moral obligation to all victims of human rights abuses who turn to us
for help. We fulfill that obligation.

MARIA FRANCISCA IZE-CHARRIN
Chief, Support Services Branch
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, United Nations
Geneva, May 31, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (55%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (UN);
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: IZE-CHARRIN, MARIA FRANCISCA; BAYEFSKY, ANNE; ROBINSON, MARY (COMR)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights: The Long View

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 192 words


To the Editor:

Re "Is the Human Rights Era Ending?" (Op-Ed, Feb. 5):

The flaw in Michael Ignatieff's argument that the human rights era is ending is
that it lacks a sense of history.

The campaign for human rights did not begin in the 1990's with the end of the
cold war, nor will it end with the war against terrorism.

Take just a few milestones: the overthrow of monarchs; the ending of slavery;
the decolonization of Asia and Africa; the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights; the defeat of fascism and, later, Communism; President Jimmy Carter's
integration of human rights into United States foreign policy; and the global
movement for human rights.

In the 1990's, by contrast, one of the worst setbacks occurred: the Clinton
administration's and the United Nations' failure to stop the genocide in Rwanda.

There will always be times of regression, but so long as civilization
flourishes, human beings will value and fight for concepts of justice and
freedom.

ROBERTA COHEN
Washington, Feb. 5, 2002

The writer, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, was deputy assistant
secretary of state for human rights in the Carter administration.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); COLD WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(76%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(73%); GENOCIDE (73%); WRITERS (73%); TERRORISM (70%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%); BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (55%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (71%) IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL; COHEN, ROBERT

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%); ASIA (79%); AFRICA (74%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights: The Long View

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 174 words


To the Editor:

Washington may be "the one government whose power can be decisive in stopping
human rights abuses," as Michael Ignatieff writes (Op-Ed, Feb. 5). But the human
rights movement works actively to delegitimize United States leadership in human
rights by demonizing it as a primary source of abuse.

The slanderous criticism of the United States over Guantanamo, the irresponsible
warnings about the impact of American military action in Afghanistan, the
rhetoric intended to polarize an important national discussion about civil
liberties and security, and the attempt to create a new class of victims out of
visa violators caught living illegally in the United States -- all seem oddly
calculated after reviewing Mr. Ignatieff's list of the world's far darker
corners.

While Human Rights Watch devoted more space in its yearly review to conditions
in the United States than any other country, lines for visas at United States
embassies and consulates around the world stretch ever longer.

JOSEPH FULVIO
Doylestown, Pa., Feb. 5, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (86%); PASSPORTS
& VISAS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); LIBEL & SLANDER (73%); TERRORISM
(68%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

PERSON: FULVIO, JOSEPH; IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights: The Long View

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 138 words


To the Editor:

Michael Ignatieff is not the first to worry "whether the era of human rights has
come and gone" (Op-Ed, Feb. 5).

Similar concerns were expressed a decade ago out of fear that the end of
cold-war rivalries would remove a major incentive for promoting human rights.

Instead, human rights were quickly seen as important not only for ending
Communist repression but also for curbing the communal violence of the
post-cold-war era.

Today, as Mr. Ignatieff notes, the Sept. 11 attacks have led to new rights
abuses. Yet repression, even in the name of security, can fuel political
violence by closing off peaceful avenues for change.

By countenancing abuse of civilians, it can also reinforce the
ends-justify-the-means rationalization of terrorism.

KENNETH ROTH
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, Feb. 5, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
COLD WAR (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (86%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: MICHAEL I ROTH (79%) IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL; ROTH, KENNETH

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (53%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (53%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bias and Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 194 words


To the Editor:

In "Ending Bias in the Human Rights System" (Op-Ed, May 22), Anne Bayefsky says
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have shown "a disturbing inability
to sort worthwhile grievances from declarations of prejudice, as when the
nongovernmental organization forum at the United Nations conference against
racism in Durban, South Africa, was turned into a platform for anti-Semitism."

While we supported the broad planks of both the official and nongovernmental
Durban platforms spelling out concrete steps for countries to take in combating
racism around the world, our organizations took the unusual step of publicly
disowning portions of the nongovernmental organization declaration that went
beyond appropriate criticism of Israeli practices. And far from "mirroring" the
biases of the intergovernmental system, we have been sharply critical, as we
were this year when the United Nations Commission on Human Rights refused to
condemn abuses in places like China, Chechnya and Iran.

KENNETH ROTH
WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
New York, May 22, 2002

The writers are executive directors of, respectively, Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International U.S.A.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); RACE & RACISM (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); CONSUMER LAW
(74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (73%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (71%) MEDICINE AND HEALTH;  PRIVACY;  CONSUMER
PROTECTION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  LOBBYING AND LOBBYISTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); UNITED
NATIONS (58%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); GOLDMAN, JANLORI

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); SOUTH AFRICA
(71%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia Using Brutality to Suppress Chechens, Rights Group Says

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 27


About the same time the United States began its war on terrorism last fall in
Afghanistan, Russia resumed a harsh campaign of torture, abductions and
political killings in Chechnya, Human Rights Watch said today.

The Russian operations, involving sweeps through villages and the detention of
hundreds, follow a pattern established last summer, which Human Rights Watch has
documented in a new report, "Swept Under: Torture, Forced Disappearances and
Extrajudicial Killings During Sweep Operations in Chechnya." A separatist
rebellion has been simmering in Chechnya, a Muslim region in the Caucasus, for
more than a decade.

The report, published today, focuses on the pattern of these campaigns as
demonstrated by military operations in June and July, with extensive evidence
gathered from Alkhan-Kala, Sernovodsk and Assinovskaya.

It emerges just as American officials prepare to give military assistance to the
government of Georgia to help stabilize a lawless region on the Chechen border
through which rebels are reported to be moving. Some refugees from Chechnya have
found refuge in Georgia, and rights groups have asked the Georgians not to send
them back merely to clear the area of Chechens, as Russia demands.

The Russian Army sweeps followed several months of violence by Chechen rebels,
who killed people thought to be cooperating with the Russians and bombed Russian
government installations and buildings. But the harsh Russian response, the
report says, "further eroded what little trust Chechen civilians retained in
Russian troops."

In the sweeps, then as now, people were taken from their homes and detained.
Though most were eventually released, many said they were tortured in custody,
some with electric shocks; others were asphyxiated, witnesses said. Bodies were
later found in unmarked graves. Others were never accounted for. Homes were
often looted or destroyed.

Rachel Denber, deputy director of the Europe and Central Asia division of Human
Rights Watch, said Russian sweeps more or less ended by late last summer, but
then picked up again sharply in the fall. Other rights groups and some experts
on the region, among them United Nations officials, had predicted that the
sweeps in Chechnya would intensify as a result of Sept. 11, with Russia taking
advantage of an antiterrorist atmosphere to resume attacks.

A year ago, President Vladimir V. Putin declared the war in Chechnya over, but
fighting persisted. The Russians, claiming they, too, were victims of
Afghanistan-trained terrorists with links to Al Qaeda, backed the American-led
war on terrorism and were not criticized much in the West when they resumed
attacks on separatists in Chechnya.

"After the summer sweep operations," Ms. Denber said in an interview today,
"there was such an outcry from local Chechen civil servants working with the
Russians, and an outcry from the international community, that you saw the
Russians acknowledge that the operations had been excessive, and the region
quieted for a short period. And then in the autumn, there was a spike in the
number of sweep operations and a real escalation in the violence with which they
were carried out."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ARMIES
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HIJACKING (78%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (77%); INTERVIEWS (75%); EVIDENCE (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%);
TESTIMONY (74%); ARMED FORCES (74%); EYEWITNESSES (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%);
IMMIGRATION (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%); CIVIL SERVICES (68%) AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) ;HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%) CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (67%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%);
GEORGIA (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);  GEORGIA
(GEORGIAN REPUBLIC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Begins Trials of Military in East Timor Abuses

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, March 19


Four army officers accused of serious human rights abuses during the violence in
East Timor three years ago appeared in a steamy courtroom here today, the first
military defendants to be tried over East Timor after long delays by successive
Indonesian governments in bringing the military to account.

The chief of the Indonesian armed forces, Adm. Widodo Adisucipto, and a phalanx
of other senior officers sat prominently in the spectators gallery, and members
of the red-hatted elite special forces stood around the room. Their presence was
announced as a show of solidarity but was interpreted as a signal that the
military would not be cowed by the nation's first human rights trials.

Well-coiffed military wives sat in the audience cooling themselves with flicks
of delicate hand fans as ceiling fans moved listlessly overhead. The government
prosecutor, Darmono, read an indictment describing how militia forces linked to
the army stormed a Roman Catholic church where 2000 refugees were huddled, in
the East Timor village of Suai in September 1999. With knives and homemade
weapons, they killed 27 people, including 3 priests and 10 women, he said.

The four officers -- plus a policeman, who is also a defendant -- are charged
with dereliction of duty for failing to prevent the massacre.

In many ways, this morning's proceedings, with a panel of five judges, a team of
prosecutors and a double row of lawyers for the defendants, represented a
landmark for Indonesia. It showed that despite little interest among the public,
Indonesia finally felt that it needed to stand by a promise made in 2000 to
establish a special court to try those accused of responsibility for the killing
of civilians before and after the 1999 vote for East Timor's independence.

More than 1,000 civilians were killed, the United Nations estimates, as militias
backed by the military rampaged across the territory and destroyed much of its
infrastructure. The East Timorese voted for independence rather than autonomy
within Indonesia.

Not least among the goals of the government in opening the trials is to satisfy
demands in the United States Congress that Indonesia must prosecute those in the
military responsible for the crimes in East Timor before the nation can receive
renewed American military aid.

The proceedings also put on the public stage the many shortcomings of the trial,
Indonesian human rights lawyers and Western diplomats said.

Human rights lawyers here and abroad have complained that senior army generals,
including the chief of the military at the time, Gen. Wiranto, have not been
charged.

The four army officers who appeared today were Col. Herman Sedyono, 54; Lt. Col.
Lilik Kushardianto, 49; Maj. Ahmad Syamsuddin, 37; and Capt. Sugito, 49. Three
one-star generals are also among the 18 defendants who are to be tried. They are
expected to appear in a separate trial before the same court next week.

One of the main criticisms is how the government severely circumscribed what
could be investigated and presented before the court. A presidential decree
signed by President Megawati Sukarnoputri last year stipulated that the court
had to limit itself to the events during two months of 1999, April and
September, and could deal only with violence in three localities, even though it
engulfed the entire territory.

The constitution of the court has also been questioned. Fifteen judges were
selected, five for each of three separate trials, without consideration of their
professional qualifications, human rights groups asserted. The Institute for
Policy, Research and Advocacy in Jakarta, a private Indonesian group, called the
selection process "below standard."

"Most of the candidates, particularly career judges, lack sufficient track
records in dealing with human rights cases, while a few even have questionable
records in such cases," said Agung Yudhawiranata, an analyst for the group.

One of the judges, Rudi Rizki, represented General Wiranto when he was chief of
staff of the military, and he helped the prosecution in the current trial
prepare its case, the judge has said.

Something resembling a quiet rally for the military took place in the court this
morning. Rows of seats were taken by youths with white bandanas emblazoned in
red with the acronym of the United Front of Indonesia, a group that wanted to
keep East Timor in Indonesia. A former militia leader, Eurico Gutteres, dressed
in tailored blue jeans, was allowed into the court, where he posed for
photographers.

Most striking was the lineup of lawyers for the defendants. Three of them
represent former President Suharto, the military strongman who ruled Indonesia
for 32 years until 1998. Two of them represent his son, Tommy, who will face
murder charges in court here on Wednesday.

One of Mr. Suharto's lawyers who was representing one defendant today insisted
that the human rights trial would conform to international standards. But the
lawyer, Muhammad Assegaf, also gave a taste of things to come. He said he would
challenge the basis of the law, passed by Parliament in 2000, on which the court
is operating.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The four accused military officers, shown outside the courtroom
in Jakarta yesterday, are, from left, Maj. Ahmad Syamsuddin, Capt. Sugito, Col.
Herman Sedyono and Lt. Col. Lilik Kushardianto. (Kemal Jufri/Imaji Press for The
New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); REFUGEES (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(67%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (73%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA;  SUAI (EAST TIMOR)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Unocal to Face Suit on Human Rights

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 11


The Unocal Corporation, the oil and gas company, faces a September trial over
charges that it was responsible for human rights abuses during the construction
of a $1.3 billion pipeline in Myanmar, the plaintiffs' lawyer said today.

The lawyer, Terry Collingsworth, said that Los Angeles Superior Court Judge
Victoria Chaney, in a tentative decision on Monday, indicated that she would
reject Unocal's bid to dismiss the suit, clearing the way for jury selection on
Sept. 26.

"We are good to go," said Mr. Collingsworth, who serves as executive director of
the International Labor Rights Fund, a workers' rights advocacy group in
Washington.

"As we have alleged from the outset, the evidence shows that Unocal entered into
a business relationship with the brutal military regime in Burma, knowing that
the military would engage in massive human rights violations in furtherance of
the project," the group said in a statement.

Unocal, based in El Segundo, Calif., has denied any wrongdoing, and today
described the suit as a political effort to force the company, the biggest
remaining American investor in Myanmar, to pull out of the Southeast Asian
country.

"The attempt is to continually try to embarrass us," a spokesman for Unocal,
Barry Lane, said. "We have nothing to be embarrassed about. We are very proud of
the project and how it is being conducted."

Human rights advocates have long fought to highlight the Myanmar case, bringing
the suit on behalf of 15 villagers in 1996 seeking to hold Unocal liable for
actions by the Myanmar government during the project.

In 2000 a federal judge dismissed the suit, saying the plaintiffs had failed to
prove that Unocal had conspired with the military or controlled military
decisions or sought to use forced labor. But that ruling left open the option of
pursuing the villagers' claims in California state court.

The pipeline, which takes offshore natural gas on a 60-mile stretch through
Myanmar, which was formerly Burma, to Thailand, was completed in 1998 and is in
operation.

Reports by the United Nations and human rights organizations said that forced
labor was used for building and maintenance of military camps, roads, railways
and bridges.

Unocal has not disputed the assertion that it knew abuses were being committed
by Myanmar. But it has argued that it could not be held responsible for its
partners' actions.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OIL & GAS PIPELINES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PIPELINE
TRANSPORTATION (90%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (89%); FORCED LABOR
(89%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (89%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (89%); JUDGES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); PETROLEUM & COAL PRODUCTS MFG
(78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); MILITARY RULE (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); NATURAL GAS (73%); JURY DUTY (73%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS
EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); POLITICS
(67%); ROAD & BRIDGE MAINTENANCE (60%) OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  LABOR;  PIPELINES;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE
AND MILITARY FORCES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL LABOR RIGHTS FORUM (57%) UNOCAL CORP

INDUSTRY:  SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS;

PERSON: COLLINGWORTH, TERRY; CHANEY, VICTORIA (JUDGE)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (93%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA
(79%); THAILAND (79%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
Red Cross Team Will Examine Prisoners From Afghanistan

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL STATION, Cuba, Jan. 17


Four representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross arrived
here today to determine whether the United States is mistreating prisoners from
Afghanistan as international human rights groups have contended.

"We will look at treatment, at conditions, and we will share our findings
confidentially with the detaining authority," said Urs Boegli, who is based in
Washington and leads the four-member Red Cross team. The group includes a
medical doctor, a linguist from Russia and an incarceration specialist.

After their arrival, Mr. Boegli and the team traveled by bus and ferry to the
Windward side of this tightly controlled 45-acre military compound, the site of
the prison camp. A group of 20 reporters, visiting the island under military
control and confined to the opposite side of the base, was allowed to visit the
prison camp today with escorts.

International human rights groups have questioned the treatment of the
prisoners, who, with the arrival of another 30 today from Afghanistan, now
number 110. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have said that the
prisoners' treatment is inhumane because they are kept in open-air wire cages
where they are exposed to the elements.

The groups also say that the men should be classified as prisoners of war, a
move that would afford them certain rights. The Pentagon calls the prisoners
"unlawful combatants" and "detainees," and says it is still making up its mind
what to do with them. Brig. Gen. Mike Lehnert, who commands the joint task force
of soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines at the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay
said today, "We are committed to treating detainees in a humane manner
consistent with international law."

General Lehnert introduced 2 members of the camp's 12-member medical team. Capt.
Al Shimkus of the Navy, the task force surgeon, said the prisoners were in
"reasonably good health" although a few were underweight. One prisoner was
sedated when he was treated for an infection to an old bullet wound and is now
receiving antibiotics.

Captain Shimkus said the prisoners received thorough health examinations on
their arrival and were checked daily. While initial exams indicated that four
had tuberculosis, further tests proved negative, he said. The prisoners are also
screened for other diseases, including H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.

The prisoners' long-term fate remains uncertain. Secretary of Defense Donald H.
Rumsfeld gave few clues when he spoke with reporters in Washington. He said he
wanted to get as much information as possible from them, mainly to prevent other
terrorist attacks, although the authorities here say that none of the prisoners
have been interrogated here so far.

After they are questioned, "a decision will be made as to their disposition,"
Mr. Rumsfeld said. "Some may or may not end up in a military commission. Others
conceivably could end up in the U.S. criminal court system. Others could be
returned to their countries of nationality and end up being prosecuted there."

"It's conceivable," he added, "some could be kept in detention for a period
while additional intelligence information is gathered or if they simply are
dangerous -- and there's no question, there are a number down in Guantanamo Bay
who, every time anyone walks by, threaten to kill Americans the first chance
they get."

But Col. Terry Carrico of the Army, the unofficial "warden" of Camp X-Ray, said
that to his knowledge, only one prisoner made such a threat. "One of the
detainees looked at one of my soldiers," Colonel Carrico said, "and said in
English, 'Before I leave here, my goal is to kill an American.' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army M.P.'s led a prisoner through Camp X-ray at the Guantanamo
Bay Naval Station in Cuba yesterday. (Lynne Sladky/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); PRISONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (78%); ANTIBIOTICS (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS  SCREENING & TESTING (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(77%); HIJACKING (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); MILITARY COURTS (74%); MILITARY
BASES (74%); NAVIES (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%); VIRUSES (73%);
TUBERCULOSIS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); TERRORISM (66%); AIDS & HIV (64%);
GUNSHOT WOUNDS (50%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE
(CUBA);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (84%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (82%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%) RED CROSS

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tokyo Journal;
One German, and His North Korean Conscience

BYLINE:  By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, March 18


After a comfortable decade as a family doctor in central Germany, Norbert
Vollertsen went a bit further than most men who want to put a divorce behind
him. He took a job as an aid doctor in North Korea.

But from the start, the country struck him as evil, he said on a visit to Japan,
where his memoirs of that experience have been published.

At the North Korean airport, members of the elite were met by chauffeured
Mercedes-Benzes, he recalled. In Pyongyang, the restricted capital, he said, the
elite's privileged life extended to luxury restaurants, casinos and nightclubs.

A mere 25 miles from the capital, the luxury quickly disappeared. Dr. Vollertsen
says he discovered villages with children dying of starvation; surgery conducted
with razor blades, without anesthesia; and shops with no food.

At one orphanage, he found groups of shivering and starving boys huddling
together for warmth in darkened rooms, slowly dying, looking in their rough blue
and white striped pajamas like color versions of Nazi concentration camp photos.

He was expelled for speaking out 18 months later, and in the 15 months since,
Dr. Vollertsen has been a man with a mission: to expose the Stalinist state's
human rights violations.

Most recently, he orchestrated, before press cameras, the invasion of the
Spanish Embassy in Beijing by 25 North Korean refugees seeking asylum. After Dr.
Vollertsen gave nonstop sidewalk interviews about the imprisonment and torture
the refugees would face at home, the Chinese government put the group on a plane
to the Philippines.

Dr. Vollertsen said that most foreign aid workers in Pyongyang keep silent,
believing they can bring about change by working with North Korea. But he said
he was haunted by a nagging phrase from his childhood in West Germany in the
1960's. Friends of his father, a teenage German Army draftee in World War II,
would say of the Nazi atrocities, "If only we had known."

"We Germans have to show that we are not cowards, that nowadays we care, that we
will speak out," Dr. Vollertsen, a hyperkinetic 44-year-old, said during an
interview on a quick stopover here. "People say, 'Why do you care?' As a German,
it is my duty to care. When I see something going on like in Nazi Germany, I
have to intervene."

According to the U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea, about 150,000
people, including entire families, are being held in labor and political prisons
so secretive that they have never been visited by Red Cross observers. In these
camps, food rations are so meager, torture so widespread, and the workloads so
heavy, that an estimated 400,000 internees have died over the last 30 years, the
group says.

Throughout North Korea, a famine during the mid-1990's killed at least 5 percent
of the population, or over one million people. North Korea blamed natural
disasters. But South Korea, which shares a similar climate, had no famine at the
time.

"Now the famine in North Korea is a fake," Dr. Vollertsen asserted. The
Communist farm system does not produce enough food; but he also asserts that a
cynical government deliberately starves regions deemed to be disloyal, then uses
photographs of suffering people to win aid.

As he spoke out, he found he had a limited audience. In Japan, for example, he
gave a series of press interviews and book reviews after publication here of his
book about North Korea, "Diary of a Mad Place.".

His constant travel is paid from royalties from that and another memoir
published in Japan on his experience in North Korea and from income left over
from his job in North Korea. Using Asia's internet cafes and airport telephone
centers, he communicates with an e-mail list of hundreds of Americans, sending
daily news about North Korean rights abuses.

One day last spring, desperate to train the spotlight on the issue, he gathered
Western reporters and a photographer at China's border with North Korea and
dared them to enter North Korea illegally with him. He backed down only when one
reporter suggested the border guards might shoot first and ask questions later.

Then, two months ago, President Bush lumped together Iran, Iraq and North Korea
as an "axis of evil." Two weeks later, though, a Gallup poll found that while 82
percent of American respondents thought Iraq's government was "evil" and 69
percent placed Iran in that category, only 54 percent said North Korea fit the
label.

Arriving in Washington this month, Dr. Vollertsen, a restless, rumpled man who
lives out of a suitcase, talked to officials and members of Congress about his
concerns.

Speaking about a country where thousands of Christians are believed to be in
labor camps, Dr. Vollertsen ended up on the cover of a Christian magazine and on
a Christian interview program that broadcast on 1,500 stations.

Before flying to Seoul on a recent Sunday, he was interviewed in the quiet of
the library of the Foreign Correspondents Club of Japan. On shelves around him
were books about Asian human rights disasters of past decades, with titles like
"The Vietnamese Gulag." He says he plans to plow ahead. Next month, if all goes
well, he will be back in Washington, testifying about North Korea's human rights
before a House committee. After that he hopes to capitalize on the billions of
viewers for World Cup soccer in South Korea and Japan to publicize North Korea's
rights abuses.

Only through such action, he believes, can Germans atone for the past and his
four sons be freed of the burden of guilt he carries.

In the library, surrounded by chronicles of human tragedies, he said: "My
children should not have to ask me, 'Papa, why did you get the knowledge, and
then not act?' "

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Norbert Vollertsen runs from an airport guard near Seoul to meet
North Korean defectors he had aided via the Spanish Embassy in Beijing. (Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STARVATION (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); FAMILY PRACTICE
(90%); FOOD CHARITIES (89%); WORLD WAR II (87%); TORTURE (87%); CHILDREN (78%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (78%); FAMILY (78%); FAMINE (77%); MALNUTRITION (77%);
PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); CHILD RESIDENTIAL HOMES (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ORPHANS (74%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); RESTAURANTS (70%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(70%); HOLOCAUST (67%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (65%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

PERSON: VOLLERTSEN, NORBERT (DR); BROOKE, JAMES

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (90%); PYONGYANG, KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
(88%); BEIJING, CHINA (87%); SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (72%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (99%); GERMANY (94%); CHINA
(93%); JAPAN (92%); PHILIPPINES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(72%)

REGION: NORTH KOREA

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: INQUIRY;
Rights Group Doubts Mass Deaths in Jenin, but Sees Signs of War Crimes

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: JENIN REFUGEE CAMP, West Bank, May 2


A day after Israeli opposition killed plans for a United Nations fact-finding
mission into the Israeli Army's disputed attack on this refugee camp, a weeklong
investigation by an American rights group found that Palestinian claims of
hundreds of civilian deaths are exaggerated.

But the report, the most authoritative to date, also contains conclusions
beneficial to the Palestinians in the international furor surrounding just what
occurred here.

For instance, it found what it described as evidence that Israeli forces used
civilians to walk protectively in front of them throughout the incursion;
destroyed more houses than needed for "any conceivable military purpose"; and
blocked the passage of ambulances and relief groups to the camp for 11 days.

The document, based on more than 100 interviews and written by Human Rights
Watch, a group that is generally considered fair-minded, concluded that those
actions, among others, constituted "strong prima facie evidence" that Israeli
soldiers "committed grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, or war crimes" and
called for further investigation by Israeli or international bodies.

In interviews with The New York Times today, four Palestinian men featured in
the report described being forced to walk down streets in front of Israeli
soldiers as they advanced through the camp. They also said the soldiers,
apparently fearing ambushes and booby traps, had sent them to enter houses and
open closets and drawers inside.

Two other men interviewed today described being blindfolded and made to stand in
a window while Israeli soldiers fired rifles over their shoulders.

"There was another guy who was standing beside me who was crying," said Kamal
Tawalbi, whose 14-year-old son was also detained. "After I heard him, I
recognized it was my son."

The Human Rights Watch senior researcher who led the project, Peter Bouckaert,
said: "We have no doubt that extremely serious violations of the laws of war
were committed. The evidence is certainly strong enough to warrant a war crimes
investigation."

Yet the inquiry may well be the last of its kind -- especially since Secretary
General Kofi Annan's decision on Wednesday to disband the fact-finding team.

Israeli officials disputed every critical finding in the report, saying that no
civilians were used as human shields, that Palestinian booby traps forced
Israeli troops to bulldoze homes and that Palestinian ambulances were used to
smuggle people out of the camp. They said Israeli forces took extraordinary
risks not to endanger civilians in a measured attack on the camp that they say
produced 28 suicide bombers, more than any other West Bank city.

"It bears asking when a country is fighting a war against terror how is it that
those who are engaged in fighting terrorists come under criticism, while the
perpetrators of the terror are not subject to scrutiny," said Lt. Col. Olivier
Rafowicz, an Israeli military spokesman.

Palestinian officials, furious over the scuttling of the United Nations team,
say the opposite is true. Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, has started
referring to the fight as "Jeningrad," an allusion to the World War II siege of
Leningrad.

Based on the number of bodies recovered nearly three weeks after gunfire ceased,
the report found that 23 Israelis and at least 48 Palestinians were killed
during the attack on the camp, a warren of 14,000 residents. Four others were
killed when the army seized control of Jenin town, which surrounds it.

At least 18 of the Palestinian dead were civilians, including women, children,
the elderly and the disabled, according to the report. At least 27 of them were
fighters. The report predicted that the Palestinian total was unlikely to
increase sharply as excavations continue. United Nations officials say only a
half-dozen people have been reported to them as missing.

Mr. Bouckaert, the rights investigator, said that in 2001 and earlier this year,
Human Rights Watch had found what he called evidence of Israeli forces' using
Palestinians as shields.

He maintained that his group was not singling out the Israelis for criticism,
and that it had also investigated the Palestinian Authority's failure to punish
suspected terrorists and was now investigating suicide bombings. That practice,
the group says, is a crime against humanity because it involves intentionally
attacking civilians.

But he said Jenin was the scene of the most flagrant Israeli abuses in eighteen
months of renewed violence.

The failure of the Israeli military "to instill discipline in its troops at a
lesser level, at an earlier stage in the conflict," Mr. Bouckaert said, "has
directly contributed to a culture where certain unlawful practices have become
acceptable."

Israeli officials said they "completely reject" allegations that Palestinians
were used to protect Israeli soldiers. "If any party is to be blamed for using
civilians as human shields," Col. Rafowicz said, "it is the Palestinian
terrorists who used the refugee camp as a center for terror."

The group also described what it called evidence of excessive Israeli force in
the firing of missiles into the camp from helicopters; the failure to warn
civilians adequately that their houses would be demolished; and the shooting of
a small number of prisoners, sometimes out of fear that they carried bombs. But
the group said it had found no evidence that Israeli forces removed bodies from
the camp or buried them in mass graves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yehia al-Hindi amid the rubble of his house in the Jenin Refugee
Camp where a rights group says it found evidence of possible war crimes.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
LAW OF WAR (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); INTERVIEWS
(88%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); EVIDENCE (76%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%);
SMUGGLING (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%) PALESTINIANS;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: ROHDE, DAVID

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED STATES
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JENIN (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Violence Over Rights Raises Fear In Guatemala

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, May 2


Rising threats and deadly violence against rights workers in Guatemala have
prompted fears of a new crisis of political violence as the country tries to
recover from decades of civil war.

On Monday, an accountant for the foundation started by the Nobel Peace Prize
winner Rigoberta Menchu -- a prominent human rights group here -- was shot dead
in a cafeteria in the capital. The police said it had been a robbery, but rights
advocates doubted that conclusion.

Also this week, four forensic anthropologists who have unearthed the skeletons
of thousands of victims of the 36-year civil war in Guatemala who decided to
leave the country after they and their families were threatened with death, in
some cases at gunpoint.

Officials say they do not know who is responsible for the threats. Rights groups
suspect that they come from former military and intelligence officers involved
in mass killings during the civil war, which ended in 1996.

President Alfonso Portillo has vowed to prosecute those responsible for the
threats. But given his government's scarce resources and ample domestic
political problems, rights groups say he has little more than promises to offer.

"The state has shown an inability to investigate these crimes and threats," said
Jose Miguel Vivanco, the director of the Americas division of Human Rights
Watch, who has met several times with the Guatemalan leader.

Authorities said the accountant was killed after a hold-up turned into a
shootout between the assailants and an armed customer at the busy cafeteria. Two
men were soon arrested for the crime and identified by witnesses, they said.

However, rights workers said one of the alleged gunmen had previously been
spotted lurking outside the Menchu foundation's offices, raising the possibility
that the robbery had been a cover for a politically motivated murder. "The
police should investigate all hypotheses and if the state has evidence which
shows it to be a common crime, let them put it on the table and convince us,"
Ms. Menchu said today at a Guatemala City news conference.

Police officials have often cited common crime to explain for past attacks
against human rights workers. But rights advocates said a recent series of
detailed threats against 11 forensic anthropologists working in Guatemala
appears to have been an organized campaign.

Since the mid-1990's, the anthropologists have excavated remains of more than
2,000 people in 200 clandestine cemeteries, and their evidence was used to bring
genocide charges against current and former government and military officials.

"For 10 years we have known who you are and let you be," said a letter sent to
the 11 anthropologists in late February. "Now it is time to settle accounts."

Threatening and obscene phone calls to their homes and loved ones in Guatemala
City soon followed, leading the police to post guards at the headquarters of the
Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation, which has done the most important
exhumations and is financed by the United States and the Netherlands. Fredy
Peccerelli, the organization's president, decided this week to leave the country
after three armed men threatened his brother on the street in the capital last
month.

"Tell your brother and his friends that this isn't over," Mr. Peccerelli's
brother was told. "Next time we are going to kill you."

Three of his colleagues have also fled Guatemala because of the threats. "It is
hard to have worked so many years to create something that is working so well
and then have to abandon it," Mr. Peccerelli said. "This is such a critical
moment in our work."

Eduardo Arevalo Lacs, the minister of the interior, said he was willing to
assign more police officers to guard them. "We will not permit any illegal acts
by any group, much less a secret outlaw band," he said.

Clyde Snow, an internationally-recognized forensics expert who helped start the
Guatemalan team, said their work was getting close to former military officers,
including Efrain Rios Montt, a former general and junta leader during the war's
harshest period who is now president of the Congress.

"These people are probably more afraid of the dead than they are of the living,"
Dr. Snow said. "Witnesses may forget throughout the years, but the dead, those
skeletons, they don't forget. Their testimony is silent, but it is also very
eloquent."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FORENSICS (89%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); POLITICS (78%); NOBEL PRIZES
(77%); GENOCIDE (77%); AWARDS & PRIZES (77%); WITNESSES (76%); POLICE FORCES
(76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); MURDER (56%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
THREATS AND THREATENING MESSAGES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; PORTILLO, ALFONSO (PRES)

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (92%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights and Jews

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 165 words


To the Editor:

Contrary to the May 27 letter by the executive directors of Human Rights Watch
and Amnesty International U.S.A., Anne Bayefsky ("Ending Bias in the Human
Rights System," Op-Ed, May 22) was correct to criticize those two groups for
their roles at the United Nations conference against racism in Durban, South
Africa, last year.

Like many other Jewish delegates at the conference, I was subjected to physical
intimidation and threats.

Anti-Semitic displays by an Egyptian nongovernmental organization went virtually
unopposed by the thousands of participating groups.

Worst of all was the forum's document, which Amnesty International refused to
vote against because it was deemed a legitimate "voice of the victims." Well,
the concerns of one group of victims -- the Jewish people -- were left off that
document, with the silent acquiescence of Amnesty International and Human Rights
Watch.

(Rabbi) ABRAHAM COOPER
Associate Dean
Simon Wiesenthal Center
Los Angeles, May 28, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); RACE & RACISM (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%) UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM;  ANTI-SEMITISM;
JEWS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%); SIMON WIESENTHAL CENTER (56%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: BAYEFSKY, ANNE; COOPER, ABRAHAM (RABBI)

COUNTRY: SOUTH AFRICA (90%); UNITED STATES (73%)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE CAPTIVES;
On Defensive, General Says Prisoners Get Mats, Even Bagels

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba, Jan. 16


Smarting a bit from criticism by international human rights groups, United
States troops here who received 30 new prisoners from the war on terrorism in
Afghanistan were determined today to show that their captives would be treated
properly.

"Each detainee has an Isomat to lay on," said Brig. Gen. Mike Lehnert, holding
up an inch-thick piece of olive-drab foam to show reporters. "It isn't
particularly comfortable. It is also the same thing issued every day to our
soldiers and marines in the field. I myself have spent a good portion of my
Marine Corps career on one of these mats."

The third load of prisoners arrived this afternoon, raising the total to 80.

General Lehnert, who is head of security at the base's prison, said that the
captives are not being interrogated here, so they do not have lawyers. Nor have
they been charged with anything, he said, while Washington determines their
status.

Amnesty International and other human rights groups maintain that the men being
held should be classified as prisoners of war, which would afford them certain
rights. But the issue is complicated by the fact that no war has been declared.

General Lehnert stopped short of saying the prisoners were being granted the
full protection of the Geneva Conventions.

"We are being guided by the Geneva Convention," he pointedly told reporters here
in a pink airport hangar as he conducted a show-and-tell session to indicate
what the prisoners would receive and generally to describe their living
conditions.

General Lehnert said that the prisoners have toothpaste and showers and roofs
over their heads. They will get bagels and cream cheese, granola bars and Froot
Loops.

Holding up a day-glow orange prison outfit, the general said: "They get a jump
suit." But revealing a little frustration with all the international scrutiny,
he added, "They don't get to pick the color."

A delegation from the International Committee of the Red Cross on Thursday is
scheduled to inspect the prisoners and conditions at the expanding prison
compound here.

What the Red Cross will see are men in their 20's and 30's whose heads have been
shaved to prevent the spread of lice. The prisoners, including at least one
British and one Australian citizen, at times read the Koran, and at times yell
to their captors that they intend to kill them.

"We have an international community of suspected terrorists from all over the
world," General Lehnert said. "These are not nice people. Several have publicly
stated here their intent to kill an American before they leave Guantanamo Bay.
We will not give them that satisfaction."

Their toothbrushes are cut short so that the sharp end cannot be used as a
weapon. They are issued plastic spoons to eat their meals but must return them
when they finish. Their cells are actually wire cages, six feet by eight feet,
bathed all night in halogen flood lights so that their every move can be
monitored.

The Red Cross will also see a burgeoning fortress, the most secure portion of
which is known as Camp X-Ray. It has a capacity today for 200 prisoners but with
the constant construction going on here, will soon have the capacity for more
than 600.

Eventually, the entire base is to hold 2,000 prisoners, but General Lehnert
suggested today that the arrival of detainees was outpacing the construction of
secure facilities. He said that the prisoners who arrived today would be held in
X-Ray for three months "and be moved to a more permanent detention facility here
in Gitmo once we have it built," using a nickname for the base.

The guards are conscious of allowing the Muslim prisoners to practice their
religion, and have told them which direction they must face to pray toward
Mecca. But military officials said that the captives do not yet have any idea
where on the world map they have landed.

Reporters were allowed to view the prisoners from a grassy hillside about 400
feet away but were not allowed to photograph them, even though their individual
identities were impossible to discern as they clanked off a gray cargo plane in
their jumpsuits and leg shackles.

They wore mittens and their hands were manacled. They also wore orange knit
caps, goggles with the lenses blacked out and blue surgical masks, while scores
of helmeted Marines secured the area with grenade launchers, machine guns and
rifles.

As part of the effort to meet the standards of the Geneva Conventions, General
Lehnert held up a thin sheet and referred to the steamy tropical weather in
Cuba. "It's about what most of our Marines sleep with," he said.

Referring to the prisoners, he said, "They get two towels. One towel is for
washing and drying. The other towel is to be used as their prayer mat." The
Geneva Conventions also say that prisoners' facilities "shall be entirely
protected from the dampness and adequately heated and lighted, in particular
between dusk and lights out." Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have
said that the Guantanamo cages appear to violate this requirement.

General Lehnert said: "After the last rain we had, I went out there and checked,
and they were all doing well. Our security forces are living in the same kind of
environment that they are."

The general then showed off samples of the food packets given the prisoners,
including peanuts, raisins, sunflower seeds and beef stew that is prepared under
the Islamic dietary laws.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Brig. Gen. Michael Lehnert, top, in charge of detainees from
Afghanistan at Guantanamo Bay, said yesterday that the prisoners received a
bucket for use as an emergency toilet. They also get toothbrushes, left, cut
short to render them useless as weapons, and packets of food, right.
(Photographs by Agence France-Presse); (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR ON TERROR
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW OF WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PRISONS (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); NAVIES (78%); HIJACKING (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(76%); MILITARY BASES (75%); AIRPORTS (74%); LIVING CONDITIONS (73%); AIRLINES
(69%); LAWYERS (66%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (61%);
QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (82%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; LEHNERT, MICHAEL (BRIG GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (86%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (86%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 22, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRISONERS;
Britain Defends U.S. Treatment of Detainees at Guantanamo

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The British government stepped forward today to defend the American treatment of
Al Qaeda and Taliban prisoners being held on an American military base in Cuba,
saying three British subjects among the prisoners had "no complaints" about
their treatment.

A Foreign Office spokesman told members of the House of Commons that the United
States and Britain "are well aware that we will be judged by a higher standard
than Al Qaeda or the Taliban" and that a British delegation that visited the
Guantanamo Bay Navy Base on Friday had found "that these standards are being
met."

The treatment of the 158 prisoners reported to be in custody at the base has
been the subject of growing criticism of the United States by international
human rights groups. Fourteen more prisoners arrived today. The Central Command
said it was holding 274 more in Afghanistan, down from 444 on Jan. 13, when the
first 20 were sent to Guantanamo.

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have said that the prisoners'
treatment is inhumane because the men are being kept in 8-by-8-foot chain-link
cages topped with corrugated metal. The open-air prison is known within the
military as Camp X-Ray.

Today, the International Committee of the Red Cross questioned whether the
United States had violated the Geneva Convention by releasing photographs of
prisoners at the base that showed them manacled and wearing large black goggles
and ear cups. The convention forbids governments to expose captives to "public
curiosity."

The United States has insisted that it is in general compliance with
international agreements on the humane treatment of prisoners, even as it
continues to argue that Al Qaeda and Taliban captives are not necessarily
entitled to the special legal rights guaranteed to prisoners of war under the
Geneva Convention.

On Sunday, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld defended the conditions in
Guantanamo Bay and said in a television interview that "we have a just criminal
system in the United States and people do get treated right -- and I think that
any suggestion to the contrary is basically coming from people who are not well
informed."

The prisoners' treatment was defended today by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman,
Democrat of Connecticut, who said, "I think our military is doing just the right
thing in the way they are handling them at Guantanamo," according to Reuters.

Mr. Lieberman spoke to reporters after a briefing at Central Command
headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base in Florida. "These are violent killers,"
he said. "They are already threatening the American personnel who are there to
guard them."

The prisoners' treatment will be the subject of a court hearing scheduled for
Tuesday in Los Angeles, where a federal judge has agreed to consider a petition
from a group of civil rights, religious and free-speech advocates who are
demanding that the Guantanamo Bay captives be brought before a civilian judge
and be told the charges they face.

The petition, which was filed on Saturday night, says the United States is
denying due-process rights to the prisoners in violation of both the United
States Constitution and the Geneva Convention.

The judge, A. Howard Matz, has not indicated how he would rule. A Justice
Department spokeswoman said today that the department had no immediate comment.

The government of Prime Minister Tony Blair has faced criticism in the press
that it is condoning American abuses of the terrorism suspects.

But a Blair spokesman today defended the treatment of the prisoners, telling
reporters in London that the British government team that visited Cuba confirmed
that the three British prisoners there "were in good physical shape" and "had no
complaints about their treatment."

"There are no gags, no goggles, no earmuffs and no shackles while the detainee'
were in their cells," the spokesman said. "They only wear shackles when they are
outside the cells."

Asked if that applied to all detainees, not just three British prisoners, he
said it did.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRISONS (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); AIR FORCES (78%); NAVIES (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); MISSING PERSONS (69%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); JUDGES (60%); PETITIONS
(60%); AIRLINES (60%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRISONERS
OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (55%);
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (55%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL;
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; RED CROSS; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); TALIBAN (AFGHAN
GROUP)

PERSON: JOE LIEBERMAN (56%) ;SHENON, PHILIP

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); CUBA (94%); AFGHANISTAN
(92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  GREAT BRITAIN;  AFGHANISTAN;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE
(CUBA)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE SATURDAY PROFILE;
A Turkish Doctor's Specialty: The Torture Victim

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL


AS a physician at the Human Rights Foundation here, Dr. Onder Ozkalipci tends to
the handiwork of sadists. He talks of the most popular methods of torturers as
another doctor might talk of the perils of cholesterol.

There's "falanga," the beating of the soles of the feet, and "submarino," wet or
dry, which involves submerging the detainee in water (wet) or wrapping a plastic
bag over the head (dry). Rape, electrical shock and mock execution are also
used.

Among the latest techniques is the sandwiching of a detainee between blocks of
ice, a procedure that leaves no physical marks but usually causes a lung
infection within days.

Dr. Ozcalipci's job, like those of roughly a dozen full-time physicians at the
foundation's five clinics across Turkey, is to rehabilitate the men, women and
occasionally children who say they have been tortured by police officers and
prison guards. He offers vitamins, refers psychiatric help, prescribes physical
therapy to treat an injured back.

Of his work, the doctor, 43, observes, "Maybe we're masochists."

Dr. Ozkalipci is a large, lumbering man with hangdog eyes and a shock of silver
hair. He speaks softly, almost in mumbles, and when he laughs, which is often
considering his trade, the laughter comes in quiet, wide-grinned chuckles.

His patients may be leftists, Kurds, transvestites, criminals and, most
recently, Islamists. He has treated street children -- pint-size thieves as
young as 5 caught snatching car stereos -- who are punished by beatings and
electrical shocks.

The children hit him the hardest. He has a daughter, age 7, whom he describes as
his chief motivation. "You think they could be your child," he says of his
youngest patients. "It's hard to imagine what they will do when they grow up."

Born and schooled in Izmir, and raised in a middle-class family, he came to his
calling after witnessing what happened to his friends during the 1980 military
coup in Turkey. He was in college, a self-described Socialist, and watched as
his peers were hauled into jail, beaten, abused.

But if the socialism of his youth brought him here, what he has seen has drained
his idealism. Although his job is to help people recover from horror, he now
describes himself simply as a pessimist.

He neither entirely agrees nor disagrees with the political beliefs of most of
his patients. Frankly, says Dr. Ozkalipci, who practiced general medicine
privately in a small town for four years before joining the foundation in 1991,
what matters to him is how his patients were tortured. Not why. "It's none of my
business," he says.

Sometimes, he says, he makes people better only to see them beaten again.
Despite all the expertise he and his colleagues have mustered over a decade of
doing this work, the payoff is slim. Few torturers, even when they can be
identified, are punished.

"There's a lot of pain and few results," Dr. Ozkalipci said. "Our country is one
of the countries that has systematic torture. This is our -- I can't find the
word -- our moral pain."

Turkish government officials dispute his claim. Last month the interior
minister, Rustu Kazim Yucelen, told reporters that there had been 67 deaths in
police custody over the last six years. But he said they were "isolated
incidents" that resulted in the prosecutions of 112 security officials.

For years Turkey's human rights record has earned the opprobrium of local and
international rights groups, and reports of torture have become central to the
debate on the country's request for European Union membership. In a scathing
report last month, Human Rights Watch described torture as "rampant" and accused
Turkey of "little but superficial and halfway measures" to improve the human
rights of its citizens.

FEW people are as intimate with the banal, redundant nitty-gritty of torture as
Dr. Ozkalipci. People of all political stripes walk into his examination room, a
spare chamber with gauzy curtains, a violet weight scale, a kilim rug the color
of ocher.

The work itself carries political risks. The foundation, whose budget is
supported by the United Nations and other international groups, has been charged
by the state security courts on several occasions. The foundation's clinic in
Diyarbakir, the center of Turkey's Kurdish region, which remains under emergency
rule, had its patient files confiscated by the authorities in early September.

Among the patients is a pale, twiggy woman of 23, named Yeliz Sayginar.

By her own count, Ms. Sayginar, who writes for a socialist publication, has been
in police custody roughly 30 times since she was 17 for her writing and
political activity.

Among the most memorable was an 11-day stay in the city's antiterrorism cell.
She sat blindfolded in a chair for two days, she said, subjected to a discordant
serenade: military music from one speaker, pop tunes from another. Over the next
nine days, as she refused to cooperate with her interrogators, she was hosed
down with cold water, pummeled, kicked, stifled by a plastic bag over her head
and hung by her wrists from a wooden bar.

In one such session, the cuffs slipped up her narrow arms and dug into her skin,
leaving scars on her left forearm still. On another occasion, after her arrest
at a demonstration protesting prison conditions, officers herded her into the
back of a police van, groped her breasts and forced her to stick her head
between one officer's legs. The memory of it is shocking in its precision. "I
talked about this in great detail with people I love and who love me," Ms.
Sayginar said. "It's also not something one forgets very easily."

FORGETTING doesn't come easily for most of Dr. Ozkalipci's patients, or for him.
One patient, he recalled, suffered from what seemed like severe paranoia. The
young man talked constantly about his fear of death. Then he died in police
custody.

The rewards of the doctor's job are rare. Physical signs of torture -- a
perforated eardrum, say -- are like answered prayers, offering a reason to go to
court. Lately, in the trials of torture suspects, the courts have begun
consulting the foundation's reports to supplement a government doctor's
examinations.

Does he worry about becoming insensitive to the pain he sees? His answer
suggests more a worry for his nation than for himself.

"This is a real trauma for us," Dr. Ozcalipci says. "It destroys the moral
values of the nation, not just the survivor. When you start to accept torture as
something normal, it destroys your sense of humanity. If you keep your silence,
after a while it will destroy you."

He imagines that some Turks are afraid to speak out. He imagines, too, that many
believe that torture cannot happen to them and so are not moved to care. Summing
up the dismissive attitude of many people, he recalls a Turkish saying: If a
snake doesn't touch me, it can live forever.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Medicine and Health

PERSON: Dr. Onder Ozkalipci

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Onder Ozkalipci (Staton R. Winter for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); CHILDREN (88%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); BOTTLED WATER & ICE
(76%); PHYSICAL THERAPY (74%); FAMILY (74%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (73%); PRISONS
(73%); CORRECTIONS (72%); MISCONDUCT (71%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (70%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (64%); COUPS (50%); ARMED FORCES (50%) TORTURE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FOUNDATION

OZKALIPCI, ONDER (DR); SENGUPTA, SOMINI

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (71%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (92%)

REGION: TURKEY

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico to Release Army General Jailed in Rights Case

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 7


The government of Mexico announced tonight that it would free Brig. Gen. Jose
Francisco Gallardo, a dissident army officer jailed eight years ago after he
criticized rights abuses by the military.

Human rights activists have called General Gallardo Mexico's last political
prisoner. The Inter-American Human Rights Commission, an arm of the Organization
of American States, ruled that his imprisonment was an "abuse of power" and
demanded his release six years ago.

But the armed forces resisted pressure to free him, insisting it was an internal
matter. The case was a test of whether the hermetic Mexican military would open
up to new civilian influence under President Vicente Fox, Mexico's first
democratic leader in seven decades.

Mr. Fox, who took office in December 2000, had previously declined to free the
general, saying he had not exhausted his legal appeals.

But the interior minister, Santiago Creel, said tonight that Mr. Fox, after a
yearlong review, had decided that the general should be released immediately. He
called the decision proof that Mexico now recognized "the existence of human
rights."

Mexico's foreign minister, Jorge G. Castaneda, said that the release was
evidence that Mexico's civilian and military leaders were moving as one toward a
democratic state.

General Gallardo, 55, rose rapidly through the ranks, becoming Mexico's youngest
brigadier general at 42. But in 1993, he published an article accusing the armed
forces of abusing soldiers' and civilians' rights and calling for the creation
of a military rights monitor.

Civilian courts cleared him of defaming the military. But the army tried him on
fresh charges -- including the theft of horse feed from the cavalry -- and
sentenced him to 28 years in jail.

Amnesty International has listed General Gallardo a "prisoner of conscience,"
the last one in Mexico.

"There are three parts of Mexico that are untouchable: the presidency, the
church and the army," he said shortly after he was jailed. "I just tried to put
in my own grain of sand, and look what happened."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); POLITICS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); APPEALS (71%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (66%); LIVESTOCK FEED (63%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (84%) ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
STATES

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (90%) WEINER, TIM; GALLARDO, JOSE FRANCISCO (GEN);
FOX QUESADA, VICENTE (PRES)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic, 'The Biggest Fish,' on Eve of War Crimes Trial

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER and MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 11


Lawyers, human rights workers and victims of the Yugoslav wars arrived here
today on the eve of Slobodan Milosevic's trial, hailing a new era of
accountability for war crimes despite anger about other suspects who are still
free.

Mr. Milosevic, the former leader of Yugoslavia and its dominant republic,
Serbia, will be the first head of state to face charges so grave: genocide for
the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with crimes against humanity and
violations of the Geneva conventions for the wars in Croatia and Kosovo, the
southern province of Serbia.

"It would have unthinkable a few years ago," said Richard Dicker, a Human Rights
Watch lawyer. "When I was here in 1996, it was derided as the international
tribunal for small fry. Tomorrow the biggest fish of them all goes on trial."

Experts say that Tuesday's trial underscores a significant broadening of
international criminal justice: that even heads of state can be tried for war
crimes, including those that took place inside their own borders. This trend has
not pleased everyone: the United States has balked at supporting a permanent
international criminal court, for fear its own officials may someday be tried
there.

The accusations cover Mr. Milosevic's actions beginning in 1991 as Yugoslavia
began to tear apart, including his leadership of and assistance to Serbs who
were fighting for control of parts of Croatia and Bosnia. They also cover his
actions in Kosovo, a province of Serbia, in 1999, when he stepped up security
forces to suppress an ethnic Albanian rebel movement.

But, for some, the trial also highlights what has not changed: Bosnian Muslims
are planning a demonstration here tomorrow, protesting what they say is the
permanent ethnic division of their country and that many others indicted for war
crimes remain free. The most prominent are Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
leader during the war there, and Ratko Mladic, the top Bosnian Serb general.

"I can hardly wait for Mladic to come and be held accountable for Srebrenica,"
said Mary Adele Greer, a lawyer with the Coalition for International Justice,
referring to the suspected executions in 1995 of 7,000 Bosnian Muslims in
eastern Bosnia.

Ms. Greer said, however, that their absence is "not detracting from what we're
focused on. We can't lose sight of the focus of why this Milosevic trial is so
important. He will be tried for offenses from all over the region."

For his part, Mr. Milosevic, 60, was reported to be preparing for his day in
court: On Wednesday, he is scheduled to deliver a rebuttal to the prosecution's
charges, though the length of his statement is apparently at the discretion of
the judges.

Zdenko Tomanovic, one of the lawyers advising him, said he was in good spirits
working on notes for his speech. Mr. Milosevic does not accept the jurisdiction
of the court, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
however, and he does not have lawyers representing him in court. As a result,
the speech will probably focus less on the specific charges than on questions
like why Western leaders supported him so long if he was in fact a war criminal.

"He will address the public, not the court," Mr. Tomanovic said.

As his supporters in Belgrade, Serbia's capital, vowed a public rebuttal of all
charges made in court, his brother, Borislav, said that Mr. Milosevic was
prepared to face the tribunal.

"His mood is good," he told Reuters in Moscow, where he once was the Yugoslav
ambassador, after speaking with his brother by telephone last weekend. "I would
say he is in good heart. He's strong without a doubt."

The proceedings on Tuesday are scheduled to begin with an opening statement by
the chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, followed a more detailed narrative of the
charges by two other prosecutors. After Mr. Milosevic makes his remarks,
expected to be on Wednesday, the prosecution will begin calling witnesses for
the first portion of the trial, which will focus on crimes committed in Kosovo
from January to June 1999.

Prosecutors have kept secret who they will call, and many legal experts say it
may be difficult for them to prove their case without the testimony of former
officials close to Mr. Milosevic. Early witnesses are expected to include ethnic
Albanian survivors of mass killings in Kosovo. Human Rights Watch has confirmed
that one of its former employees, a Kosovo expert, will testify on one of the
first days.

The trial is expected to last at least two years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); TRENDS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(69%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (68%); RELIGION (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(56%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (55%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
CROATIA (93%); KOSOVO (93%); ALBANIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS
(79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA;  CROATIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America's Shady Ally Against Terror

BYLINE:  By Muhammad Salih;  Muhammad Salih is the leader of the Erk (Freedom)
Party of Uzbekistan. He lives in exile.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: OSLO


When the Soviet Union fell apart, most of its provincial Communist dictators did
not. Instead, they jumped to join those who had been, moments before, their
"nationalist enemies" -- and adopted nationalist slogans as their own. These
former first secretaries of their regional Communist parties became presidents
and set about denigrating their once dear party. I watched this happen in
Uzbekistan with Islam Karimov, who is still, remarkably, the Uzbek president,
and will be visiting Washington this week. He just secured an extra two years on
his term -- it will now stretch to 2007.

Initially, the Western powers must have been a bit astonished by the
transformation of first secretaries into presidents. But they supported these
"newly independent states," as they were called, and the dictators who ruled in
them. Twelve years have passed, but the undemocratic, human-rights-abusing,
one-party states have not changed much at all, and neither has Western support
for them. Something has always happened -- worries over the security of
ex-Soviet nuclear materials, a desire to avoid antagonizing Russia, China or
another power -- that somehow justifies this situation. Western politicians have
always had convenient excuses for supporting these governments. The dictators of
the independent states have been lucky.

Their last case of luck came on Sept. 11. On that day, in an instant, something
happened that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan had been unable to
accomplish in over a decade. Just 15 days before this tragedy, Mr. Karimov had
promised that he would grant an amnesty that would have released thousands of
citizens who had been convicted of various crimes. Among those eligible were at
least 1,000 political prisoners, promised amnesty in exchange for repentance.
This was an effort by Mr. Karimov to win the good will of the United States,
which otherwise tended to issue reports condemning his government's repression.
America did not appear to notice this gesture of mercy.

But by late September such promises of freedom became unnecessary. The
superpower had arrived in Tashkent with good will and much else. This last case
of luck was so great that Mr. Karimov, being singled out by the United States as
an ally in the war against terrorism, began to feel that he was the leader not
only of Uzbekistan but of all Central Asia. Today the Kazakh, Kyrgyz and Tajik
leaders look at him with envy.

The Russian political elite is watching the Uzbek leader with alarm, warning
Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, that Mr. Karimov, always somewhat
querulous in his dealings with Moscow, is drifting toward a pro-American stance.
Perhaps even the Americans think this is true.

But in fact, the opposite is occurring. Uzbekistan is drifting toward an
anti-American stance, if one understands "American" as implying democracy, human
rights and the struggle against state-sponsored terror.

After Sept. 11, Mr. Karimov reversed his amnesty for some political prisoners
who had originally been scheduled for release. (About 800 members of a Muslim
organization, Hizb-ut-Tahrir, were freed, only to be put under constant
surveillance. Secular dissidents remain in prison.) He understood that the
political impetus for amnesty had diminished greatly. America's warm relations
with Karimov have, in a way, increased repression in Uzbekistan, there being no
need now to conform to international human rights standards.

The authorities in Uzbekistan have essentially untied the militia's hands.  If
militiamen kill citizens, they can simply fill out documents claiming the victim
was a terrorist, or even a follower of Osama bin Laden. No civilian has any
ability to question this characterization.

As for Uzbekistan's efforts on the democracy front, Mr. Karimov held a
referendum, in 1995, to avoid an election. According to official results 99.8
percent of voters endorsed this nonelection idea wholeheartedly. Mr. Karimov won
re-election in 2000 with a 92 percent favorable vote. (Even his leading opponent
voted for him, and said so.) Now he has secured by referendum an extra two years
after his term ends in 2005, just for asking. The positive vote was 91.8
percent. The State Department wisely decided not to monitor this last
referendum, because the mere act of monitoring might confer on it some
legitimacy.

More than once, America has had to tear down what it has helped create. That was
recently the case, to a degree, in Afghanistan -- America helped sustain a
Muslim insurgency, and now has crushed a Muslim insurgency, the Taliban, that
turned into a government. It may prove to be the case in Uzbekistan, which has
been raised by its antiterror alliance with America into the pre-eminent Central
Asian power.

Uzbekistan is located in the very center of a highly explosive and densely
populated region where almost 60 million people live, more than a third of them
in Uzbekistan itself. The Karimov government's example of repression is likely
to be infectious in a neighborhood of states that have little tradition of
democracy or human rights. Mr. Karimov shows them that it is possible to gain
prestige and money and extend your rule on a whim -- and still gain American
support in the post-terrorism world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (86%); CORRECTIONS (86%); RELIGION (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); WAR ON TERROR (70%); HIJACKING (68%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (63%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICAL PRISONERS

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%) SALIH, MUHAMMAD; KARIMOV, ISLAM (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (86%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); TASHKENT,
UZBEKISTAN (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (86%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); CHINA
(79%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: UZBEKISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ALLIES;
Uzbekistan's Leader Doubts Chances for Afghan Peace

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


President Islam A. Karimov of Uzbekistan, a pariah-turned-ally in the Bush
administration's war on terrorism, wrapped up two days of meetings with top
government officials today, praising the American campaign against the Taliban
but expressing sharp doubts about the future stability of Afghanistan.

"Personally, I do not harbor much optimism about future prospects," Mr. Karimov
told reporters here this morning. "Of course, peacekeeping operations are very
important. But I do not believe that these peacekeepers will interfere into the
standoff between warlords and ethnic groups in Afghanistan, and therefore we
cannot rule out the possibility of these confrontations."

Indeed, Mr. Karimov said, "constant, permanent interethnic strife in
Afghanistan," which adjoins his country's southern border, is all but certain to
complicate the future. He said the United States "shouldn't lose control of the
situation" as it finishes action against the Taliban and Al Qaeda, but said a
future American role should be limited to "special operations only."

Only a year ago, Mr. Karimov, a former Soviet-era strongman who has run the
country since 1989 and recently extended his current term from five to seven
years, was persona non grata in Washington for his country's poor human rights
record. In its annual human rights report last week, the State Department
harshly criticized the authoritarian regime for torture, beatings and arbitrary
arrests of Muslims under the guise of fighting terrorism.

But immediately after Sept. 11, the Bush administration turned to Mr. Karimov
for help in staging American military operations from Uzbekistan. On Tuesday, he
met President Bush for 45 minutes in the Oval Office and received thanks for
that help. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and the Uzbek foreign minister,
Adulaziz Kamilov, signed five cooperation agreements codifying the nations' new
strategic relationship.

The most important document commits the United States to "regard with grave
concern any external threat" to Uzbekistan while calling for Uzbekistan to
"intensify the democratic transformation of its society politically and
economically." The United States Export-Import Bank also granted a $55 million
credit guarantee, on top of the administration's recent tripling of foreign aid
to Uzbekistan to $160 million.

The declaration about external threats refers to remnants of the extremist
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. Mr. Karimov and the United States jointly regard
it as a terrorist organization which might regroup outside the country, in
Afghanistan, for example. Indeed, Mr. Karimov's concern about such elements may
help explain his gloomy comments about the future of Afghanistan and his desire
for a continued American presence in Uzbekistan.

"The United States presence in the region is explained by the need to finish the
antiterrorist operation," Mr. Karimov, speaking through an interpreter, told
reporters at Blair House, the presidential guest residence across from the White
House. "The United States may remain in Uzbekistan as long as they think it is
necessary; in other words, as long as it takes to finish disrupting the
terrorist network."

American commanders have said they do not plan a long-term military presence in
Uzbekistan, where the post-Sept. 11 deployment has aggravated Russian concerns
about American influence in Central Asia. But Mr. Karimov thanked American
parents who "brought up such courageous soldiers," and said the 2,000 American
troops in his country were welcome to operate from the air base at Hanabad
indefinitely.

A senior administration official said that Mr. Karimov had repeatedly expressed
his admiration to Secretary Powell for the United States's swift early success
in Afghanistan, where so many nations have come to grief for centuries. At the
same time, the official added, "The secretary made it clear that over time, the
questions raised about Uzbekistan and the judgments made won't just be about
terrorism but about progress on human rights and economic reform."

The official noted that in his private meeting with Secretary Powell, it was Mr.
Karimov who brought up the topic of human rights first, acknowledging that he
had work to do. In the meeting with reporters this morning, Mr. Karimov also
acknowledged, "Yes, indeed, we do have problems with human rights." But he
avoided direct answers to questions about specific steps he might be taking to
improve conditions.

"We're going to promote democratic development not because we want to get into
the good books of the United States, but because it is in our interests," Mr.
Karimov said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); RELIGION (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON
TERROR (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (86%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (70%);
TORTURE (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); EXPORT TRADE (68%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(67%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE FINANCING (66%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (65%);
ETHNICITY (55%); EXPORT IMPORT BANKING (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) ;TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: PURDUM, TODD S; KARIMOV, ISLAM (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UZBEKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PRISONERS' RIGHTS;
Group Reports Mistreatment Of Detainees

BYLINE:  By Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 374 words


Many of the 1,200 people detained since the attacks on the United States on
Sept. 11 have had their human rights violated, including their right to know why
they have been held, Amnesty International said yesterday.

The human rights group condemned the policy under which the United States
government has taken some 1,200 noncitizens into custody in a nationwide sweep
for possible suspects connected to the attacks.

Amnesty International said that the United States had violated the detainees'
rights to humane treatment, to have prompt access to a lawyer, to be able to
challenge the lawfulness of their detentions and to be presumed innocent until
proven otherwise.

The group said reports of cruel treatment had also been received. It cited
examples that included prolonged solitary confinement, heavy shackling of
detainees and lack of adequate exercise.

"The government's treatment of these individuals is simply unacceptable and is a
violation of international law," William Schulz, executive director of Amnesty
International, said in a statement.

The Justice Department said in its most recent statement, on Feb. 15, that 327
individuals had been detained on immigration violations or were being
investigated for "possible terrorist connections."

That figure did not include detainees being held under sealed indictments or as
material witnesses, numbers the Justice Department will not divulge, nor those
seeking asylum.

Attorney General John Ashcroft has refused to release the names of immigration
detainees, saying the information would be "too sensitive for public scrutiny."

He has also said the department's efforts to combat terrorism were carefully
planned to avoid infringing on constitutional rights while saving American
lives.

Amnesty International said it had gathered information during visits to two
jails, one in New York and another in New Jersey, and during interviews with
lawyers, detainees, relatives and former detainees.

The group called for a full inquiry into conditions at certain federal detention
centers and urged the authorities to release detailed information on all
detainees.

In addition, it urged that individuals not be deported to countries where they
would be at risk of serious human rights abuses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); REFUGEES (78%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
DEPORTATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAWYERS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
(73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (71%);
WITNESSES (70%); INDICTMENTS (67%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  IMMIGRATION
AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (82%)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Brazil Accuses a U.N. Human Rights Envoy of Bias

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: BRASILIA, Brazil, March 18


The Brazilian government accused a United Nations rights envoy of bias today
after he reportedly said that famine in Brazil amounted to genocide and that
thousands were being "assassinated" by malnutrition in a class war.

In a strongly worded statement in response to the comments by the envoy, Jean
Ziegler, which were reported in a leading daily, Brazil's Foreign Ministry said
it "profoundly regretted" their "nonconstructive and unbalanced tone."

Six weeks ago, Brazil became the first country in Latin America to extend an
open invitation to the United Nations to probe rights issues.

Mr. Ziegler, who arrived in Brazil last month to research famine among the
country's 170 million people, was reported today in the daily Folha de Sao Paulo
as saying: "There is a class war in Brazil. Some 40,000 people are assassinated
every year, statistics show. For the U.N., 15,000 is an indicator of war.

"The statistics indicate that a third of Brazilians suffer from malnutrition,"
he was quoted as saying. "In Brazil, where the soil is fertile and rich in the
tropical climate, famine is genocide. Who dies of hunger in Brazil is
assassinated."

Mr. Ziegler's office was not available to confirm the report.

Defending the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso's record on
human rights, the ministry said Mr. Ziegler's comments "put at risk the
objectivity of his mission."

The ministry said the standing invitation given to the United Nations to
investigate rights in Latin America's largest country "showed maximum openness
on the part of the country toward constructive dialogue with the human rights
mechanisms of the U.N."

Mr. Ziegler, who was designated by the United Nations high commissioner for
human rights, Mary Robinson, will report his findings to the organization later
this year.

In its statement, the ministry said Brazil had made significant progress on
human rights and social issues in recent years, with 97 percent of Brazilian
children attending school and all Brazilians benefiting from state health care.
The state-run Institute of Applied Economic Studies says 22 million Brazilians
live in extreme poverty, earning under $1 a day.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FAMINE (90%); MALNUTRITION (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); SOCIETAL ISSUES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (78%); STATISTICS (76%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (74%);
POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (73%); TRENDS (71%); CLIMATOLOGY (69%) FAMINE;  SOCIAL
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: ZIEGLER, JEAN (PROF)

CITY: BRASILIA, BRAZIL (58%); SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (58%)

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (99%); LATIN AMERICA (91%)

REGION: BRAZIL

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia General Denies Responsibility for East Timor Killings

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 4


The commander of the Indonesian Army when militias backed by the military
rampaged through East Timor nearly three years ago testified today that he was
not responsible for what he called the "incident."

Gen. Wiranto, the former commander, blamed the United Nations and the East
Timorese police for the deaths of more than 100 people in violence that followed
a referendum in which the people of East Timor voted overwhelmingly for
independence. An independent commission in Indonesia and a United Nations panel
concluded two years ago that the military, which opposed independence, had
supported the militias.

The general was appearing as a witness, not a defendant, at a trial on human
rights abuses by the military in the former Portuguese colony, which Indonesia
annexed in 1976.

After two years of hesitation over whether to hold a trial, the government
opened one last month. Senior military officers, including General Wiranto, who
were named by the commission two years ago, have not been charged.

Instead, five mid-level military officers, as well as police officers and
civilian leaders, are defendants.

The trial and General Wiranto's appearance have a direct bearing on Indonesia's
relations with the United States.

In the aftermath of Sept. 11, the Bush administration would like to renew ties
with the Indonesian military, which has historically played a vital role in
keeping the country together. The administration views Indonesia, the most
populous Muslim country, as an incubator of Islamic extremism and has urged the
government, so far unsuccessfully, to take a firmer stand against it.

The hands of the administration are tied by Congressional restrictions placed on
American aid to the military because of the human rights abuses in East Timor. A
law stipulates that before the United States can give assistance to the
Indonesian military, the government must bring to justice those responsible for
the killings.

General Wiranto, who was forced out of office in 2000, strolled into the
courtroom today wearing a loose fitting batik shirt and bearing a smile of
supreme confidence. The general, an amateur crooner, has released a CD of love
songs called "For You My Indonesia."

Scores of supporters, many wearing black garb and bandanas of an Islamic
militant group, clapped during his testimony. In the corridor outside the
courtroom, young men carried placards, among them: "Kofi Annan, impotent."

The general said that the violence erupted in East Timor after the referendum in
August 1999 because people were dissatisfied with the way the United Nations had
conducted the poll.

"The chaos happened because of dissatisfaction over the irregularities in the
vote," he said.

Neither the judges nor the prosecution asked him specifically about the
military's role in organizing and directing the militias.

General Wiranto said the East Timorese police were responsible for security
matters, not the army. The military, he asserted, was responsible for overall
national security.

Two years ago, a government human rights commission recommended the prosecution
of the general and 32 other military and civilian officials after concluding
that they were responsible for the killing of more than 100 people, with many
others wounded and raped.

The United Nations panel made a similar finding.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); REFERENDUMS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); ELECTIONS
(76%); WAR CRIMES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(71%); RELIGION (69%); POLLS & SURVEYS (63%); RECORD RELEASES (61%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;
REFERENDUMS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ELECTIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; WIRANTO (GEN)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spotlight on Central Asia Is Finding Repression, Too

BYLINE:  By EDMUND L. ANDREWS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: BISHKEK, Kyrgyzstan, April 10


The United States' newest strategic partners, the impoverished former Soviet
republics of Central Asia, are undergoing a surge of repression and corruption
just as they are attracting new world attention.

Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, president of Kazakhstan, imprisoned two of his leading
political rivals two weeks ago and has ignored objections about it from the
United States and the European Union. Last week, Kazakhstan's prime minister
admitted that more than $1 billion had been transferred to off-shore bank
accounts in Mr. Nazarbayev's name.

In neighboring Kyrgyzstan, which is now hosting a new American air base for
attacks on Afghanistan, the government has shut down two opposition newspapers.
Last month, the police killed seven demonstrators protesting the imprisonment of
a member of Parliament.

Uzbekistan, Central Asia's most populous country and the host of another
military base used by the United States has one of the worst records in the
region for human rights. As it has attempted to clamp down on people suspected
of sympathizing with radical Islamic groups, experts say, Uzbekistan has raised
major barriers with neighboring countries, disrupting the movement of both goods
and people across state borders.

Tajikistan, the region's poorest country, remains a central corridor for heroin
smuggling.

The authoritarian turn in these Eurasian allies is problematic for Washington,
which is relying on their support for the military operation in Afghanistan. The
Bush administration has criticized the human rights record of several of the
governments but has been careful not to undermine them.

All this provided a backdrop to gala meetings in Kazakhstan on Monday and
Tuesday of the World Economic Forum's Eurasian Summit, which attracted hundreds
of Western business executives and government officials.

At a packed cocktail party hosted by Mr. Nazarbayev on Monday night, top
government officials quietly insisted that the recent political arrests were a
mere legal problem and that the diverted money was a rainy-day fund in case of
abrupt shortfalls in government revenue.

Prime Minister Imangali Tasmagambetov insisted that $400 million from the secret
$1 billion fund had been drawn to cover government obligations in 1997, when the
country was badly shaken by Russia's financial downturn.

At least in public, many executives at the conference seemed unconcerned. "I
don't get involved in those issues," said one. "It has no impact on what we do
at all."

Kazakhstan, a vast country that has emerged as one of the world's biggest new
sources of oil, is drawing billions of dollars of investment from drilling and
pipeline companies that include ChevronTexaco and Exxon Mobil. For it and
neighboring countries in the region, the twin allures of tapping oil and helping
in the American-led war against terrorism have brought elevated geopolitical
significance.

"Since Sept. 11, a lot of our shareholders discerned the importance of this
region, and we ourselves are going to take advantage of that to wield a cohesive
policy," said James D. Wolfensohn, president of the World Bank, who is touring
five Central Asian countries this week.

The World Bank, which loaned $3.5 billion to central Asian countries over the
past 10 years, plans to loan at least $1.5 billion over the next 10 years. The
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development plans to invest $300 million
over the next several years. The United States, on its own, is providing
hundreds of millions of dollars in new assistance as well.

Even as the Eurasian conference was under way, several countries were cracking
down harder than usual on political opponents.

Here in Kazakhstan, two founders of a new opposition party called Democratic
Choice for Kazakhstan remained incarcerated throughout the conference.

One of the men, Mukhtar Ablyazov, is a former governor who is also a founder of
two opposition newspapers and an opposition television network called TAN. The
other, Galymzhan Zhakiyanov, is a former energy minister. He took refuge for
nearly a week in the French Embassy here and is now under house arrest.

Meanwhile, the government has shut down Mr. Ablyazov's newspapers, and an
unidentified person blacked out TAN's broadcast in Almaty by shooting a cable
that fed signals to its transmission tower.

Government leaders say both men have been charged with crimes: Mr. Ablyazov for
soliciting prostitutes and Mr. Zhakiyanov for misusing his office as energy
minister.

"It is nothing more than a criminal proceeding," said Karim Massimov,
Kazakhstan's deputy prime minister. "It will be decided in court."

In Kyrgyzstan, police officers killed 7 people and wounded at least 17 others in
mid-March at a protest rally in the village of Kerben. The country's leaders
said the police had fired only after the protesters became violent. But last
week, human rights groups revealed a police videotape of the incident that they
said showed the police blocked a peaceful march and then fired on unarmed
people.

"It was absolutely clear from the video that the protesters were unarmed," said
Natalia Ablova, director of the Bureau on Human Rights and Rule of Law, a group
based here.

Some longtime observers believe, however, that Kyrgyzstan's president, Askar
Akeyev, has been one of the region's more courageous reformers. He has ushered
in a host of market-opening measures that reduced the power of old monopolies
and encouraged competition.

But one senior Western diplomat said that political repression in Kyrgyzstan has
deep roots. "They have been doing it for a long time," he said. "It's not
better. It's not worse. It is manifesting itself in a different way."

Business executives and diplomats say that every country in Central Asia has a
serious problem with corruption. In Tajikistan, for example, drug trafficking
has become such an ingrained part of the economy that Western companies and
lending institutions like the World Bank have largely stopped their activities
there entirely.

The fear of infiltration by Muslim militants has added to the difficulties,
causing countries like Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to impose ever tougher
restrictions and higher barriers along their borders with neighboring countries.
The Uzbeks have put mines along some of their border areas with Kyrgyzstan,
which have killed many traders and shepherds.

"The new map of Central Asia is being defined by a process that is often
antagonistic and tainted by strong-arm politics, economic pressures, shadowy
back-room deals, nationalist sentiments and an environment of mutual mistrust,"
said the International Crisis Group, a nonprofit organization that monitors
tensions in the region.

It does not help that Uzbek leaders feel they are in constant rivalry with
Kazakhstan to be recognized as the leaders of Central Asia. Thus, while almost
everybody at the Eurasia meeting insisted on the need for "regional
cooperation," top Uzbek leaders did not attend.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); CORRUPTION (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS (78%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WAR ON TERROR
(75%); TERRORISM (75%); HIJACKING (75%); TALIBAN (75%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); TRENDS (74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (72%);
EXECUTIVES (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%); SMUGGLING (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (69%); SHAREHOLDERS (67%); ECONOMIC NEWS (60%);
PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (60%); ALLIANCES & PARTNERSHIPS (58%); RELIGION (52%);
HEROIN (51%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  KAZAKHSTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
KYRGYZSTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  US-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-UZBEKISTAN;
TAJIKISTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

COMPANY: CHEVRON CORP (51%); EXXON MOBIL CORP (51%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (57%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

TICKER: CVX (NYSE) (51%); XOM (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (51%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (51%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (51%); SIC1311 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (51%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (51%)

PERSON: ;ANDREWS, EDMUND L; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); BISHKEK, KYRGYZSTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); KAZAKHSTAN (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (94%); ASIA (94%);
KYRGYZSTAN (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); TAJIKISTAN (93%); EUROPE
(92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (88%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

REGION: KAZAKHSTAN;  AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  KYRGYZSTAN;
UZBEKISTAN;  TAJIKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

As Trials Lag, Death May Save Khmer Rouge From Justice

BYLINE:   By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 18


Surrounded by weeping relatives and chanting monks, Ke Pauk, a Khmer Rouge
leader blamed for 10,000 deaths, was buried this weekend by a small corps of
former comrades who saluted him as a national hero.

His death on Friday, at the age of 68, from natural causes, was also mourned
around Cambodia by the many people who hated him. They had lost one of the last
half dozen top Khmer Rouge leaders still alive and marked for possible
indictment and trial.

"This is an omen," said Youk Chhang, an archivist who has prepared tens of
thousands of documents for use as evidence in any trial.

Cambodians are coming to realize that no one may ever be brought to justice for
the deaths of more than a million people under Khmer Rouge rule from 1975 to
1979.

Just a few days before Mr. Ke Pauk's death, the United Nations, after five
frustrating years of talks with the Cambodian government, withdrew from
negotiations on the structure an international tribunal.

The announcement on Feb. 9, by the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan,
said the provisions of a new Cambodian law to set up a tribunal, and the
government's refusal to modify it, made it impossible to hold a trial that would
meet international standards of justice.

The United States, which is the strongest international supporter of a trial, is
making a last-ditch effort, along with some allies, to bring the United Nations
back to the negotiating table.

The impasse has revived a heated debate over whether a flawed trial is better
than no trial at all, and whether the United Nations should bend a little to
allow one to go forward.

"These are the last batch of monsters who haven't faced justice, after killing
millions of people," said Ambassador Kent Weideman of the United States, arguing
for a trial on Cambodia's terms. "This was one of the most dramatic instances of
atrocities in the 20th century."

He voiced exasperation with what he called the "purists" among human rights
advocates both here and abroad. It would be a tragedy, he said, to let the
killers go free because of what he called technical differences over the shape
of a tribunal.

"You've got to give it a chance," he said. "This is a historic issue. It's too
important to just cavalierly give up on." The fine points of procedure could
still be ironed out in a formal memorandum between the United Nations and the
government, he maintained.

Others say that the differences are not mere technicalities, and that a flawed
trial would do far more harm than good.

"Participating in trial procedures which are not fair would serve only to
undermine United Nations human rights standards, and sell the Cambodian people
short," said the London-based group Amnesty International in a statement.

The withdrawal of the United Nations may have been what Prime Minister Hun Sen
was seeking. His government released copies of its correspondence with the
United Nations to show that it had negotiated in earnest, but said it would
proceed with a trial on its own if necessary.

In that case, Mr. Hun Sen could keep a tight reign on any trial. An unrestricted
process that follows the evidence wherever it leads would present too many
uncertainties to fit his strongman formula of government, analysts said.

Some experts suggest that the government may have been playing for time during
the negotiations, waiting for the old and mostly ailing leaders to die.

"It's possible that there's a waiting game going on in the hope that a number of
the key suspects and witnesses will pass on and make the whole issue of a
tribunal irrelevant," said Mike Jendrzejczyk, a spokesman for Human Rights Watch
in Washington.

Although the special law setting up an international tribunal contains most of
the provisions demanded by the United Nations, it insists on giving the
Cambodian justice system precedence over any legal and procedural agreements it
might sign with the United Nations. This opens a host of loopholes that might be
manipulated by the Cambodians in the selection of defendants, the gathering of
evidence and the shape of any verdicts.

For Ambassador Weideman, however, the current law is good enough.  Fears of
political manipulation might not be borne out, he said, adding, "The proof of
the pudding is in the eating."

In the months before Mr. Ke Pauk died, he said he would be willing to stand
trial, but he warned that it would be a waste of time. "I, one member, was
standing in a very small part of the country," he said.

As the commander of the Khmer Rouge Northern Zone, he oversaw purges in which as
many as 10,000 people were killed, many of them after torture. Mr. Ke Pauk
contended that the person to blame was Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge
who gave the orders.

But Pol Pot is not available for trial. He died peacefully in his bed in April
1998.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 4, 2002



CORRECTION: An article on Feb. 19 about a dispute between the United Nations and
the Cambodian government over a proposed tribunal to try former Khmer Rouge
leaders misspelled the surname of the American ambassador in Phnom Penh, who
supported the Cambodian argument. He is Kent Wiedemann, not Weideman.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Children at a schoolhouse playing with the bones of people
killed by the Khmer Rouge, who are held responsible for more than a million
deaths.; A farmer in Cambodia holding a skull outside a room filed with the
skulls and bones of Khmer Rouge victims. A longstanding impasse between the
Cambodian government and the United Nations on proposed regulations for a
tribunal may prevent a trial of the surviving Khmer Rouge leaders. (Photographs
by Seth Mydans/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); WAR & CONFLICT (79%); INDICTMENTS
(76%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); LEGISLATION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%); CIVIL
WAR (66%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (65%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA;

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Vietnam: Report Cites Rights Abuses

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 85 words


In a 200-page report Human Rights Watch accused the government of a wide range
of abuses against the hill tribes of the Central Highlands.

A crackdown on unapproved Protestant worship has been at the center of many of
the abuses, which the report said included church burnings, torture and
arbitrary arrest. It also criticized Cambodia for closing its borders as
thousands of refugees have fled. A Vietnamese government spokesman said the
report was "a brazen distortion of the reality."   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TORTURE
(88%); REFUGEES (88%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (88%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(83%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  FREEDOM OF RELIGION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

COUNTRY: VIET NAM (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: VIETNAM

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chinese Court Hands Down Prison Sentences for 2 Leaders of a Banned Party

BYLINE:  By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, May 31


Two leaders of the outlawed China Democracy Party have been given long prison
sentences on subversion charges, a human rights monitor reported today.

Hu Mingjun and Wang Sen, both from Chengdu in Sichuan Province, were sentenced
Thursday to 11 years and 10 years, respectively, by a court in Sichuan, the Hong
Kong-based Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy said. Mr. Hu is 30
years old, said the center, which did not give Mr. Wang's age.

The men were arrested in spring 2001, months after they had contacted protesting
workers at a state-owned steel mill in Dazhou in Sichuan, and issued a statement
of support for the workers in the name of the democracy party. More than 1,000
steel workers had gathered in the street to demand unpaid wages.

The court found that the men, in the name of a "hostile organization," -- the
democracy party -- had incited workers to protest and wreck social stability,
the center said.

The two men were among hundreds of rights advocates around the country who tried
in early 1998 to register the democracy party as a legal opposition movement.
Later that year, the party was banned and dozens of members were arrested, with
several top organizers receiving lengthy prison terms.

The longest sentence was reserved for Xu Wenli, a dissident who had been in
prison from 1979 to 1993. He was arrested again in 1998 as he worked to promote
the new democracy party and sentenced to 13 years.

Mr. Xu is now 59 and is reportedly ill with chronic hepatitis. Today Mr. Xu's
wife, He Xintong, 54, fasted and called foreign reporters to demand better
medical care for her husband.

"He's very weak, and he still has a liver problem," Ms. He said, Reuters
reported. She said he remained optimistic about the prospects for democracy in
China.

"His heart is at ease, like still water," she said.

Mr. Xu is one of the most prominent dissidents still in Chinese prisons, and the
United States has repeatedly called for his release. When President Bush visited
China earlier this year, diplomats speculated that Mr. Xu might be freed as a
good-will gesture. But no prominent political prisoners were released.

"China doesn't need to play those cards anymore," Ms. He said, noting that China
had gained the entry it desired into the World Trade Organization and that it
had won the right to hold the 2008 Olympic Games. Since the terror attacks on
Sept. 11 last year, she added, global advocacy of human rights has weakened.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PRISONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); POLITICS (71%); IRON & STEEL
MILLS (70%); BACK PAY (70%); HEPATITIS (66%); TERRORISM (60%); OLYMPICS (50%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (50%); CHRONIC DISEASES (50%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (50%) ECKHOLM, ERIK; HU MINGJUN; WANG SEN; XINTONG; XU
WENLI

CITY: CHENGDU, SICHUAN, CHINA (91%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (94%); SICHUAN, CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); HONG KONG (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 3, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Russia: Human Rights Problems

BYLINE:  By Alison Smale (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 78 words


The country's human rights commissioner said that 10 years after the fall of
Communism Russians still feel "absolutely helpless" if pursued by the police,
prosecutors or courts.

The police still manipulate courts and beat people, Oleg Mironov told the
Interfax news agency. He also said the practice of cutting off heat and
electricity in winter in regions where officials have not paid utility bills was
"a flagrant violation of human rights."   Alison Smale (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: SMALE, ALISON; MIRONOV, OLEG (COMR)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%)

REGION: RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel, in Reprisal for Killings, Razes Gaza Refugee Homes

BYLINE:  By JOEL GREENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Jan. 10


The Israeli Army retaliated today for the killing of four Israeli soldiers
Wednesday by Palestinian militants by bulldozing dozens of houses in a refugee
camp in the Gaza Strip, leaving hundreds of homeless people searching for their
belongings in a five-acre sea of rubble.

The action in Rafah, near the border with Egypt, was the largest Israeli
demolition operation in more than 15 months of violent conflict with the
Palestinians. Since the start of that uprising, the army has destroyed scores of
homes and large swaths of agricultural land, actions that have drawn strong
condemnations from human rights groups. Today, the United States condemned the
latest demolition, which the army said was intended to deny cover to Palestinian
gunmen.

"We have been very clear about the need for Palestinian action against violence
and terror," a State Department official said in Washington. "At the same time,
we do not believe that demolitions of Palestinian property and homes can
contribute to the restoration of calm and an end to violence."

Agence France-Presse reported early on Friday that 12 Israeli tanks and
bulldozers had moved into the Palestinian Authority's airport near Rafah and had
begun tearing up the runway. A spokesman for the Israeli Army confirmed that
troops and equipment were in the area, but would not give any details about
their mission.

An Israeli Army statement said troops had carried out "engineering activity" on
Friday, razing only 10 to 13 uninhabited homes that had "served as cover for
gunmen firing on army forces operating in the area." The army said the
structures were also suspected to have covered tunnels serving for the smuggling
of weapons from Egypt.

But an official from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency said that 54
houses were destroyed during today's demolition and that more than 500 people
had been left without shelter. The Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza
put the numbers higher: 58 houses destroyed and 700 people left homeless.

Throughout a day of pouring rain, men, women and children picked through the
wreckage of the refugee camp where their homes -- cinder-block dwellings with
corrugated roofs -- had once stood. They tried to salvage blankets, clothing and
identity cards from the rubble. Smashed furniture and crushed appliances poked
out from the ruins, along with a child's bed and a bicycle.

Residents said they had grabbed their children and run when they were awakened
about 1:30 a.m. by the roar of about a dozen Israeli tanks and bulldozers.

Samir Ghneim, 35, said he had fled with his four children minutes before a
bulldozer smashed into his family's house. The children were shaking and
frightened, he said.

His 8-year-old daughter, Maryam, said: "I heard the bulldozers and tanks, and we
ran away into the night. My father held me, and we were crying."

Tamam Ghneim, 52, a member of the same extended family, said she and her six
children had managed to escape through a hole in a wall shared with a neighbor's
house before her dwelling was destroyed.

"This is revenge," Mr. Ghneim said. "We didn't do anything. The attack happened
in Israel, so why us? Why do our children have to go through this?"

Today's demolitions, after the killing of the soldiers by attackers from the
militant group Hamas, raised the possibility of a renewed slide into violence
after weeks of relative calm that followed a call on Dec. 16 by the Palestinian
leaderYasir Arafat for a halt to armed attacks on Israelis.

The militant Islamic Jihad group announced today that it was no longer bound by
understandings with the Palestinian Authority to halt attacks in Israel.

The area where today's demolitions took place had been the site of frequent
fighting between Palestinian gunmen and Israeli soldiers posted along the
border, and the army said its forces were met with gunfire and grenades during
today's demolition. But refugees living in the area said it has been calm since
Mr. Arafat's cease-fire call last month.

Wednesday's attack on the soldiers occurred at an army post in southern Israel
several miles away, on the border with the Gaza Strip. The Hamas gunmen had come
from Rafah, but not from the same refugee camp the Israelis entered today.

Since the start of the Palestinian uprising, the Israeli Army has destroyed
scores of houses in Rafah during fighting with Palestinian gunmen along the
Egyptian border.

Palestinians and Israeli human rights advocates have said that the demolitions
are part of a deliberate campaign to clear a swath of territory along the
frontier as collective punishment for Palestinian attacks.

The army has said the demolitions, which have also been carried out in
neighborhoods bordering Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip, removed buildings
from which gunmen have attacked Israeli troops.

In saying today that it was no longer bound to stop its attacks, the Islamic
Jihad cited what it called Israel's continuing war against the Palestinians and
the Palestinian Authority's recent arrests of militants.

Unlike Hamas, which announced a suspension of suicide and mortar attacks after
Mr. Arafat's cease-fire appeal, Islamic Jihad did not declare a halt to attacks
in Israel. But its attacks also stopped.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Residents searched for their belongings in the Rafah refugee
camp yesterday. Palestinians said the Israeli Army had bulldozed dozens of
homes.; The United Nations refugee agency supplied tents in Rafah yesterday for
residents left homeless by a bulldozing operation by the Israeli Army.
(Photographs by Fayez Nureldine/Agence France-Presse) Map of Israel highlighting
Rafah: Israel said its action in Rafah was intended to deny cover to gunmen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (94%); ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); REFUGEES (90%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(79%); TERRORISM (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); HAMAS (78%); SMUGGLING (77%);
HOMELESSNESS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(68%) PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (92%); HAMAS (59%);
HEZBOLLAH (59%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (59%) HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST
MOVEMENT); ISLAMIC JIHAD; PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (55%)

PERSON: GREENBERG, JOEL; ARAFAT, YASIR

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(93%); EGYPT (93%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP;  RAFAH (GAZA)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2002 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

At the Rebel-Held Zone in Colombia, Alarm Is Mounting as a Showdown Threatens

BYLINE:   By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: PUERTO RICO, Colombia, Jan. 11


In this honky-tonk town just outside rebel-held territory, no one seems to know
who shot Mayor John Lozano six times in the back on Tuesday, leaving him dead in
the street.

No one knows who gunned down his predecessor, Mayor Jose Rojas, in August. No
one seems to know anything about two other town officials assassinated recently,
or about many other slayings in the town.

"Here no one sees anything," said Pedro Pena, the security guard at the town
hall, as he rested with a shotgun across his lap. "People die and no one knows.
We are blind to all of this."

This town, like several others on the outskirts of the rebel zone in southern
Colombia, has become hotly contested in recent months with the arrival of
privately financed paramilitary forces that are itching to enter the rebel
dominion.

President Andres Pastrana declared an end to peace talks with the rebels on
Wednesday and is now weighing whether to drive the guerrillas out of the huge
zone, which he ceded to them in November 1998 as the talks got under way.

Unless a last-minute deal is reached to save the talks, the rebels may be gone
from the area in days. Many residents and human rights officials fear that
paramilitary gunmen will move in to replace the rebels, exacting revenge on a
populace they regard as sympathizers of the guerrillas.

"If I lived in the zone, I would get out because the paramilitaries will adopt
scorched-earth tactics," said Adam Isacson, who follows Colombia's war for the
Center for International Policy in Washington. "They are going to slit throats.
They are going to see anybody who stayed as a guerrilla."

The United Nations envoy for Colombia, James LeMoyne, met with the rebels today
in a last-ditch effort to break the stalemate.

On Thursday night Mr. Pastrana gave Mr. LeMoyne until 9:30 p.m. Saturday to find
a way to restart talks. If the envoy's efforts fail, Mr. Pastrana said, the
government "will assume that this guerrilla group is not continuing with the
talks." The rebels will then be given until Monday night to vacate the zone.

For talks to resume, the guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or FARC, are demanding that the government end air patrols and cancel
restrictions on access it imposed on the 16,000-square-mile safe zone. The
government has refused, saying the rebels must carry out an October accord in
which both sides agreed to discuss the implementation of a cease-fire.

The crisis has resulted in the worst impasse in three years of talks. The
Colombian government has positioned thousands of troops outside the zone in
preparation for a possible takeover.

Although Mr. Pastrana has pledged that government forces will protect the lives
of civilians in the zone, y foreign diplomats and human rights groups believe
that some army units collaborate with paramilitary fighters. As a result,
residents of the zone fear that an army takeover there will bring an invasion of
the right-wing militiamen.

Already, towns like Puerto Rico that are just outside the zone have seen
paramilitaries move in, leading to firefights with rebels who stray outside
their zone. In several cases, public officials have been killed, though it
remains unclear in most cases who was responsible.

Mr. Lozano is the fifth mayor to be killed in towns just outside the rebel zone
since July, according to the Colombian Confederation of Municipalities, which
represents mayors nationwide.

Amid the bordellos, cantinas and farm tools stores here, the paramilitaries have
started to make their presence felt, according to a human rights official in the
zone.

Doctors at a local hospital have received fliers from paramilitaries accusing
them of having treated wounded rebels, and the owner of a store that sells
beans, rice and other staples in bulk has been accused of providing provisions
to rebels. The owner has decided to flee the country, the rights official said.

Paramilitaries are also believed to be quietly collecting information about
possible targets, the official said. "People are afraid of what they say because
they do not know whom they are talking to," he said.

Some people in the zone have opted to leave before the army enters. Colombian
television has filmed residents leaving in heavily loaded taxi while others have
fled on the aging buses and battered jeeps that serve as public transportation.

At one public transportation cooperative, the ticket seller, Melky Cuellar, 30,
said the group had doubled its trips out of the zone on Thursday, the day after
Mr. Pastrana announced the end of talks. Today, the number of trips was back to
normal since people are calmer on hearing of Mr. LeMoyne's negotiating efforts.

Carmen Rosa, 36, a nurse, said she and her husband were up until 2 a.m. today
trying to decide whether to send their four children out of the zone. "We could
not sleep, just thinking about this," she said. "And then we decided we could
not send them out. Our lives are here. We work here. Everything is here for us."

The mayor of San Vicente del Caguan, the largest town in the zone, said the
government should send officials to provide a semblance of order if the FARC is
driven away. He also called on international human rights groups to provide a
presence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 16, 2002



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about fears of
violence in and near a rebel-held zone in Colombia after the collapse of peace
talks misidentified a town where anti-rebel groups accused doctors and a store
owner of having helped the rebels and where a nurse spoke of her fears. It was
San Vicente del Caguan, the largest town in the zone, not Puerto Rico, a town
just outside the zone.

GRAPHIC: Photo: James LeMoyne, right, the United Nations envoy, with two rebel
commanders on his arrival in the rebel-held zone in Colombia yesterday.
(Associated Press) Map of Columbia highlighting Puerto Rico: The mayor and other
officials have been assassinated in Puerto Rico.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (94%); CITIES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (88%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
ASSASSINATION (78%); PEACE PROCESS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%); ARMED FORCES (60%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (51%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%)

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); PUERTO RICO (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  PUERTO RICO (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Captives And the Law

BYLINE:  By Anthony Lewis;  Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The Bush administration has done well militarily in Afghanistan, but it has
badly fumbled the question of justice for its captives. It has failed to
understand the power of the human rights ideal in today's world -- and America's
stake in living up to that ideal.

The failure has brought awkward international political consequences for the
United States. The imprisonment of Taliban and Qaeda captives at Guantanamo, and
their treatment there, have been questioned by some of America's closest allies.

The European Union's external affairs commissioner, Chris Patten, said the
perception that the captives are being mistreated -- or may be sentenced to
death -- "would be a way of losing international support and losing the moral
high ground." The two leading British newspaper columnists, Hugo Young of The
Guardian and Philip Stephens of The Financial Times, wrote critical columns.

All this has put the Bush administration on the defensive. Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld devoted an entire press briefing to defending the Guantanamo
camp against what he called baseless critical "hyperbole."

Most Americans probably reject the foreign criticism. What accounts for the
stark difference on this issue between us and people abroad who are usually
staunchly pro-American?

America was the target of the Sept. 11 attacks, and Americans may understandably
have stronger feelings against terrorists now. Britain, Spain and other European
nations that have had much experience with terrorism do not feel so freshly
vulnerable.

Then there is the death penalty. All European countries have given it up, and
leaders from politicians to the pope deplore what they regard as the savage
survival of executions here.

Underneath, the prisoner issue touches a profound resentment abroad at what many
see as an American tendency to lecture others about international standards
while refusing to comply with those it urges.

The human rights movement in the world got its main start in the United States.
Thirty years ago Congress began imposing sanctions on countries that violate
human rights. The United States pushed the United Nations to create the
International War Crimes Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Yet the Bush
administration is trying to sabotage establishment of an international court for
war crimes that all our allies support.

The administration has also troubled some friendly governments by withdrawing
from the Kyoto treaty on global warming and the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.
Charles Grant, director of the Center for European Reform, a London research
group, said the Guantanamo issue touches "European concern that America doesn't
believe . . . in submitting itself to rules, organizations or norms that limit
its freedom of action."

European unease about the legal side of the American war on terrorism goes back
before Guantanamo to President Bush's order calling for military tribunals to
try non-American citizens involved in terrorism. Objections in Europe made it
doubtful that we could win extradition orders for suspects arrested there.

The tribunal order has turned out to be an embarrassment for the administration.
It has used civilian courts for the first terrorist prosecutions, undermining
its argument that they could not be trusted for such cases.

In Guantanamo, too, the administration has created unnecessary complications. It
has tried to justify its treatment of prisoners by arguing that they are not war
prisoners but "unlawful combatants." "These people are committed terrorists,"
Mr. Rumsfeld said. But whether they are is the very question that a legal
process must decide. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 say they must be considered
prisoners of war unless a "competent tribunal" finds otherwise.

The handling of the prisoners in Camp X-Ray has given the United States a
self-inflicted wound. Fencing around with legalistic reasons to deny them rights
due prisoners of war convinces hardly anyone. The administration should have
learned by now that the world may be with us in fighting terrorism, but it wants
to hold us to our professed ideals.

"Whatever the legal rights and wrongs," Philip Stephens of The Financial Times
wrote, "the politics of Camp X-Ray are terrible. . . . As it confronts the
authors of Sept. 11, the United States must demonstrate at every turn that it is
on the side of civilized values."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); EXTRADITION
(88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); SENTENCING (76%); MILITARY
COURTS (76%); POLITICS (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); HIJACKING (76%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); MILITARY BASES (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (70%); WRITERS (68%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (67%); NAVIES (67%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (67%); FINES & PENALTIES (64%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%); ARRESTS (61%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%); GLOBAL WARMING (50%) TERRORISM;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;
PENTAGON BUILDING

COMPANY: FINANCIAL TIMES GROUP (83%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (83%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (83%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); LEWIS, ANTHONY

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%); SPAIN
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  NEW YORK CITY;
WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

France Fines General, 83, for Memoir Justifying Algerian War

BYLINE:  By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 25


An 83-year-old former French general who wrote a book admitting that he had
tortured and summarily executed dozens of Algerians during France's brutal
colonial war was convicted today "of trying to justify war" and fined $6,500.

The general, Paul Aussaresses, was pursued not for the acts themselves, which
have long been covered by an amnesty, but for telling his unapologetic version
of events.

The president and the senior editor of his publishing house were convicted of
the same crime and fined even more -- $13,000.

All said they would appeal the verdict and called it an assault on the freedom
of speech.

"This is the first ever act of censorship on a personal account of French
history," said the general's lawyer, Gilbert Collard. "One has to fight for the
right to tell history."

The general's book, published last year, caused an uproar here, where more and
more the mood leans toward atonement for the brutality of Algeria's war of
independence.

But in his account, the general, once one of the most secretive men in the
French security apparatus, showed little remorse. He described torture as
routine, widely condoned by his superiors and something he had been resigned to
when he had gone into service in Algeria.

He said that as many as 3,000 suspects had "disappeared" and that he himself had
executed 24 Algerians suspected of being guerrillas.

During the trial the prosecution singled out 19 passages from the general's
memoir, "Algeria Special Services 1955-1957," to justify the charge against him.

"The best way to make a terrorist talk when he refused to say what he knew was
to torture him," the general wrote in one such passage. In another he said of
the hundreds of executions he ordered: "I was indifferent. They had to be
killed; that's all there was to it."

The publication of the book caused an immediate outcry, with human rights
activists and even high-level government officials, like the European affairs
minister, Pierre Moscovici, calling for his prosecution. President Jacques
Chirac quickly stripped the general of his Legion d'Honneur, and he was also
barred from wearing his uniform.

But even when he took the stand in his trial in November, the frail general, who
wears a patch over one eye, described torture as useful and was unrepentant. "My
actions appeared justified," he told the court, adding that he would do the same
thing again today "if it were against Osama bin Laden."

The general told the court that he did not regret writing the book. "There is
the duty of keeping your mouth shut," he said at one point. "But that can
sometimes serve as a cover for cowardice. And then there is the duty of bearing
witness."

The general left court today smiling and waving at spectators, slowly moving one
step at a time down a long, winding staircase.

He made no comment. The $6,500 fine was far less than the maximum the law
allowed -- five years in prison and a fine of about $40,000.

But the human rights groups that brought the charges against him were delighted.
"This decision is a condemnation of all those who consider torture and summary
executions to be admissible under certain circumstances," the Human Rights
League said in a statement.

France has never apologized for its conduct during the war, although recent
surveys indicate that most French citizens would approve such a move. The war,
which lasted from 1954 to 1962, cost the lives of 30,000 French men and women
and at least a half million Algerians.

Even without issuing a formal apology, government officials have begun
acknowledging wrongdoing.

Last week, a measure to institute an annual memorial day received wide support
in Parliament, though the government has not decided whether to make it law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Aussaresses, center, a former French general, left court in
Paris after being convicted of trying to justify France's war in Algeria.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (90%); FINES & PENALTIES (90%); WRITERS (90%);
PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); VERDICTS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); TESTIMONY (86%); CENSORSHIP (78%); BOOK REVIEWS (78%); PUBLISHING
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); BOOK PUBLISHING
(78%); CRIMINAL FINES (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TERRORISM (68%)
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  TORTURE;  FINES (PENALTIES)

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%) AUSSARESSES, PAUL; DALEY,
SUZANNE

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (88%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (99%); FRANCE (96%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: ALGERIA;  FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia and Chechnya

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 152 words


To the Editor:

"Police in Chechnya Accuse Russia's Troops of Murder" (front page, Jan. 25)
shows that Russia's army is incapable of operating in Chechnya without enormous
human rights violations. Aside from killing at least 60,000 people since 1994
and twice leveling Grozny, Russian troops have engaged in widespread looting,
murder and torture.

Groups like Human Rights Watch have documented many abuses; Russia fobs off all
complaints with unfulfilled promises to investigate.

The culture of the Russian armed forces, as well as their attitude toward
Chechens, guarantees such abuses. They will not end until Russia leaves Chechnya
with autonomy and aid to rebuild. Otherwise, Chechnya will remain an ulcer that
bleeds the Russian Army, and a breeding ground for future conflict. After 200
years of trying to subdue the Chechens, hasn't Russia learned anything?

ROBERT J. GRAHAM
Catskill, N.Y., Jan. 26, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MURDER (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ARMIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (88%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: GRAHAM, ROBERT J

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DETAINEES;
Civil Rights Groups Allowed to Visit Two Jails in New Jersey

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER DREW

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 415 words


After repeated complaints from civil rights organizations, the Immigration and
Naturalization Service allowed several of the groups into two jails in New
Jersey this week to talk to foreigners detained as a result of investigations
into terrorism.

The I.N.S. has said it is holding 460 such people nationwide, with two of the
largest clusters in Hudson and Passaic Counties, in New Jersey. Many are Arabs
or Muslims who were picked up for questioning on immigration violations and are
awaiting deportation.

Jail officials have let personal lawyers, family members and friends visit some
of the detainees. But they had not previously given access to an array of civil
rights groups, some of which have filed suits to try to penetrate the secrecy
surrounding the detentions.

"Generally, we were pleased that the I.N.S. allowed us to visit," said Allyson
Collins, an associate director at Human Rights Watch in Washington.

Representatives of the groups, including the American Civil Liberties Union and
Amnesty International USA, visited the Hudson and Passaic County jails on
Wednesday. Immigration officials in Newark took journalists on a tour of the
Hudson County jail yesterday but would not allow interviews with any detainees.

The civil rights advocates described conditions at the Hudson County jail, a
six-story concrete block building, as reasonably good. They said they were shown
only small parts of the Passaic jail.

The Hudson County jail's director, Ralph Green, told reporters that the
detainees lived apart from inmates held on state criminal charges, though the
two groups attend prayer services and educational classes together.

The I.N.S. pays the jail $77 a day to house each of the detainees. About two
dozen of them lingered in a common area yesterday morning, watching television
and talking at tables with stainless-steel tops.

The jail employs a Muslim imam, or spiritual leader, and provides for daily
prayers. But some inmates have complained that they had trouble arranging a
group prayer service during Ramadan last year.

Many of the detainees in the New Jersey jails were originally stopped for minor
problems, like traffic violations, or because neighbors viewed them as
suspicious. In most cases, lawyers say, local F.B.I. agents quickly determined
that they were not involved in the Sept. 11 terror attacks. But F.B.I. officials
in Washington and overseas have been checking to make sure the detainees have no
other ties to terrorism before sending them home.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (94%); CIVIL RIGHTS (93%); IMMIGRATION
(93%); CORRECTIONS (91%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); PRISONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); LAWYERS (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); HIJACKING (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(77%); RELIGION (76%); RAMADAN (76%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); JOURNALISM
(72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); VEHICULAR OFFENSES
(71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (71%); WRITERS (67%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;
HUDSON COUNTY JAIL (NJ);  PASSAIC COUNTY JAIL (NJ);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%) IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE; AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION; AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: DREW, CHRISTOPHER

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (96%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW JERSEY

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CASUALTIES;
Uncertain Toll in the Fog of War: Civilian Deaths in Afghanistan

BYLINE:  This article was reported by Barry Bearak, Eric Schmitt and Craig S.
Smith and was written by Mr. Bearak.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2053 words


In an age of eavesdropping warplanes and satellite-guided bombs, the Pentagon
finds itself accused of sometimes relying on faulty intelligence in Afghanistan,
leading to an unnecessary toll of civilian deaths.

Scrutiny has grown since a predawn raid on Jan. 24, when U.S. commandos killed
at least 21 men presumed to be Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters. Officials in the
interim Afghan government have since joined grieving survivors in calling the
attack a tragic mistake, with some surmising the Americans were duped with false
information by a scheming local warlord.

A full-fledged investigation by the Pentagon's Central Command is under way,
which is unusual. Despite scores of credible reports about possibly misdirected
airstrikes and sizable civilian losses -- accounts from the United Nations, aid
agencies and journalists -- the military has made detailed inquiries into but a
few cases, like the bombing of Red Cross warehouses in Kabul twice within 10
days in October.

Most often, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and military spokesmen have
dismissed accusations of mistakes as enemy propaganda. They express confidence
in their targeting and regret any "collateral damage." They maintain that
extraordinary efforts have been taken to minimize civilian losses, something
that even most critics of the war effort would not dispute.

Nevertheless, certainly hundreds and perhaps thousands of innocent Afghans have
lost their lives during American attacks, a scattering of bodies extraordinarily
difficult to tabulate.

Many mournful Afghan families demand a reckoning.

"Tell me why our homes were destroyed and 55 people -- even little children --
are dead?" asked an angry young man named Gul Nabi, standing in December among
the 15 obliterated houses of a village named Madoo. "There were no Arabs here,"
he said, referring to Al Qaeda fighters. "There were only farmers who lived a
good life and prayed to Allah for peace."

The American military routinely reviews the effectiveness of its air raids, but
by its own admission it has faced insurmountable difficulty in tracking the toll
of civilian deaths. Mr. Rumsfeld has called the task "next to impossible,"
citing a lack of ground access to bombed targets.

That leaves much unknown. American weaponry, according to a statement Mr.
Rumsfeld made in October, is "probably 85-90 percent reliable."

Assessing the Damage

For the Afghanistan campaign, the Air Force created a special assessment team at
its air operations center in Riyadh to look at cases of possible civilian losses
and other unintended damage. Pilot reports, targeting data and aerial
reconnaissance photos are examined. The team has reviewed "several scores" of
reports and acknowledged a handful of bomb malfunctions that have led to
unintended casualties.

Mistakes caused by bad intelligence are harder to investigate. Credible reports
about such instances are referred to Central Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla.
Field investigations are necessary. Customarily, none have been assigned because
of the difficulty of getting troops to the sites.

The military ordered its investigation of the Jan. 24 commando raid only after
Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan's pro-American interim president, personally
complained to Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of the operation in Afghanistan.

"The military knows they'll get pummeled about issues relating to civilian
casualties, and they don't have a clue how to address it in a nonpropagandistic
way," said William H. Arkin, a former army intelligence analyst who is a
military adviser to Human Rights Watch. "The subject ties them in knots. It's an
irritant, and they avoid it."

For a war that has so riveted the world's attention, there are tremendous gaps
in knowledge about what has occurred. Some of this was deliberate. For months,
the Taliban excluded any foreign observers. Much of what they claimed about
civilian casualties has proven to be false.

But now, even with the Taliban gone, truth remains hard to come by. The sites of
past air raids are often in remote locations that are only reachable on unsafe
roads. Memory, as always, can be a chameleon. In the Muslim tradition, bodies
are buried soon after death. Some answers disappear in the turned earth.

"What we were challenged with each and every time, particularly in the early
weeks of the war, was that we did not have people on the ground to check," said
Rear Adm. Craig R. Quigley, senior spokesman for the Central Command.

Now, about 4,000 American troops are in Afghanistan. But most investigations
would be unreliable because of the amount of time that has passed, the admiral
said. Some of the damage has been repaired, many of the witnesses have moved
away.

"You just don't find much," he said.

If that is true, many mysteries will remain unresolved.

What happened at the village of Karam in Nangahar Province on Oct. 11? The
Taliban claimed 200 civilians were killed in an air raid. Some survivors put the
death count at 50, some 100, some higher. Reporters, visiting the scene days
later, found a hamlet of demolished mud huts and interviewed devastated family
members. Mr. Rumsfeld called the claims of a high death toll "ridiculous" and
said secondary explosions proved that a major arms dump had been struck.

What happened on Dec. 1 when bombs leveled several villages near Tora Bora, the
cave complex where Osama bin Laden was thought to be hiding? America's
anti-Taliban allies in the region said the bombs killed at least 115 civilians
and called for the raids to stop. Doctors Without Borders, the aid organization,
said they transported 72 dead, including women and children, and left many more
bodies behind. The Pentagon said its planes had hit only its intended targets.

What happened on Dec. 20 when American planes attacked a convoy in Paktia
Province, killing as many as 50 to 60 people on the road and in surrounding
villages? The Pentagon said that Taliban leaders were in the vehicles and that
the enemy fired first, using antiaircraft missiles. Survivors claimed the convoy
was bringing tribal elders to Kabul for the inauguration of the interim
president.

What happened on Dec. 29 in an air raid on Niazi Qala, a village in Paktia? Some
survivors said more than 100 civilians were killed. The Pentagon claimed it had
hit a Taliban ammunition depot, and journalists later found a huge cache of tank
rounds and mortar shells. Villagers, however, said anti-Taliban forces had
earlier taken control of the munitions and that many of the people killed,
including women and children, had congregated for a wedding.

"We've got about 300 incidents in our database, and I'd say about a third
involve some civilian casualties that would be worth taking a second look at,"
said Mr. Arkin, the Human Rights Watch adviser, who is also an adjunct professor
at the U.S. Air Force's School of Advanced Airpower Studies.

Human Rights Accounting

The rights group is making plans to send researchers to Afghanistan in March to
estimate the number of civilians killed and to investigate those attacks that
might have arisen from an illegitimate use of force.

America's use of cluster bombs will be studied. Each one sprays a huge area with
more than 200 soda-can-size armor-piercing bomblets. Some fail to detonate on
contact.

"The duds in effect become land mines that explode when touched," said Joost
Hiltermann, executive director of the Human Rights Watch arms division.

By some calculations, he said, the American bombing campaign may have left
36,000 unexploded canisters strewn across Afghanistan's rugged landscape, an
estimate that Admiral Quigley said was too high. He declined to provide a better
number.

Rights groups often take the lead in counting civilian deaths, and some experts
believe it would in the Pentagon's interest to provide its own numbers.

"It hasn't been a major focus of attention for the military, which may well be a
mistake.' said Eliot A. Cohen, a professor at Johns Hopkins University who
directed the Air Force's definitive study of the 1991 Persian Gulf war.
"Frequently, the human rights community will, in the absence of good numbers,
put out bad numbers."

A few researchers have already done some arithmetic, basing their calculations
on various news reports. Prof. Marc W. Herold, an economist at the University of
New Hampshire, added up at least 3,767 civilian casualties from Oct. 7 to Dec.
6. Carl Conetta, co-director of the Project on Defense Alternatives, used a more
stringent distillation of media accounts and concluded that a better guess would
be 1,000 to 1,300 deaths.

Whatever the total, the Pentagon would likely continue to insist that it is a
bare, if inevitable, minimum. "There is no question but from time to time,
innocent people, noncombatants, undoubtedly are killed and that is always
unfortunate," Mr. Rumsfeld has said repeatedly.

Military officials describe a rigorous process of picking targets. In
Afghanistan, the Pentagon has used multiple sources of intelligence, including
local Afghans, U-2 spy planes, reconnaissance satellites, unpiloted Predator
drones and RC-135 Rivet Joint planes that collect electronic transmissions.
Sources are crosschecked for accuracy.

Commanders then determine which aircraft to dispatch, the type and size of bomb,
and even the best approach route to minimize the threat to civilians. Lawyers
review the targets, also evaluating the risk to civilians.

"This has been the most accurate war ever fought in this nation's history,"
General Franks told the Senate Armed Services Committee last week.

About 60 percent of the 18,000 bombs, missiles and other ordnance used since the
air campaign began on Oct. 7 were precision-guided, up from fewer than 10
percent of munitions in the Persian Gulf war, military officials said.

A Raid Gone Awry

But word-of-mouth, rather than faulty high-tech gear, is the main suspect in the
seemingly misbegotten Jan. 24 raid. In the pitch of night, relying on surprise,
American soldiers and some commandos from an allied country burst into two
compounds near the village of Hazar Qadam in Oruzgan Province, more than 100
miles northeast of Kandahar. They were expecting to find secreted members of the
Al Qaeda or Taliban leadership. And they were hoping to catch them napping.

Nayaz Muhammad, 27, said he was asleep in a school when he was awakened by a
blast. Most of the 11 other men in the room died almost immediately in a barrage
of gunfire. He escaped by diving out a window. The attackers were bathing the
building in light. He managed to flee to a barn.

"I didn't know why they were shooting," Mr. Muhammad recalled days later.

Neither did Muhammad Yunas, a former district government chief, who had been
sleeping in the other compound. He saw the charging Americans.

"I told my men, 'Don't shoot, they're our people, they'll come to talk,' " he
said. "We were amazed. Why would the Americans come to attack us?"

In the morning light, 21 lay dead, villagers said. Nineteen had been pulled from
the school by neighbors. Two of the corpses had their hands bound behind their
backs with white tape, witnesses said. The others were burned beyond
recognition.

Hours later, back in Washington, a victory was being announced. The commandos
had destroyed a large cache of weapons, it was reported. Twenty-seven prisoners
were taken. They were being questioned. Some might be high-level Taliban.

But within two weeks, the raiders themselves were on the defensive. Mr. Rumsfeld
conceded that friends might well have been mistaken for foes. Villagers insisted
the weapons cache was merely a storehouse for confiscated arms. The 27 prisoners
were released to Afghan authorities.

Meanwhile, the military investigation began. Was the raid legitimate? If not,
where had the American military gotten the false intelligence? General Franks
said that at least some of the detainees were criminals, if not enemy warriors.

Many Afghan officials from the area say the Americans listened to lies and were
drawn into a feud between factions fighting to control the town. They wonder why
the military did not go to Oruzgan and ask around.

Ahmed Wali Karzai, the president's brother, is based in Kandahar. He said he had
tried to settle the dispute. Instead, people are needlessly dead.

"I hope that the Americans are brave enough to name the person who gave them
that information," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Afghanistan highlighting Oruzgan: American forces led a deadly
Jan. 24 commando raid on Oruzgan. (pg. 14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (78%); AIR FORCES
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR
& CONFLICT (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (76%); HIJACKING (76%);
ARMED FORCES (73%); FAMILY (69%); AIRLINES (60%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY; RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%);
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (66%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (87%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Trial of Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 153 words


To the Editor:

You captured the horror of the atrocities listed in the indictment of Slobodan
Milosevic and the historical importance of the trial ("Power Drove Milosevic to
Crime, Prosecutors Say as Trial Opens," front page, Feb. 13). But the trial in
The Hague represents a historical breakthrough on another level.

Mr. Milosevic faces charges not only for murder and "ethnic cleansing," but also
for command responsibility for rape and other sexual violence committed during
the conflicts in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo.

After centuries of invisibility, these brutal crimes against women have emerged
from the shadows and into the courtroom. That the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia's indictment of Mr. Milosevic includes rape
and sexual violence charges marks a victory for women everywhere.

MARTINA VANDENBERG
Europe Researcher
Human Rights Watch
Washington, Feb. 13, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST PERSONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (84%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); MURDER (58%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  SEX CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%) HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

PERSON: VANDENBERG, MARTINA; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO (92%); CROATIA (79%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (71%); EUROPE (70%); UNITED STATES (64%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             100 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 6, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing: Asia;
UZBEKISTAN: FIRST RIGHTS GROUP

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 89 words


For the first time, the authorities have registered an independent human rights
group.

The decision came Monday, as the State Department issued its annual report on
human rights, including a passage citing police abuse, the stifling of dissent
and other violations in Uzbekistan. President Islam Karimov is also to leave for
the United States next week. The Independent Human Rights Organization was
registered by the Justice Ministry after 10 years of pressure, allowing it to
organize events and own computers and other property.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); ANNUAL REPORTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (86%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (85%); RELIGION (54%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             108 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Turkey: Banned Legislator Appeals To Europe

BYLINE:  By Douglas Frantz (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 91 words


A legislator banned from politics for antisecular activities says she has filed
a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights asserting that she was
denied her right to free speech.

Nazli Ilicak was stripped of her seat in Parliament by the Constitutional Court
last year at the same time her Virtue Party was outlawed after being found
guilty of violating the secular policies of the state. Ms. Ilicak was accused of
supporting another legislator from the Islamic party who tried to wear a head
scarf in Parliament.   Douglas Frantz (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (86%); CHURCH & STATE (84%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(82%) ISLAM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  SUSPENSIONS,
DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS;  WOMEN;  CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%) EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS

PERSON: ILICAK, NAZLI; FRANTZ, DOUGLAS

COUNTRY: EUROPE (93%)

REGION: TURKEY

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             109 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Mideast, Days of Anguish

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 103 words


To the Editor:

The story of Palestinian human rights is one of consistent neglect and abuse.

Israel's place in that indignity is not slight, but it is not complete either
("Life Under Siege," by Allegra Pacheco, Op-Ed, April 10).

It is no less a violation of their human rights that, for example, their
government encourages suicide in Israel. Human rights are not a substitute for a
victimization mentality. They require, as Ms. Pacheco notes, rigorous and
focused application. In the current situation, no single party bears the brunt
of the blame for their violation.

YONI ROSENZWEIG
Cambridge, Mass., April 10, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); TERRORISM (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

PERSON: ROSENZWEIG, YONI

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (91%); MIDDLE EAST (90%);
UNITED STATES (73%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             115 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The War on What?

BYLINE:  By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


Spend a few days in Indonesia and you'll find many people asking you a question
you weren't prepared for: Is America's war on terrorism going to become a war
against democracy?

As Indonesians see it, for decades after World War II America sided with
dictators, like their own President Suharto, because of its war on Communism.
With the fall of the Berlin Wall, America began to press more vigorously for
democracy and human rights in countries like Indonesia, as the U.S. shifted from
containing Communism to enlarging the sphere of democratic states. Indonesians
were listening, and in 1998 they toppled Mr. Suharto and erected their first
electoral democracy.

Today Indonesians are still listening, and they're worried they're hearing
America shift again -- from a war for democracy to a war on terrorism, in which
the U.S. will judge which nations are with it or against it not by the integrity
of their elections or the justice of their courts, but by the vigor with which
their army and police combat Al Qaeda. For Indonesia, where democracy is still a
fragile flower, anything that encourages a comeback by the long-feared, but now
slightly defanged, army and police -- the tools of Mr. Suharto's long repression
-- is not good news.

"Indonesian democrats have always depended on America as a point of reference
that we could count on to support us," said the prominent Indonesian commentator
Wimar Witoelar. "If we see you waffling, whom do we turn to? It is like the sun
disappearing from the sky and everything starts to freeze here again."

There is a broad feeling among Indonesian elites that while some of their more
authoritarian neighbors, like Malaysia or Pakistan, have suddenly become the new
darlings of Washington as a result of the war on terrorism, Indonesia is being
orphaned because it is a messy, but real, democracy.

"We sometimes fear that America's democratization agenda also got blown up with
the World Trade Center," says the Indonesian writer Andreas Harsono. "Since
Sept. 11 there have been so many free riders on this American antiterrorism
campaign, countries that want to use it to suppress their media and press
freedom and turn back the clock. Indonesia, instead of being seen as a weak
democracy that needs support, gets looked at as a weak country that protects
terrorists, and Malaysia is seen as superior because it arrests more terrorists
than we do."

Indeed, many people here believe that retrograde elements in the army and police
have helped stir up recent sectarian clashes in Aceh and the Maluku islands to
spur Parliament to give the security services some of their old powers back.

Says Jusuf Wanandi, who heads a key strategic studies center here: "I just spoke
with some senior military people who said to me: 'Why doesn't the government
give up all this human rights stuff and leave the problem to us?' They said the
Americans should normalize relations again with the Indonesian Army 'and we'll
do the job for them.' That is not the right approach, because we do not trust
yet that the reforms of the military here have been adequate."

In fairness, the Bush team has kept aid for Indonesia at $130 million and made
it the official policy in all diplomatic contacts that Indonesia should continue
fighting its war for democracy, while contributing what it can to the war on
terrorism. (It's not clear if there are any Qaeda cells here.)

Nevertheless, some top Pentagon officials are definitely pushing to let the
Indonesian military make a comeback and to restore ties with the Indonesian
military that were suspended after the army ran amok in East Timor in 1999.
Indonesia is just beginning to try military officers involved in those killings.
If there is any hope of senior army officers being held accountable for East
Timor, it will certainly be lost if America signals that all it cares about now
is that the new antiterrorism laws being debated by the Indonesian Parliament
give the army anything it wants.

America needs to be aware of how its war on terrorism is read in other
countries, especially those in transition. Indonesia is the world's biggest
Muslim country. Its greatest contribution to us would be to show the Arab Muslim
states that it is possible to develop a successful Muslim democracy, with a
modern economy and a moderate religious outlook. Setting that example is a lot
more in America's long-term interest than arresting a few stray Qaeda fighters
in the jungles of Borneo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
ELECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); POLITICS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); WORLD WAR II
(72%) TERRORISM;  ELECTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INDONESIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (57%) FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (92%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (78%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); MALAYSIA (92%); GERMANY (92%);
PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Indonesia's Military;
Will It Help to Help This Army?

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


WHEN the United States recast the Central Asian states from dubious
dictatorships to necessary allies in the war on terrorism, Indonesia's generals
took heart. Having enjoyed American aid during the cold war and then lost it
when American policy stressed human rights in the 1990's, the top military
officers in the world's largest Muslim nation began to hope that the United
States would soon come calling again.

This week, in fact, Indonesia's defense minister, Matori Abdul Djalil, will be
in Washington to talk up the need for reviving military relations. But he will
be entering a tricky debate, in which Washington is unsure which way to step.

Should the United States back a military with a history that includes deep
corruption and atrocities committed in East Timor three years ago? Some in the
Bush administration argue that, whatever the history, the army is the only
institution that can keep Indonesia together during the messy transition to
democracy.

Or should the United States keep its distance, demanding that Indonesia's
military show accountability for its past? According to this argument, popular
in Congress and the State Department, only an army leadership that showed
contrition could be trusted to strengthen, not weaken, democratic gains.

The sudden interest in the Indonesian military stems, of course, from the war on
terrorism. Indonesians in general practice a moderate version of Islam, but a
growing number of extremist Islamic groups have emerged in the last few years.
Their activities, including the massacre of 14 Christians on the Molucca islands
10 days ago, appear to be tolerated by the military; some American officials
point out that the army leadership has not condemned the groups.

Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, who was ambassador here during the
Reagan administration, is likely to give Mr. Matori the most sympathetic
hearing. He has said the best way to promote Indonesia as a model moderate
Muslim country is for the United States to have influence over the military and
help it hold the center together.

"I think it is unfortunate that the U.S. does not today have
military-to-military relationships with Indonesia," Secretary of Defense Donald
H. Rumsfeld said last week.

Those who disagree say that the Indonesian military shows few signs of reform.
Dana Dillon, a retired American army officer and a policy analyst at the
Heritage Foundation, notes that the violence in East Timor three years ago
stopped only when the Indonesian Army left.

"They had 20 years to reform," said Mr. Dillon. "It didn't work with American
military assistance then. Why now?"

Others, like Robert B. Oakley, a former ambassador to Zaire and Pakistan, harbor
few illusions about how far American training and money can push Indonesia on
the path of reform. But Mr. Oakley takes the pragmatist's view that the United
States cannot afford to keep itself shut out of the military. "We can influence
them a bit," he said. "we can't revolutionize them."

The history of American involvement with the Indonesian military is one of
steady contraction after a high point in the 1970's and 80's.

During the cold war, Indonesian officers trained in the United States. When
Indonesian troops fired in 1991 on marchers in East Timor, which was then an
occupied territory of Indonesia, Congress placed human rights conditions on
training. In 1994, the Clinton administration stopped the sale of small arms,
and in 1998, Congress ended all American training of Indonesian soldiers after
it learned that a special forces organization whose units had fired on student
demonstrators had had American training.

More restrictions were added after army-backed militiamen rampaged through East
Timor in 1999 after the area voted for independence. Over 1,000 East Timorese
were killed, according to United Nations estimates. This week, after three years
of United Nations tutelage, East Timor will gain its formal independence.

The most recent restrictions, which basically outlaw contact with the Indonesian
army, are at the heart of the debate in Washington.

Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, has insisted that the military be
held accountable for atrocities in East Timor. The trial of four mid-level army
officers, under way now, is the most significant government effort to meet the
demand.

But American officials who oppose the renewal of military ties dismiss it as a
sham. Most of the defense lawyers also represent the family of Indonesia's
deposed dictator, Gen. Suharto. And generals sit in the spectators' gallery,
with their presence seen as an effort to intimidate the judges and prosecutors.

IN the very short term, the Pentagon may be satisfied with restoring only modest
ties. It plans to push Congress for $8 million to equip and train a
counterterrorism unit in the Indonesian police force and $8 million to train a
peacekeeping force. The members would be vetted by the F.B.I. to weed out
human-rights violators.

Gonawan Mohamad, an Indonesian weekly columnist and respected commentator,
believes that in the long run the United States should try to work with the
army, especially to train young officers. Now, he says, is not the moment to
start because the military still needs to acknowledge its mistakes in East
Timor.

But the army cannot be left to its own devices forever, he said. If that
happens, he predicts, the result will be a rotten army that would only suffocate
a nascent democracy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: During jungle survival training, Indonesian soldiers in an elite
unit drank blood from a snake to boost their immunity from bites. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (92%); TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WAR ON TERROR
(90%); COLD WAR (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); RELIGION (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); CORRUPTION (72%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (95%); TIMOR-LESTE (93%); CENTRAL ASIA
(92%); ASIA (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  EAST TIMOR

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             118 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guatemala Monitor

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 174 words


To the Editor:

Re "Police Doubts About Attack Cast Cloud on Rights Group" (new article, May 6):

For more than 40 years, Amnesty International has pursued the truth about human
rights abuses around the world.

In that spirit, we at Amnesty International U.S.A. responded to reported threats
against Barbara Bocek, a longtime specialist on Guatemala, by calling for a
thorough investigation by Guatemalan authorities.

Since last August, we have been in contact with local law enforcement
authorities involved in the Bocek case, most recently on the day after she
reported that she had been attacked near her home in Washington State. The
police never shared with us their doubts about the case.

The threats and violence against human rights defenders in Guatemala are
escalating, and the Bocek case appears consistent with a pattern of intimidation
common to the Guatemalan military and its associates. We will continue our
inquiry into the case.

CHARLES J. BROWN
Deputy Executive Dir., Action-
Mobilization, Amnesty Intl. U.S.A.
Washington, May 7, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(73%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: BROWN, CHARLES J; BOCEK, BARBARA

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking the Russia Summit a Step Further

BYLINE:  By Michael McFaul;  Michael McFaul is a Hoover Institution fellow and
professor of political science at Stanford University.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 906 words


President Bush is poised to have a terrific trip on his first visit to Russia.
He will sign an agreement with President Vladimir Putin that will eliminate
thousands of nuclear weapons. He and Mr. Putin will celebrate a new, closer
relationship between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Russia, paving
the way for an uneventful expansion of the alliance this fall. Mr. Bush will
proclaim Russia a market economy and urge Russian integration into the West.
Finally, Mr. Bush and Mr. Putin will make joint statements about their shared
commitment to the war on terrorism.

The summit will be only a partial success, however, if Bush fails to push for
greater democracy. Soviet, then Russian, democratization was indispensable in
preparing all the achievements of the upcoming summit. Autocratic Russia opposed
NATO, resisted arms control and suppressed markets. Democratic Russia has sought
to join the West and cooperate with the United States. A return to dictatorship
in Russia would quickly undermine all of these achievements.

Unfortunately, the trend in Russia is going away from democracy. Most worrying
has been Mr. Putin's disregard for human rights in Chechnya. Russia must defend
its borders and respond to terrorist acts, such as the attack, said to have been
by Islamic fundamentalists, in Dagestan earlier this month. The conduct of the
Russian armed forces and units of the Ministry of the Interior in Chechnya,
however, does not serve these purposes. Russian tactics in Chechnya have been
routinely inhumane, especially against civilians. These methods have inspired
more fanaticism within Chechnya and made Russia less secure.

Mr. Putin also has silenced many of his critics. He and his surrogates have gone
on the offensive against critical independent media outlets, seizing control of
NTV -- the country's only national opposition network -- and threatening others.
Through new laws and registration procedures, Mr. Putin's government has also
limited the freedoms and powers of independent trade unions, political parties
and nongovernmental organizations like the Glasnost Defense Foundation, the
Socio-Ecological Union and the Russo-Chechen Friendship Society. The state
security service has stepped up harassment of investigative journalists, human
rights activists, environmental leaders and academics.

Mr. Putin has even weakened alternative power centers within the state. His
so-called reform of the upper house of parliament, the Federation Council, has
gravely weakened this once important check on presidential power. Most
disturbing, as demonstrated by the recent election in Ingushetia, the Russian
federal government has begun to manipulate elections by disqualifying
front-running candidates deemed unacceptable. Even Mr. Putin's generally
positive legal reforms are tainted by the selective application of the law for
political purposes.

In isolation, any one of the anti-democratic trends might not be cause for
alarm. Taken as a whole, they cannot be ignored.

W hy should Mr. Bush or the American people care? First, the obvious: Democracy
is a good system of government and one desired by Russians. In nationwide polls
in 2000, 60 percent of respondents believed democracy was a very good or fairly
good system of government for Russia, while only 24 percent portrayed it as
fairly bad or very bad. Eighty-seven percent of Russians think it important to
elect the country's leaders. Most Russians are not willing to take the trade of
more order for less freedom. Nearly 80 percent believe the military should not
rule Russia.

Second, dictatorship is unlikely to help the economy. Russia needs a more
effective state to sustain markets. There is no reason to assume, however, that
an autocratic regime in Russia would be an effective state. Russia's last
autocratic regime -- the Soviet Union -- produced neither an efficient state nor
economic growth. In the post-communist world, the correlation between democracy
and economic growth is robust.

Third, an autocratic Russia will eventually threaten the United States. Such a
Russia would depend on the military, the intelligence services and military
industries to stay in power. Many in these sectors distrust the United States
and seek to reassert Russian influence in Georgia, Ukraine and Central Asia; to
sell nuclear technologies to Iran; and to increase weapon sales to Iraq. The
negative impact of an antidemocratic Russia on American security interests would
be direct.

On his visit to Moscow, Mr. Bush must speak the truth about Russia's democratic
backsliding. He needs particularly to speak about Chechnya, acknowledging that
terrorists there must be stopped but emphasizing that not all Chechens are
terrorists and the only road to peace and security in the Caucasus is political,
not military. Second, if Mr. Bush truly values his relationship with Mr. Putin,
then he should speak candidly about the democratic criteria for genuine
partnership between our nations. Third, he must make a special effort to meet
with those in Russia fighting for democracy and human rights.

Mr. Putin is not a dictator, and he wants Russia to become a thriving capitalist
economy fully integrated into the West. Rhetorically, he also has championed
democracy. This is why Mr. Bush's message in Moscow could have a significant
impact. By emphasizing democratization, he could impress on Mr. Putin the
urgency of moving in the right direction now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); POLITICS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (87%);
ELECTIONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (78%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%);
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); CIVIL WAR (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(73%); LEGISLATION (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (71%);
JOURNALISM (68%); FUNDAMENTALISM (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); RELIGION (66%);
RENEWABLE ENERGY (60%); LABOR UNIONS (50%); POLLS & SURVEYS (50%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  TELEVISION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND
EXPRESSION;  ORGANIZED LABOR;  FREEDOM OF THE PRESS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (58%) NTV (RUSSIAN TELEVISION)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (90%) MCFAUL, MICHAEL; BUSH, GEORGE
W (PRES); PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRES)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Zimbabwe: Human Rights Investigation

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 57 words


A team from the African Commission on Human and People's Rights -- part of the
Organization for African Unity -- arrived to investigate widespread assertions
of rights abuses. President Robert Mugabe, who was re-elected in March in a vote
marred by violence and allegations of fraud, has been accused of trying to
stifle the opposition.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION FOR AFRICAN UNITY; AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
AND PEOPLE'S RIGHTS

PERSON: MUGABE, ROBERT

COUNTRY: AFRICA (93%); ZIMBABWE (93%)

REGION: ZIMBABWE

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             135 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: BALKAN TRAIL;
U.S. Labels an Arab Captive A Planner of Qaeda Attacks

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


A terrorism suspect handed over to Americans last week by Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been identified as a European lieutenant in Al Qaeda who was ordered to
carry out attacks on American targets in the Balkans after Sept. 11, law
enforcement and military officials said today.

American investigators said intercepted telephone calls and other evidence
showed that the suspect, Bensayah Belkacem, who was believed to be a native of
Algeria or Yemen with Bosnian citizenship, had numerous conversations on
cellular telephones last fall with leaders of Al Qaeda in Afghanistan.

Among them, the officials said, was Abu Zubaydah, the operations chief for Al
Qaeda, who was believed to be one of a handful of men entrusted with running the
terrorism network in the event of Osama bin Laden's death or capture.

American officials said Mr. Belkacem, 41, and five other suspects -- all of them
from Algeria, and all but one naturalized citizens of Bosnia -- were handed over
Friday to American soldiers in Bosnia and flown to the American naval base in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The Bosnian government, which arrested the six men in October, agreed to turn
them over after Bosnia's supreme court ruled Thursday that not enough evidence
existed to hold them there.

The handover has been denounced as illegal by human rights groups and by United
Nations officials. Bosnian officials have defended their decision, noting that
the five suspects with Bosnian passports were stripped of their citizenship
before they were turned over to the United States and were not entitled to the
due-process rights of citizens.

Asked at a Pentagon news conference today about the legality of the handover,
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said he had no immediate comment, though he
defended the treatment of the 158 Qaeda and Taliban captives at Guantanamo.

The United States has long been alarmed by the presence in Bosnia of hundreds of
Arab-born Muslim fundamentalists who first traveled there in the 1990's to help
defend the nation's predominantly Muslim population during the civil war. Many
went there at the direction of Mr. bin Laden, who apparently saw the opportunity
for a holy war defending Muslims against from Serbian and Croatian nationalists.

About 3,100 American soldiers are now assigned to Bosnia as part of a NATO-led
peacekeeping force, and American officials fear that those troops are a prime
target for the Qaeda cells that are believed to exist there and elsewhere in the
Balkans.

The officials said F.B.I. and military investigators were particularly eager to
question Mr. Belkacem about the personal background and possible hiding places
of Mr. Zubaydah, a Saudi-born Palestinian in his early 30's who is believed to
have coordinated the terrorist attacks ordered by Mr. bin Laden.

Mr. Zubaydah has been linked to the bombing of the destroyer Cole in October
2000 in Yemen, in which 17 Americans were killed. Nicknamed "the Mailman" by
terrorist colleagues because of his role in relaying orders from Mr. bin Laden
and making sure they were carried out, Mr. Zubaydah was singled out by President
Bush last month when the president listed leaders of Al Qaeda being hunted by
the United States.

American officials said the six men were arrested in Bosnia on the basis of
telephone calls intercepted by American agencies showing that they were plotting
terattacks in Bosnia and elsewhere.

Among the targets, the officials said, were the United States Embassy in
Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, and the large American military encampment
outside Tuzla known as Eagle Base. At the time of their arrest, both the
American and British embassies in Sarajevo were closed for fear that they were
targets of imminent attacks.

An American military official said Mr. Belkacem had gone to Bosnia in the 1990's
to fight in the civil war. He obtained Bosnian citizenship after the war and
married a Bosnian woman, settling in Zenica, home to large numbers of former
foreign Muslim fighters. He worked for an Islamic relief organization.

The officials said that shortly after Sept. 11, American intelligence agencies,
working closely with the government of neighboring Croatia, listened in as Mr.
Belkacem and others discussed plans for attacks. The Bosnian police were alerted
and quickly arrested Mr. Belkacem and the others.

An American official said a search of Mr. Belkacem's home turned up a copy of
Mr. Zubaydah's cellphone number in Afghanistan, where he was then believed to be
hiding with Mr. bin Laden, and several blank passports.

"He was apparently on the phone constantly to Afghanistan, with Zubaydah and
others," this official said. "There were dozens of calls to Afghanistan."

The transfer of Mr. Belkacem and the other prisoners to American custody
prompted street protests in Sarajavo last week by hundreds of supporters of the
six captives, including several family members who tried to block American
military vehicles transporting the men from jail.

A senior United Nations official in Sarajevo said today that the United States
and Bosnia had both acted illegally.

"The rule of law was clearly circumvented in this process," the official,
Madeleine Rees, the representative in Bosnia of the United Nations high
commissioner for human rights, said at a news conference. There was "no legal
basis" for the Bosnian government's decision to hand over the men, she said,
calling it an "extrajudicial removal from sovereign territory."

Asked whether the United States had pressured the Bosnian government to hand
over the six, she said, "The simple answer is, Yes."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MOBILE & CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); TALIBAN (78%); DUE PROCESS (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); NATURALIZATION (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); NAVIES (77%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); CITIZENSHIP (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BOMBINGS
(73%); WIRETAPPING (72%); MISSING PERSONS (72%); LITIGATION (72%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (72%); DENATURALIZATION (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%); OSAMA BIN
LADEN'S DEATH (69%); IMMIGRATION (68%); FUNDAMENTALISM (68%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (67%); RELIGION (67%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (67%); SUPREME COURTS
(66%) TERRORISM;  CELLULAR TELEPHONES;  BOSNIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%); UNITED NATIONS (54%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) BELKACEM, BENSAYAH; SHENON, PHILIP

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); YEMEN (94%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (87%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); CROATIA (79%); SAUDI
ARABIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  YEMEN;  ALGERIA;  NEW YORK CITY;
WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             138 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Sri Lanka: Compensation In Police Rape

BYLINE:  By Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 70 words


The Supreme Court granted $1,600 in compensation to an ethnic Tamil woman who
was raped while in police custody last year.

The human rights group Amnesty International said the award was "a landmark
judgment" that confirmed that rape in custody constitutes torture. It urged the
authorities to prosecute the three soldiers and three police officers accused of
the rape; they are now free on bail.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VERDICTS (88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); BAIL (86%); MISCONDUCT (85%); ETHNICITY (85%) SEX
CRIMES;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TAMILS (ETHNIC
GROUP);  POLICE;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  TORTURE

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: DUGGER, CELIA W

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: SRI LANKA

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             142 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Guatemala: Job Bias Report

BYLINE:  By David Gonzalez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 92 words


Labor laws have failed to protect women working in clothing factories who
encounter "persistent" discrimination and abuse, including forced overtime and
pregnancy tests, according to a report by Human Rights Watch.

It says that the factories, some subcontractors for major American retailers,
discriminate by refusing to hire those who are pregnant, or by denying health
care to those who become pregnant. Although most major American retailers spell
out worker rights, the report says some factories continue to flout them.
David Gonzalez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN WORKERS (90%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
(90%); SUBCONTRACTING (89%); RETAILERS (88%); APPAREL MFG (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(87%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (86%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             144 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge on Trial

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

Re "Cambodia Won't Easily Find Justice on Its Own," by Youk Chhang (Op-Ed, Feb.
14):

The United Nations' decision not to participate in Cambodia's tribunal for the
Khmer Rouge was sad but courageous.

Cambodian leaders balked over every attempt to secure minimum guarantees of
judicial independence and the integrity of the court, given that political
factors routinely dictate the outcome of sensitive trials.

While it is deplorable that the worst of the Khmer Rouge leaders will likely get
off scot-free, it would have been worse had the United Nations lent its name to
show trials. Cambodia has missed a key opportunity to stand as an example of
justice for the perpetrators of crimes against humanity; the United Nations has
stood its ground with integrity.

DINAH POKEMPNER
General Counsel
Human Rights Watch
New York, Feb. 14, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); LAWYERS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) UNITED NATIONS;
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: POKEMPNER, DINAH

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (96%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             145 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: ASIAN ARENA;
Finding a Tepid Ally in the War on Terror, U.S. Presses Indonesia to Arrest 2
Clerics

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER and JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Feb. 17


The Bush administration, frustrated that the Indonesian government has failed to
crack down against the threat of terrorism, has urged officials here to begin a
search for an Indonesian cleric believed to be the point man for Al Qaeda in
Southeast Asia, American officials said.

The officials contrast the help in fighting terrorism that they are receiving
from Singapore, Malaysia and the Philippines with what they characterize as a
lack of energetic cooperation from Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim
country. The C.I.A. said last week that Indonesia was a likely place for Al
Qaeda, Osama bin Laden's organization, to base further operations.

The government has declined to look seriously for the cleric, Riudan Isamuddin,
better known as Hambali, even though United States officials say he was the
likely operational director for a plot to blow up the American Embassy in
Singapore.  The Indonesians have also said they do not have enough evidence to
arrest another cleric, Abu Bakar Baasyir, who an American official said this
week has been a conduit of money to militant Islamic organizations.

The deputy chief of staff of the Indonesian Army, Gen. Kiki Siyahnakri, said in
an interview here last week that the authorities were looking for Mr. Hambali
and were committed to fighting terrorism.

The American dissatisfaction comes during a vigorous debate within the Bush
administration over military aid to Indonesia, which was curtailed by Congress
because of human rights violations by the Indonesian military. To get around the
restrictions, the Pentagon wants to spend nearly all of the $21 million recently
allocated in a defense bill for worldwide counterterrorism on Indonesia,
officials said.

General Siyahnakri said the Indonesian military did not need combat training.
"We need assistance in how to shape military ethics in accord with international
human rights law," he said. But he added that Indonesia had its own conditions
for new military aid. "The relationship must be of equal partners," he said,
"not as one acting as the superpower, as the world's police officer, and the
other one is ordered around."

In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, the C.I.A. examined possible trouble
spots around the world and concluded that Indonesia was "potentially a big
threat," said an official who has read the report. The report said that many
Indonesian Muslims had gone to Afghanistan to fight the Soviet invasion in the
1980's and that those people could readily be activated by Al Qaeda.

American officials said they had tried to impress on Indonesia's president,
Megawati Sukarnoputri, that the potential for a terrorism is a "cancer in her
country." She has declined to make any commitments, saying that Indonesia is a
democracy and cannot arrest people on the mere suspicion of terrorist
intentions. She also appears to be constrained by her reading of domestic
politics. She is worried that the country's Islamic political parties,
particularly those allied with the vice president, Hamzah Haz, would vigorously
oppose any crackdown.

American officials have told Indonesia that Mr. Hambali is their first priority.
During those conversations, Indonesian officials have said that he has been in
and out of Indonesia several times in the last year, including at least once
since Sept. 11.

Mr. Hambali has lived most of the last decade on the coast of Malaysia, an easy
boat ride across the Strait of Malacca. Further, with the widespread corruption
in Indonesia, Mr. Hambali, like anyone else on a watch list, could have easily
entered the country by simply inserting a $50 bill between the pages of his
passport, a Western diplomat said.

The United States would also like Indonesia to arrest Mr. Baasyir, an Islamic
cleric who lived in Malaysia with Mr. Hambali for many years and now lives
openly in central Java.  Singapore and Malaysia say that he is a leader of
Jemaah Islamiah, a group they describe as a terrorist organization and to which
Mr. Hambali has been linked. Mr. Baasyir denies any links to terrorism.

An American official described Mr. Baasyir as the ideological godfather of the
organization, and said that he had funneled money from Saudi Arabia to Islamic
terrorist groups. Another official said he was "intimately intertwined" with the
aborted attack on the embassy in Singapore.

General Siyahnakri said officials were aggressively looking for Mr. Hambali.
That assessment was not shared by other governments.  "They're not looking very
hard," a senior American military officer said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (95%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
WAR ON TERROR (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); RELIGION
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (86%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); ARMIES (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); INTERVIEWS
(73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%);
ETHICS (69%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (68%); MILITARY TRAINING (66%); POLITICS
(62%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); SINGAPORE (93%); SOUTH-EASTERN
ASIA (92%); MALAYSIA (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%); ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Witness at Milosevic Trial Says He Saw Serbs Kill Scores

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 27


Halit Barani, an Albanian activist, said in court today that he had been
arrested 76 times over the years, so he was more than sure the Yugoslav police
did not like him. But just how little they liked him emerged from a document he
handed over to the court here, which carried this blunt, typewritten title:
"List of Shiptars in Kosovska Mitrovica who need to be summarily liquidated."

Mr. Barani was No. 21 on a list of 66 names. They were all Albanians -- called
"Shiptars" as a slur -- in the vicinity of the city of Mitrovica in northern
Kosovo. A commander, M. Markovic, signed the order, addressed to "the special
unit."

The list was discovered in a municipal building after Serbian forces left Kosovo
in 1999 and NATO troops moved in, Mr. Barani said. It was one detail in a
snapshot of violence Mr. Barani presented in testimony today against the former
Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, who is accused of war crimes.

In just one area in Kosovo, in three months in 1999, Mr. Barani said, 650
Albanians were killed, 80,000 expelled, 429 injured by guns, 5,842 arrested and
279 missing. He said 9,540 shops or houses were destroyed.

In his testimony Mr. Barani listed scores of killings he said he had seen
himself, part of what prosecutors contend was a pattern of violence aimed at
clearing Kosovo, the southern province of Serbia, of ethnic Albanians after
March 1999. In one case, he said he stood 50 yards away while four Serbian
policemen gunned down two Albanians that month.

He said he made sure the bodies were removed quickly, carrying away one himself.

"I washed the pavement so they wouldn't know I had taken the body," said Mr.
Barani, a former salesman who is head of a local human rights group. "Because
the police were taking bodies away to obliterate traces of the killing."

Earlier, Mr. Milosevic presented his own litany of horror from the fighting in
Kosovo. Questioning another Albanian witness, he reeled off a list of no fewer
than 11 incidents in which he said Albanian guerrillas, the Kosovo Liberation
Army, had killed people near the northwestern city of Pec.

As other Albanian witnesses have done before -- much to Mr. Milosevic's
frustration during his cross examination -- the witness, Besnik Sokoli, denied
even hearing about most of the Pec killings. Today, however, Mr. Milosevic gave
up after only 35 minutes of questioning, where in previous days he kept going
for hours.

"There is no point in examining this witness any longer about things that the
entire Yugoslav public knows about and he says he knows nothing about," Mr.
Milosevic told the judges. "It is pointless for me to question him any further
because, as he said himself, he is a staff member of this tribunal."

Mr. Sokoli had said he worked as a translator for the tribunal here, which is
trying Mr. Milosevic for crimes in three Balkan wars, in Croatia, Bosnia and
Kosovo.

In his questions to Mr. Sokoli, Mr. Milosevic explored one angle of his defense,
asserting that Serbian soldiers and police officers escorted Albanians out of
Kosovo not as an act of "ethnic cleansing" but as a way to protect them from the
fighting with the rebels.

Mr. Sokoli testified that thousands of people were driven from their homes in
Pec in March 1999 by the Serbian police and army, and that he himself was beaten
up by the police.

Mr. Milosevic said: "The entire border was a war zone. In fact, therefore, would
it be fair to conclude that soldiers and others helped you leave the war zone?"

Mr. Sokoli answered, "I don't think so because I was beaten up and mistreated by
soldiers, and so were others."

For the second time in two days, Mr. Milosevic asked the judges to release him
from detention so that he could prepare for his defense, which he is carrying
out without lawyers. In what has become a daily occurrence, his request led to a
tangle with the chief judge, Richard May.

"All of you know full well that I am not going to run away from this place of
force and injustice, where my people and where my country are being defended,"
Mr. Milosevic said.

Judge May cut him off. "We are not impressed by your political points," he said.
"You have made them a great many times. They do not improve with repetition."
The judge said the bench would hear his arguments for his release.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Halit Barani, above, an Albanian human rights activist,
testified yesterday at the trial of Slobodan Milosevic, below. Mr. Barani said
he was on a list of 66 people who were to be killed by Serbs in Kosovo in 1999.
(Pool photos by ICTY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES
(90%); TESTIMONY (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); ARMED
FORCES (74%); SHOOTINGS (73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (66%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY
(59%) NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; BARANI, HALIT

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); ALBANIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); KOSOVO (94%);
NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);  PEC (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             149 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
U.S. Seeks DNA Of All Captives In Afghan War

BYLINE:  By DAVID JOHNSTON and JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1520 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


Frustrated by their inability to identify a vast majority of captured fighters
of Al Qaeda and the Taliban, federal authorities are proposing to create a DNA
databank of terrorism suspects by analyzing blood samples from thousands of
detainees being held in Afghanistan and Cuba, government officials said.

The officials said the DNA database could help in tracking terrorism suspects in
the future. They said that would be particularly important because they now
believed that many of the detainees would have to be released before the
government was certain who they are.

The information could also play a role in some current investigations, including
the case of Richard Reid, who has been accused of trying to blow up a
trans-Atlantic flight with explosives hidden in his shoes. Investigators said
the DNA might help them trace the source of hairs found in Mr. Reid's shoes and
possibly identify an accomplice.

The DNA database has been proposed by F.B.I. officials and is being reviewed at
the Justice Department, officials said. Congressional approval would be required
to expand the National DNA Index System to permit the F.B.I. to take DNA samples
from terrorism suspects and keep the information in computer files.

The DNA proposal is likely to raise concerns among civil liberties groups that
have fought attempts to expand the use of DNA profiling, and from advocates for
the detainees and officials from some countries who have objected to the
treatment of the prisoners by the United States.

Even before the DNA proposal, civil rights groups had objected to the treatment
of the prisoners being held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch have said that conditions there are inhumane because the men
are being kept in 8 foot by 8 foot chain-link cages topped with corrugated
metal. Other rights advocates have said the prisoners are being denied due
process.

Officials said that few of the 300 captured fighters now being held at
Guantanamo Bay had been positively identified, and that American interrogators
knew most of them only by their aliases. They said there were 7,500 to 8,000
more prisoners in detention camps in Afghanistan, most of them in the custody of
the Afghan forces that captured them. Almost none have identity papers, and
United States officials said it was possible that some are leaders of Al Qaeda.

"We don't know who these guys are, and we need to find out," said one law
enforcement official.

Despite the inability to identify the detainees, the officials said some
prisoners had disclosed intriguing, although unconfirmed, information during
interrogations.

Notably, some detainees have said they had heard that hijackers were being
trained in an Afghan camp before the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States,
officials said. Several have also said they saw Osama bin Laden after Sept. 11,
and suggested to interrogators that Mr. bin Laden quickly shifted his
headquarters to the mountainous region around Tora Bora after the attacks on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon.

United States officials believe that Mr. bin Laden stayed in the Tora Bora
region until mid- to late December before dropping out of sight. No detainees
have provided information about his whereabouts after he left Tora Bora,
officials said.

American officials said they had also learned, apparently from the prisoners,
that there were strong ties between Zacarias Moussaoui, who was indicted in
December as a conspirator in the Sept. 11 plot, and Mr. Reid, who has been
charged in the attempted bombing aboard a Paris-to-Miami flight in December. The
two men are believed to have been at the Qaeda-affiliated Khalden camp in
Afghanistan at the same time, and may have gravitated to each other because they
were among the few foreigners there who spoke little Arabic.

But the government has not yet been able to corroborate much of the information
from the detainees and will not be able to do so until they can be more certain
of the identities of the prisoners, officials said.

The prisoners flown to Cuba were chosen because American officials believed that
they might be the most significant detainees or might be able to provide the
most important information about Al Qaeda, officials said. They have been
fingerprinted and photographed, and, in some cases, hair samples have been
taken. But the United States has not yet taken blood samples for DNA analysis.

Interrogations have so far been of limited use in confirming the identities of
those being held at the Guantanamo Bay base, in part because most of the
detainees only know each other by their aliases. To help in their
identification, officials said, the translators have been asked to listen for
the accents and dialects of the prisoners, in order to help American officials
identify what countries they are from. Fingerprints and photographs are then
sent to the home countries to see if those governments can confirm their
identities.

American officials said the DNA databank developed from the detainees would
primarily be kept for identification purposes. If a prisoner was released and
then later arrested, the authorities would have information to prove his
identity.

Law enforcement officials cited Mr. Reid's case as an example of how the
databank could be useful.  Investigators discovered two human hairs embedded in
a crude igniting device found in Mr. Reid's shoes. The authorities said that the
strands did not match Mr. Reid's hair and that if a DNA database existed,
analysts could search it for a match and perhaps identify an accomplice.

Civil liberties groups have strenuously opposed efforts in several states to
expand the use of DNA profiling to people who have not been convicted of crimes.
Law enforcement officials said they had no plans to sample the DNA of the
hundreds of detainees who have been held in the United States after Sept. 11,
because they know such a proposal would encounter roadblocks.

Federal law permits DNA profiling only of convicted sex offenders and other
violent felons, of biological material found at crime scenes and of evidence
obtained in missing person cases. The proposal would create a new category of
F.B.I. DNA profiling.

The proposal is part of the government's effort to assess the state of Al Qaeda
after the military operation in Afghanistan. But many of the attempts,
particularly those aimed at determining the fate of Al Qaeda leaders, have
experienced setbacks.

Military assessors went to the scene of a November bombing attack on the
compound of Muhammad Atef, who was chief of military operations for Al Qaeda and
the most senior terrorist leader believed killed in the war. But they found no
remains.

American intelligence officials say they picked up cellphone conversations of Al
Qaeda members talking about Mr. Atef's death soon afterward, leading them to
conclude that he was dead. Some detainees in Cuba have also told interrogators
that they had heard about Mr. Atef's death, although none of their information
is believed to be firsthand.

At one point, American officials believed that they had identified the body of
Ramzi Muhammad Abdullah bin al-Shibh, a Yemeni who had tried repeatedly to enter
the United States and who law enforcement officials believe was to be the 20th
hijacker in the Sept. 11 attacks. Because Mr. Shibh is believed to have been
involved in that plot, finding him has been among the F.B.I.'s top priorities.
Mr. Shibh, who had been living in Hamburg, Germany, left there days before Sept.
11, and American officials believe he ended up in Afghanistan.

When American troops located a body in Afghanistan that they thought was Mr.
Shibh, they sent fingerprints to Yemen, where local authorities compared them
with a set they had on file. But there was no match, and officials are still
uncertain of Mr. Shibh's fate.

The biggest unresolved question of the Afghanistan mission is whether Mr. bin
Laden is alive or dead. The United States is already considering the use of DNA
testing to help identify his remains if they are someday located. The government
is trying, through intermediaries, to obtain samples of DNA from members of Mr.
bin Laden's family. Officials said that they had not yet obtained any samples,
and the Bush administration has no plans to ask for them directly from the
family.

The effort to glean information from prisoners at Guantanamo has had only
halting success. The fighters were first interviewed in Afghanistan by military
and C.I.A. interrogators interested in intelligence that could be of value on
the battlefield or in thwarting terrorist attacks.

Only in recent days have law enforcement officials begun the more tedious
process of debriefing the detainees in Cuba about their personal backgrounds and
knowledge of Al Qaeda. So far only about three dozen of the 300 detainees have
been interviewed, officials said.

But the officials said that some of the prisoners who arrived in detention camps
underfed, disoriented and fearful for their lives had grown more comfortable.
Those officials said they were optimistic that they would eventually recruit
informants from among the detainees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A prisoner is taken for questioning in Guantanamo Bay. Officials
want detainees' blood for a DNA database. (Associated Press)(pg. 20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DNA (94%); TERRORISM (93%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); DNA
TESTING (90%); TALIBAN (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING (89%); HIJACKING (89%); FORENSICS (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (75%); APPROVALS (73%); DUE PROCESS (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%);
AIRLINES (69%); NAVIES (60%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  PRISONERS OF WAR;
BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  DNA (DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%); PRISONERS
OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%) ;FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) JOHNSTON, DAVID; RISEN, JAMES; REID, RICHARD

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (96%); CUBA (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             151 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The War in Colombia Intensifies

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 495 words


Things may get a lot worse before they get any better in Colombia, the site of
the bloodiest and longest-running conflict in the Americas. Last month President
Andres Pastrana abandoned a failed three-year-old peace process with the
country's largest leftist guerrilla movement, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, and ordered the army to reoccupy an enormous and desolate southern
area that he had ceded to the insurgents.

It was a justified move. Exploiting its safe haven to engage in drug trafficking
and profitable kidnappings, the guerrilla group, known by the acronym FARC, had
shown little inclination to engage in meaningful peace talks. The government's
hand was ultimately forced by the group's hijacking of an airliner to kidnap a
prominent Colombian senator. Most Colombians overwhelmingly support the
offensive against the FARC, despite well-grounded concerns that the guerrillas
may conduct an urban terrorist campaign in retaliation. The international
community is also supportive of President Pastrana's decision.

If the past is any guide, however, the government may soon cede the moral high
ground. The Colombian Army has a poor human rights record, and as the conflict
intensifies, the army may feel emboldened to ignore such issues further.
President Pastrana has mistakenly given the military too much power in governing
areas of conflict. Both he and his military commanders should know that the
world will be watching, and judging, how civilians who are caught in the
crossfire are treated.

Bolstered in recent years by American training and more than $1 billion in aid,
ostensibly earmarked to help it fight the drug trade, the Colombian Army says it
has become a stronger, more professional and more democratic force. This
assertion is too often belied by its closeness to right-wing paramilitary groups
that massacre innocent civilians in the name of waging counterinsurgency.

The Colombian government must show a determination to crack down on right-wing
paramilitary forces that also engage in the drug trade to finance their terror
with the same fervor it fights the 17,000-member FARC. The Bush administration
and Congress must resist the temptation to use America's war on terror elsewhere
as an excuse to more deeply involve the United States in this decades-long
conflict. The United States can best help the Colombian people by conditioning
any further military aid on an improvement in the army's human rights record.

Colombia holds legislative elections tomorrow and will elect a new president in
May. The frustration with the stalled peace process has made public opinion more
hawkish, but ultimately the only lasting solution to the country's epidemic of
violence is a political settlement. The short-term hope is that increased
military pressure will drive the guerrillas to a more conciliatory position, and
that in waging the fight, Colombia's army can finally gain the respect of the
very people it purports to defend.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ARMIES
(90%); NARCOTERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%);
CIVIL WAR (77%); HIJACKING (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(75%); WAR ON TERROR (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (72%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%) EDITORIALS;
ELECTIONS;  LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS;  PUBLIC OPINION;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             152 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saying No to Israel's Occupation

BYLINE:  By Ishai Menuchin;  Ishai Menuchin is a major in the Israel Defense
Forces reserves and chairman of Yesh Gvul, the soldiers' movement for selective
refusal.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


In this past week of madness and carnage, hope for peace between Israel and the
Palestinians appears impossible. After 35 years of Israel's occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza, the two sides seem only to have grown accustomed to
assassinations, bombings, terrorist attacks and house demolitions. Each side
characterizes its own soldiers as either "defense forces" or "freedom fighters"
when in truth these soldiers take part in war crimes on a daily basis. Daily
funerals and thoughts of revenge among Israelis tend to blur the fact that we,
the Israelis, are the occupiers. And as much as we live in fear of terrorism and
war, it is the Palestinians who suffer more deaths hourly and live with greater
fear because they are the occupied.

Twenty years ago, when I was first inducted into the Israeli Army, to serve as a
paratrooper and officer for four and a half years, I took an oath to defend
Israel and obey my commanders. I was young, a patriot, probably naive, and sure
that as a soldier my job was to defend my home and country. It did not occur to
me that I might be used to carry out an occupation or asked to fight in military
engagements that are not essential for the defense of Israel.

It took me one war -- the Lebanon war -- many dead friends, and some periods of
service in the occupied territories to find that my assumptions were wrong. In
1983, I refused to serve in acts of occupation, and I spent 35 days in military
prison for my refusal. Today, as a major in the reserves of the Israel Defense
Forces, I still defend my country but I will not participate in a military
occupation that has over the decades made Israel less secure and less humane.
The escalating violence is evidence of this truth.

Being a citizen in a democracy carries with it a commitment to democratic values
and a responsibility for your actions. It is morally impossible to be both a
devoted democratic citizen and a regular offender against democratic values.
Depriving people of the right to equality and freedom, and keeping them under
occupation, is by definition an antidemocratic act. The occupation that has now
lasted a generation and rules the lives of more than 3.5 million Palestinians is
what drives me, hundreds of other objectors in the armed forces, and tens of
thousands of Israeli citizens to oppose our government's policies and actions in
the West Bank and Gaza.

My commitment to democratic values caused me to act against the occupation -- to
sign petitions, write ads, and take part in demonstrations and vigils. But those
acts of opposition were not enough to absolve me of having to make a moral
choice about participating in the occupation as an officer and ordering others
to do so. So while I continue to serve in the defense force, I selectively
refuse military orders if they require my presence in the territories outside
the pre-1967 Israeli borders. I will not obey illegal orders to execute
potential terrorists or fire into civilian demonstrations. (Since October 2000
more than 850 Palestinians have been killed by my army: 178 were minors, and 55
were executed.) And I will not take part in "less violent" actions like keeping
Palestinians under curfew for months, manning roadblocks that prevent civilians
moving from town to town, or carrying out house demolitions and other acts of
repression aimed at the entire Palestinian population.

As our government prepares to increase military action in the West Bank and
Gaza, Israelis need a true debate about the nature of Israel's presence in these
territories. Israeli and international human rights groups have raised their
voices about the persistent violation of Palestinian human rights. I believe it
is my duty as a citizen of a democratic nation to protest this conduct, which
cannot be justified.

I and others who serve in the defense forces cannot by our actions alone change
government policies or make peace negotiations more likely. But we can show our
fellow citizens that occupation of the territories is not just a political or
strategic matter. It is also a moral matter. We can show them an alternative --
they can say no to occupation. When we begin to see Israel's situation in that
light, perhaps we will be able to let go of our fear enough to find a way
forward.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMIES (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); BOMBINGS (72%); PETITIONS
(62%); PUBLIC POLICY (50%) PALESTINIANS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARMAMENT,
DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

PERSON: MENUCHIN, ISHAI

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Policy Critique

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's severe criticism of the United States' decades-long
support for Jonas Savimbi of Angola ("Our Own Terrorist," column, March 5) is
tragically on target.

The devastating consequences for millions of Africans in part due to American
actions in the name of prosecuting the cold war in distant lands need to be
examined more closely to help guide the current all-encompassing war on
terrorism.

The recent release of the State Department's annual human rights reports ("U.S.
Report Criticizes Allies in Antiterror Campaign for Human Rights Abuses," news
article, March 5) may indicate that these lessons have yet to be learned: you
quote an Amnesty International representative as saying, "There continues to be
a disconnect between human rights reports and actual foreign policy."

GILBERT MARTIN
Cambridge, Mass., March 5, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); TERRORISM (88%); COLD WAR (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: SAVIMBI, JONAS; KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D; MARTIN, GILBERT

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: ANGOLA

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             158 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prisoners In Peru Seek A Way Out

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, March 26


Condemned to life in prison for treason, Wagner Aponte was once resigned to
spending the rest of his days behind bars, like hundreds of others imprisoned
for joining rebel groups that waged war against the government during a 20-year
conflict.

So year after year since he was convicted in 1994, he has passed the time in a
prison on Lima's outskirts, reading, writing a journal and, as of late, playing
the violin. But now Mr. Aponte is pleading for a retrial, arguing that special
antiterrorism courts that convicted him and others under wartime laws were
unjust.

"What we ask," said Mr. Aponte, who is 30, sitting on the bunk of an 8-by-4-foot
cell, "is for a way out."

Prisoners like Mr. Aponte are creating a sticky problem for President Alejandro
Toledo, who won election in June 2001 promising a democratic break with the
decade-long authoritarian rule of Alberto K. Fujimori. About 2,200 Peruvians are
in jail for participating in rebel movements, and they have begun to press the
government for new trials. While acknowledging that many may have been unfairly
condemned, Mr. Toledo's government faces fierce public opposition to any
leniency for them.

"Public opinion is completely resistant when it comes to the situation of the
terrorists," said a high-ranking official in the Interior Ministry. "Any
sentiment that there has been some kind of injustice simply does not exist."

The prisoners believe that Mr. Toledo should order new trials because they were
convicted by hooded judges, often on the basis of coerced testimony. Many
officials concede that the arbitrary judicial system Mr. Fujimori used to
prosecute the guerrillas violated the rights of thousands of them.

But the officials, along with experts on Peru's conflict, also say that many
inmates convicted of treason or terrorism were rebel fighters or associates who
could very well remain committed to violence. Nearly all were tied to one of
Latin America's most fanatic rebel groups, the Shining Path, which tried to
install a Maoist state in Peru through terror bombings and assassinations until
it was largely defeated in the 1990's.

Many Peruvians believe that opening an avenue to freedom for the inmates would
be a colossal mistake, invigorating a rebel group that, while weak, has been
stirring. In recent months, small bands of Shining Path guerrillas have stepped
up attacks on police officers in isolated regions. The group may have been
responsible for the car bomb that killed nine Peruvians on March 20, just three
days before President Bush arrived to meet with Mr. Toledo, officials here said.

"People are fearful of letting them out because the Shining Path almost caused
the collapse of the country," said Ernesto de la Jara, director of the Legal
Defense Institute, which has taken up the cause of a number of Peruvians whose
terrorism convictions he says were clearly unfair.

The inmates, nearly 500 of whom are serving life terms, are determined to be
heard. In February they began a nationwide hunger strike that lasted 31 days and
at its height included 850 prisoners in 18 jails.

One participant was Lori Berenson, the New York woman who won a retrial after
she was sentenced to a life term by a military tribunal for collaborating with
rebels in a foiled plan to take over Peru's Congress. She was recently sentenced
in a second trial to a 20-year term.

The inmates, communicating from prison to prison with the help of relatives,
demanded retrials and political prisoner status. They called for three prisons
to be closed and for a role for former rebels in a government truth commission
that is investigating rights abuses during Peru's conflict. Their demands were
rejected by the government.

But groups like Human Rights Watch, an American monitor, and some government
officials acknowledge that the status of the inmates must, in time, be
addressed. "Yes, we have to combat terrorism, but we also have to do this," said
Wilfredo Pedraza, who oversees prison programs for Defender of the People, a
government human rights agency. "I believe we need to punish, but to punish with
legitimacy."

In recent years Peru has released more than 700 prisoners, called the innocents
here, who were able to show they were unjustly convicted. Rights groups and
Defender of the People estimate that perhaps 50 innocents remain imprisoned.

Of the roughly 2,200 current prisoners, hundreds who were convicted on charges
of treason or terrorism were minor collaborators with the rebels. They were
given harsh sentences for small-scale political advocacy or painting graffiti,
said Sebastian Brett, the Peru researcher for Human Rights Watch. Many of them
say they want what only Ms. Berenson has received, a retrial. "To retry does not
mean they are given freedom," said Carlos Tapia, a member of the Truth
Commission, created to study the justice system under Mr. Fujimori. "It means
you are doing what corresponds to a democratic government."

The remaining inmates, anywhere from 1,200 to 1,500 prisoners, include hard-line
members of Shining Path. Even human rights groups say that some of them remain
staunchly committed to the group's violent cause. They view their imprisoned
leader, Abimael Guzman, as a messiah.

Still, the families of the prisoners are mounting a spirited, if uphill,
campaign to prod the government to act, organizing forums and protesting in
front of the Justice Ministry.

Speaking outside Castro Castro prison near Lima, where Mr. Aponte and many
others are confined, Patricia Asencio said the families were not demanding
immediate freedom for jailed relatives, but retrials. "Our relatives have
sentences of 20 years to life, with no chance of reincorporating into society,"
said Ms. Asencio, who said she was the secretary of the Association of Families
of Political Prisoners and Disappeared of Peru. "But the conflict has ended, and
they want to make their way back into society."

Inside the dirty peach walls of Castro Castro prison, inmates speak of how they
were tortured until they signed confessions, then convicted in trials lasting
only minutes before judges in hoods who did not permit cross-examination.

But several men made it clear that they were members of Shining Path and
continued to believe in its cause of overturning a government they regard as
capitalist and corrupt. Several inmates spoke reverently of Mr. Guzman,
referring to him by his Shining Path nom de guerre, President Gonzalo. The men
acknowledge that the group committed "errors" during the conflict, but say that
a vast majority of abuses took place at the hands of state security forces.

"We have had affinity and sympathy for the organization, which is called a
terrorist group," explained Helmer Aponte, 28, Mr. Aponte's brother who is also
serving a life sentence at Castro Castro prison. Both men said they were
students working on political issues, not armed fighters, when they were tried
and convicted.

Others, like Percy Mendoza, 30, said they played a role in military operations.
"It was a war, and for a war, you need soldiers," Mr. Mendoza said.

But the men also say, as has Mr. Guzman in talks with government
representatives, that the conflict has ended and that the inmates, if given
their freedom, would not return to violence. They say they will work through the
group's political wing, the Peruvian Communist Party.

"We have two ways to go, all-out war or a political resolution," said Camilo
Baras, a prisoner leader in Castro Castro. "And President Gonzalo says he wants
a political resolution."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nilda Aponte, above left, at the prison where two of her
brothers are serving life terms in connection with Peru's war on rebels. One of
the brothers is Wagner Aponte, below, in 1988 with his father, Maglorio.
(Photographs by Ana Cecilia Gonzales-Vigil for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (92%); PRISONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); TREASON (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ASSASSINATION
(78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); BOMBINGS
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); TESTIMONY (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); LATIN AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: THE COLLEGES;
Campus Tensions Growing With Support for Palestinians

BYLINE:  By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1294 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., April 6


As violence in the West Bank and Gaza has escalated over the last few weeks,
pro-Palestinian groups on campuses across the country have asserted themselves
with new vigor, organizing demonstrations and national campaigns to try to
counteract what they see as a better-financed, better-established effort by
pro-Israel student groups.

To the alarm of Jewish students who read the campaigns as anti-Semitism, the
pro-Palestinian groups have become something of a cause celebre on university
campuses. Using emotional demonstrations that depict the Palestinian struggle as
one for human rights and justice, they have attracted support from other popular
campus movements of recent years, including sweatshop opponents, affirmative
action supporters and campaigners for a so-called living wage.

On Tuesday, students at more than 30 schools, including Columbia, Georgetown and
the Universities of California, Massachusetts and Washington, plan a national
"day of action" to start a campaign that they hope will persuade universities to
divest themselves of stock in corporations that do business with Israel, as they
did in isolating South Africa in the 1980's.

"The ideal situation for the pro-Israel groups has been the status quo, where no
one asks any questions," said Fadi Kiblawi, a University of Michigan student who
was born in Kuwait and raised in this country by Palestinian parents. "This is a
group of students who are fed up with how we are being portrayed. We've always
been characterized as terrorists. But we present a logical argument, one based
in international law and human rights."

The movements have heightened tension on campuses, as pro-Israel and
pro-Palestinian groups draw their own battle lines on opinion pages and in
common areas, with each side accusing the other of racism and support for
terrorism. In Ann Arbor, pro-Israel groups protested last week when students at
a conference in support of the Palestinian cause sold a book calling the
Holocaust a myth. Arab and Jewish students have reported receiving death
threats.

At the University of California, Jewish students were advising one another to
walk in groups after the son of a rabbi was beaten this week. The beating was
the latest in a string of incidents in Berkeley that has included the
spray-painting of anti-Israel and pro-Palestinian slogans outside a church and a
synagogue on the edge of campus.

Jewish leaders on campus accuse the pro-Palestinian groups of using scare
tactics and intimidation. They say that while they doubt any universities will
be persuaded to divest, they fear the campaign will be an effective public
relations tool.

"Their goal is to get Israel to be disliked, to see it as this racist, horrible,
Nazi regime," said David Livshiz, a senior at Michigan and a member of the
American Movement for Israel. "It has become a trendy cause, and that's
unfortunate. To a large degree it's because they are using this language of
human rights; they make themselves very appealing. Because they're so much
louder, they get support."

Jewish and pro-Israel student groups still outnumber the pro-Palestinian
organizations on most campuses. At the University of Michigan here, there are
about 6,000 Jewish students, compared with about 2,000 Arab or Muslim students
-- a relatively high figure for an American campus, reflecting the large
concentration of Arab-Americans in the nearby Detroit area.

But students on both sides say the pro-Palestinian groups have attracted more
attention with louder, more persistent appeals.

In Ann Arbor, about 100 pro-Palestinian students have sponsored three
demonstrations over the past month, carrying placards reading "Israel = Terror"
and "Free Palestine." A group that began on the Berkeley campus, Students for
Justice in Palestine, has now spread across the country. At Harvard, members
held a peace vigil to denounce what they called Israeli terrorism; at the
University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, the same group has begun holding
weekly sit-ins in the main campus plaza.

A march planned for April 20 in Washington suggests the kind of coalitions that
are forming: it is to include pro-Palestinian groups from Howard and George
Washington Universities, demonstrators from environmental groups, supporters of
a living wage and protesters of the United States military buildup.

The protests reflect a significant change from the months immediately after
Sept. 11. When the current intifada began in the fall of 2000, pro-Palestinian
groups began staging war-crimes tribunals and other events to demonstrate
against Israel. They planned to start the divestment campaign last fall, and
Hillel and other national organizations for Jewish students began planning their
own protests in opposition.

These plans were abandoned after the Sept. 11 attacks. Pro-Palestinian groups
canceled conferences and protests, and Arab and Muslim students assumed a low
profile, fearful of -- and, in several cases, victims of -- verbal and physical
attacks.

But by January, the student groups had begun to take up the cause again. In
recent weeks, they say, the violence shown on television has swayed opinion to
their cause.

"When people see images of tanks rolling into Palestinian cities, of ambulance
drivers being shot at by Israeli defense forces, women giving birth at the
checkpoints, it becomes clear that this is not just a case of two equally wrong
sides fighting," said Snehal Shingavi, a Berkeley student and a member of
Students for Justice in Palestine.

The groups are adopting many of the tactics used by Jewish student groups like
Hillel. This summer, the Palestine Solidarity Movement, a national coalition of
student groups, will send students to deliver money and supplies to the Middle
East. In the words of a manifesto adopted by about 500 students at a Berkeley
conference in February, the students will act as observers and a "protector
force for the Palestinians living under the illegal Israeli occupation."

The groups have attracted support from non-Muslim and non-Arab students. At
Berkeley, Mr. Shingavi said, fewer than one-fifth of the core 70 members of his
organization are Arab or Muslim. They have also drawn support from Jewish
students.

"I always had this view that Jews wouldn't do anything bad," said Laura Pearl, a
Jewish student who is a member of the Palestine Committee at Michigan. "Once I
started to question that assumption, I saw how many things there were that
Israel had done that were really bad."

The movement has also spread to campuses without a strong tradition of political
activism. At North Carolina State, the Arab Club started out as a support
network for students with relatives in the Middle East. As the violence has
escalated, members say, they have become more political. On Friday they rallied
with students from Duke and the University of North Carolina outside a campus
mosque.

The campus groups shy away from talking about suicide bombers or Yasir Arafat.
"Arafat is a problem for us," said Amer Zahr, an Arab student at Michigan. "He's
not Gandhi." They talk about the Palestinians as "indigenous people" and Israel
as an "apartheid state."

Jewish groups on campus resent the efforts to draw parallels between Israel and
South Africa, and fear the demonstrations will become more emotional and less
rational as the divestment campaign begins.

"The issue of divestment is predicated on the idea of Zionism equals racism. To
that we have to say, 'Hold on a second,' " said Richard M. Joel, the president
of Hillel International.

The pro-Palestinian groups recognize that divestment may be a tough sell. But,
as Salah Husseini recently told his fellow students at a meeting in Michigan:
"Right now, it's not about getting it passed. It's about getting people to think
about it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A pro-Palestinian group held a peace vigil Thursday at Harvard.
(Michael A. Dwyer for The New York Times); Groups rallied in support of the
Palestinians on Friday at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. (Alex
Maness for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(89%); DIVESTITURES (88%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); HOLOCAUST
(76%); GENOCIDE (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%);
RIOTS (73%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (73%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%);
RELIGION (71%); ARAB AMERICANS (69%); RACE & RACISM (62%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(60%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (56%) DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  PALESTINIANS;
ANTI-SEMITISM;  COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;  JEWS;  PALESTINIAN-AMERICANS

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA (59%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (54%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (54%)

PERSON: ZERNIKE, KATE

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL
(94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); KUWAIT (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             160 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights of Women

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

Re "Washington Is Criticized for Growing Reluctance to Sign Treaties" (news
article, April 4):

Among the treaties that the United States has signed but not ratified is the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,
which is regarded as an international bill of rights for women.

More than 20 years have passed since the United Nations unanimously adopted this
convention, which has been ratified by virtually every country but the United
States.

The United States government's efforts to promote the human rights of women, in
Afghanistan and around the world, are severely handicapped by its refusal to
support international human rights law, and particularly by its refusal to
ratify this treaty.

AMANDA SULLIVAN
New York, April 4, 2002

The writer is director, Women's Action Network, Equality Now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (92%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); FEMINISM
& WOMEN'S RIGHTS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); GENDER EQUALITY (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); DISABLED PERSONS (52%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WOMEN;  TREATIES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: EQUALITY NOW (83%); UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION
OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN (58%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)
EQUALITY NOW (ORGN)

PERSON: SULLIVAN, AMANDA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (68%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             162 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Tribunal Becomes Reality, Without U.S. Role

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1200 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 11


More than half a century after it was proposed in the ruins of World War II, the
world's first permanent court for the prosecution of war criminals and dictators
became a reality today as the United States stood on the sidelines in strong
opposition.

The treaty that established the court, which is expected to take shape in The
Hague over the next year, went into effect after the 60th nation had ratified
it. The court closes a gap in international law as the first permanent tribunal
dedicated to trying individuals, not nations or armies, responsible for the most
horrific crimes, including genocide and crimes against humanity.

Until now, just ad hoc courts like the Nuremberg trials after World War II and
the Balkans tribunal that is now sitting in judgment on Slobodan Milosevic, the
former Yugoslav president, have done that work.

"The long-held dream of the International Criminal Court will now be realized,"
Secretary General Kofi Annan said at a news conference in Rome, where 120
countries first agreed in 1998 to set up the tribunal. "Impunity has been dealt
a decisive blow."

But the Bush administration again demonstrated its readiness to go it alone when
it deems necessary, boycotting the ceremony here that celebrated the birth of
the court. That attitude has prompted concern in Europe and elsewhere over a new
American unilateralism.

The establishment of the court has been broadly welcomed by most democratic
nations, American lawyers' associations and human rights groups. But it has an
implacable foe in the Bush administration, which argues that the court will open
American officials and military personnel in operations abroad to unjustified,
frivolous or politically motivated suits.

The court will assume jurisdiction over charges of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed after July 1 of this year. Washington fears
that a country as powerful as the United States, with its unchallenged military
might and troops around the world, would be uniquely vulnerable to prosecutions.
In theory, any American, from high-ranking officials like the Secretaries of
Defense or State to soldiers in the field, could be accused of a crime.

President Bush appears to be on the verge of not only renouncing the tribunal,
but also removing the signature of the United States from the treaty.

Even so, no country is deemed to be outside the court's jurisdiction. American
participation would strengthen the court considerably, and by not taking part
the United States will lose influence over court proceedings.

The United States signed the treaty for the court in December 2000 in the last
days of the Clinton administration. Bush administration officials say it will
never be sent to the Senate for ratification.

Congress has passed a law to forbid Americans at all levels of government to
cooperate with the new court, and the United States is trying -- so far without
success -- to insist on exemptions for Americans from its jurisdiction.

Today, five members of Congress, led by Henry J. Hyde, chairman of the House
International Relations Committee, sent a letter to Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell requesting that he ask the Security Council to write into every future
peacekeeping resolution a grant of absolute immunity from the court for
Americans who take part in operations. That would start with a renewal of the
international force for Bosnia in June.

The New York City Bar Association was one of many organizations that wrote to
Mr. Bush this week urging a reconsideration of what is apparently a decision to
renounce the court treaty. The action, the president of the lawyers' group, Evan
A. Davis, said would "weaken U.S. international standing at the very time we
need international cooperation for the war against terrorism."

The United States ambassador for war crimes, Pierre-Richard Prosper, said in a
conference call from Washington with reporters that Mr. Bush had not decided to
"unsign" the treaty. But all his comments on the relations, or lack of them,
between the United States and the court point to that end. Symbolically, the
American seat at the ceremony today was empty.

It was a ceremony, Mr. Prosper said, "that we felt there was no need for us to
attend, and there was no role for us to play."

Mr. Prosper seemed to rule out allowing the treaty to remain in limbo, perhaps
to be reconsidered by a future administration.

"Our position is that we continue to oppose the treaty and do not intend to
become a party," he said. "It is important that our position is made clear and
that we operate here in good faith and not create expectations in the
international community that we will be a party to this process in the near
term."

Asked whether the United States would cooperate in handing over war criminals or
information for prosecutions, Mr. Prosper said, "We have no obligation to the
court."

David J. Scheffer, who signed the treaty for the United States as the ambassador
for war crimes in the Clinton administration, said in an interview today that
backing out now was "a very ill-advised strategy."

"The only reason you would unsign the treaty is if your intention was to wage
war against the court," Mr. Scheffer said. "If your intention is not to wage war
against the court but rather to try to preserve American interests, defend
American interests, protect American interests, then the best strategy would be
to remain as a signatory."

Michael Posner, executive director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights,
said in an interview that unsigning the treaty would set a terrible precedent.
"No American president in 200 years has unsigned a treaty, as far as we can
find," he said. "It would also send a signal to other governments around the
world that treaties they signed are unsignable."

Most democratic nations and all European Union countries have ratified the
treaty -- except Greece, which is in the process of doing so -- along with
Canada, New Zealand and a number of African, Eastern European and Central Asian
countries. Israel has signed it but not ratified. Egypt, Iran and Syria have
signed. India and Pakistan have neither signed nor ratified.

Besides the United States, other powerful nations have held themselves aloof, as
well. Russia has signed but not ratified. China has done neither.

European allies have been among those trying to convince the United States that
many safeguards are built into the court that can prevent frivolous or
politically inspired prosecutions. Most cases will be brought by a chief
prosecutor or the Security Council. A pretrial review panel will be able to
throw out charges. Moreover, the court will be required to allow national courts
to handle cases in the first instance.

Mr. Prosper said today that those steps were not enough. "The point is that we
do view the safeguards as being insufficient," he said.

Mr. Annan tried to calm American fears today. "The court will prosecute in
situations where the country concerned is either unable or unwilling to
prosecute," he said. "Countries with good judicial systems who apply the rule of
law and prosecute criminals and do it promptly and fairly need not fear.

"I don't think this a court that is going to run amok."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); JURISDICTION (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%);
ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (77%); GENOCIDE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(64%); PRESS CONFERENCES (53%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CLINTON, BILL

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); NETHERLANDS (92%); EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             164 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amnesty Accuses Spain of Racism in Its Treatment of Immigrants

BYLINE:  By EMMA DALY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: MADRID, April 18


Amnesty International has accused Spain, the steppingstone to Europe for
thousands of poor immigrants, of "frequent and widespread" mistreatment of
foreigners and ethnic minorities, including torture, and called for the
authorities to adopt a plan to combat racism.

The organization's report, the first on racism in a European country,
investigated more than 320 cases of abuse from 1995 to 2002, including deaths
and rapes while in custody, beatings and verbal abuse. Amnesty International
also expressed concern about the widespread use of racial profiling by the
police.

"The cases we have documented show a pattern of violation by law enforcement
officers of the rights of members of ethnic minorities or persons of non-Spanish
origin," writes Gillian Fleming, the author of the report. "Discrimination
against these people, tolerated by the authorities, makes them especially
vulnerable to torture and ill treatment by state officials."

The economic boom in Spain in the last few years, and its position at a southern
frontier of Europe, has spurred an increase in immigration.

The number of foreigners living legally in Spain has risen sharply in 20 years,
with an 18 percent increase in 2000 alone, to 1.1 million. The number was about
200,000 in 1981, the report said. Moroccans make up the largest group, followed
by Ecuadoreans.

Amnesty International focused on Spain in part because it currently holds the
presidency of the European Union.

It says that racist attacks have increased as the immigrant population has
grown, with the recent influx bringing about "a general recognition that racism
and xenophobia are at least as serious a problem in Spain as elsewhere in
Europe."

In the report, the human rights group detailed the cases of four immigrants who
died in police custody, as well as five women who reported being raped or
sexually assaulted.

It also examined the plight of children living without their families or in the
street. The report says immigrant children often face abuse, deportation without
regard to the law or their family situation, and a lack of protection and legal
representation.

"Physical ill treatment and abuse of authority by police officers," Amnesty
International said, was "frequent and widespread," although, for a variety of
reasons, "only a small number of ill-treatment cases result in judicial
complaints."

The report says many undocumented immigrants, "living in the hope of receiving
work and residence permits, are afraid to lodge complaints with the police or
courts." Even when complaints are made, investigations have fallen short of
international standards, the reports finds.

In its discussion of racial profiling, the report cited the case of Rodney Mack,
an African-American who is principal trumpet player with the Barcelona Symphony
Orchestra, who said he was badly beaten by officers in Barcelona looking for a
black car thief.

In Spain, Amnesty International found, officers routinely detain black people
and members of other ethnic minorities on suspicion of drug dealing or of not
carrying the identity documents that are obligatory in Spain.

The report was rejected by Spanish officials. Ignacio GilLazaro, a congressman
from the ruling Popular Party, said, "The police and Civil Guard confront
immigration in a deeply humanitarian way."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); RACE & RACISM (93%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (92%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ETHNICITY
(90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%); TORTURE (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); SEX OFFENSES
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); RACIAL PROFILING (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); CHILDREN (85%);
MISCONDUCT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%);
DEPORTATION (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); FAMILY (77%); TRENDS (77%); ASSAULT &
BATTERY (76%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POPULATION GROWTH (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); DEATHS (71%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (70%); WRITERS
(69%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (60%); VEHICLE THEFT (60%); WIND INSTRUMENTS
(60%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%); EU PRESIDENCY (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  TORTURE;  ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;
DISCRIMINATION;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  POLICE;  SEX CRIMES

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%) AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: DALY, EMMA

CITY: BARCELONA, SPAIN (92%); MADRID, SPAIN (78%)

STATE: CATALONIA, SPAIN (73%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (98%); EUROPE (95%); MOROCCO (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SPAIN

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             165 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 20, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Rights Commission Criticizes Cuba

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 19


The United Nations Commission on Human Rights, meeting in Geneva for its annual
review, today approved a relatively mild resolution urging Cuba to grant its
citizens greater political freedoms.

Havana had vigorously lobbied against any resolution being brought and was stung
when, for the first time, it was introduced by fellow Latin American countries.

The vote on the measure, which refrained from condemning Cuba outright, was 23
to 21, with nine countries in the 53-member commission abstaining.

The commission also voted to censure Iraq, accusing its government of
"all-pervasive repression and oppression sustained by broad-based discrimination
and widespread terror." The censure passed easily, 28 to 4, but 21 countries
abstained.

The big upset of the session came when European countries failed to round up
enough votes to pass a resolution against Moscow's actions in Chechnya. Russia,
which denounced the effort as "politically motivated," has ignored two earlier
commission resolutions calling for an independent investigation into military
atrocities against civilians.

Russia regards the separatists as terrorists, and compares its actions there to
the American-led campaign against the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

"Are we not entitled to the same treatment when we combat terror?" asked
Russia's delegate, Leonid Skotnikov, arguing against the resolution, which also
condemned "terrorist attacks, kidnappings and public executions" by Chechen
rebels.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); APPROVALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); LOBBYING (77%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); AL-QAEDA (69%); TALIBAN (69%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (66%); INVESTIGATIONS (52%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%); AL-QAEDA (55%)

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (90%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CUBA (94%); LATIN AMERICA (91%); SWITZERLAND
(90%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             168 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Maoist Revolt Grows, Nepal Fears for Its Democracy

BYLINE:  By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1339 words

DATELINE: SATBARIYA, Nepal


The bodies of the Maoist rebels were still scattered across parched lentil
fields and behind a stand of sissau trees, almost a week after thousands of
their comrades swarmed a police garrison here on a moonless night.

"When one Maoist was killed, another came forward," said Deepak Hamal, a young
policeman who survived the battle in mid-April. "They were there to kill or to
die."

Almost a hundred Maoists fell before the survivors overran the garrison, when
the constables ran out of ammunition. After the battle the rebels melted back
into the countryside.

The horror of the bodies -- faces contorted in grimaces of death -- has seeped
into life here, merging with a stain of violence that has spread over the last
year in this tiny Hindu kingdom encircled by India and China.

A spindly boy in rags wandering across the fields said he was afraid that the
ghosts of the dead would return to haunt him. He could have been speaking for
all of Nepal. Last June the crown prince massacred his father and mother, the
king and queen, and most of the royal family in a fusillade of gunfire.

In recent months the Maoist rebellion, inspired by the Shining Path guerrillas
of Peru and led by two college-educated, upper caste Brahmins, has spiraled in
intensity in this nation of stark poverty and beauty, where the snowy Himalayas
tower majestically over pitiful scenes of hunger and want.

The rebels carried out surprise attacks in late November in many of the
country's 75 districts, bringing a shocking end to a four-month cease-fire and
three rounds of peace talks. They also went after the army for the first time,
drawing it into the conflict.

The killing has intensified ever since. The police estimate that 3,600 people
have died since the Maoists declared a "people's war" in February 1996.

Half of those deaths have been in the four and a half months since a state of
emergency was declared, suspending civil liberties in this young democracy, just
12 years into its incarnation as a constitutional monarchy.

The 50-000-member Royal Nepal Army, a largely ceremonial force that occasionally
took part in United Nations peacekeeping missions, joined the battle against the
Maoists on Nov. 26. The widespread hope in Katmandu that the army would quickly
crush the rebellion has proved empty.

The ruthless tactics used by both the rebels and the security forces have become
more widespread, say victims and human rights researchers.

Amnesty International and Nepalese human rights groups have documented what they
call a pattern of abuses by security forces that include the execution and
torture of people suspected of being Maoists.

The rights groups accuse the Maoists of gruesome violations as well, including
executions of dozens of schoolteachers who refused to submit to extortion
demands and the torture and murder of suspected informants and political
opponents with large, curved knives.

Resham Prasad Panta, 52, a poor farmer who lives a four-hour trek from the
nearest road in the Gorka district, said Maoists dragged him from his dinner one
recent night, accused him of being an informer and shattered his shin with a
large boulder. More Maoists then brutally beat his frail, underfed wife, Sita,
48. Both lay in a hospital here.

"We are simple people," said Mrs. Panta, tears streaming down her face. "We have
nothing for or against anyone. Both sides pressure us. The Maoists say you must
be informing the police. The police say you must be sheltering the Maoists. We
are squeezed."

The Maoist influence has spread to most areas of the country, with deaths
related to the insurgency in 60 of the 75 districts. Last year the Maoists set
up "people's government's" in 22 districts.

When the Nepalese won their long struggle for democracy in 1990, the Maoists
were in the mainstream, part of a Communist alliance with a small number of
parliamentary seats. But in 1994 the election commission barred the alliance
from taking part, an act the courts later ruled illegal. Maoist leaders were
brutally beaten by the police.

In 1995, Pushpa Kamal Dahal and Baburam Bhattarai formed the Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist), and the next year it issued 40 demands, including abolition of
the monarchy, radical land reform and a raft of policies that it said would
liberate the people.

When the Maoists did not get their way, they went to war.

The two leaders are believed by the government to be living underground in
India. The group has financed itself by robbing banks and extorting money from
landlords, teachers and business people. Members have armed themselves by
looting automatic rifles and rocket launchers, among other weapons, from
security forces.

Estimates of the number of rebel fighters range from 2,000 to 10,000, but they
seem to be getting bolder, even as their casualties mount. They have begun
attacking the few gains that Nepal's young democracy can claim: clean drinking
water supply systems, village government offices, and small roads and bridges
that connect remote areas to larger towns.

In February and again in April they mustered thousands of guerrillas for attacks
that caught the security forces completely off guard. At 10:30 p.m. on April 11
they simultaneously assaulted five police and security posts in the western Dang
district, striking along the country's main east-west highway.

They prevented reinforcements from reaching any of the posts by felling huge
trees to block the roads.

"We had dismissed these guys as a bunch of clowns," said a senior Western
diplomat based here. "They weren't. They're dedicated, calloused and clever."

A general strike ordered by the rebels shut down much of Nepal on Tuesday, even
in Katmandu. Despite a heavy security presence, Katmandu residents said they
feared rebel retribution if they did not go along.

Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba acknowledged in an interview that the rebel
attacks in Dang were a setback and sketched out a largely military strategy to
defeat them. He said that as long as the Maoists used violence, it would be
difficult to pursue programs to combat endemic poverty.

"Unless there is peace, how can you introduce social development?" he said. But
many here, including some who are close to the king and in the military, fear
that further neglect of Nepal's poor will only help the Maoists.

There is another danger facing Nepal that is rarely spoken of openly: the risk
that the new king, Gyanendra, backed by the military, will topple democracy as
King Mahendra did in 1960.

There have been some ominous signs. In March the army chief of staff, Gen.
Prajwalla Shumsher Rana, made a scathing attack on politicians, blaming them for
bringing Nepal to near ruin.

Prabhakar Rana, another member of the powerful Rana clan who is close to the
royal family and serves as a director of its holding company, has said in
interviews that there may be a coup.

"Those who practice democracy have failed," he said. "They must pull up their
socks and mend their ways." If they don't, he said, "the army could take over
and ask the king to rule, or the army could just take over."

Asked about such a possibility, the prime minister diplomatically said he
believed that the king was committed to democracy. But Mr. Deuba, who spent more
than nine years in prison during the movement for democracy, also issued a
warning of sorts. He said that if there was a coup, the king would be risking
his crown. "Everybody would be against him," Mr. Deuba said.

In Katmandu, scholars, journalists and politicians gossip endlessly about palace
intrigue and politics. But young policemen earning $40 a month are doing most of
the dying on the government's behalf, and poor people in the countryside are
living with the daily terror.

Here in Satbariya, villagers who hid their weeping children under beds as the
battle between the Maoists and the Armed Police Force raged, still fear that the
Maoists will return.

Jokhan Prasad Chaudhari, patriarch of a large family and owner of a tiny plot of
land, predicted only more hardship. "It will not end," he said. "Many more will
die."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The bodies of four Nepalese police inspectors killed in
Satbariya by Maoist guerrillas were cremated in Katmandu. In recent months the
Maoist rebellion in Nepal has intensified, with a mounting death toll. (Thomas
Kelly for The New York Times) Map of Nepal highlighting Satbariya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FAMILY (90%);
TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); ARMIES
(87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (83%); MURDER (77%); STATES
OF EMERGENCY (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); PEACEKEEPING (69%);
PEACE PROCESS (66%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (65%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (65%); POLITICS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); EXTORTION
(60%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ROYAL FAMILY

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (55%)

PERSON: DUGGER, CELIA W

CITY: KATHMANDU, NEPAL (89%)

STATE: HIMALAYAS (56%)

COUNTRY: NEPAL (98%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

REGION: NEPAL

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             172 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civil Rights for the Transgendered

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 370 words


Mayor Michael Bloomberg yesterday signed into law a bill that extends New York
City's human rights protection to transgendered people -- a group that includes
cross-dressers and people who have had or will soon have sex-change surgery. The
new law, which passed the City Council 45 to 5, is an important step forward in
fighting prejudice and in protecting the rights of some of society's most
vulnerable citizens.

The transgendered category covers a wide array of people who do not fit into
traditional gender groups, whether due to appearance, behavior or physical
attributes. Even in a city as diverse, and generally tolerant, as New York,
transgendered people often find themselves discriminated against when looking
for work and on the job, and in finding and keeping housing. They are frequently
denied service in restaurants and stores. And they are often the victims of hate
crimes.

In the debate over the new law, few argued that transgendered people deserve to
be discriminated against. Rather, they said that transgendered people were
adequately protected by the city's human rights law, which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of gender and sexual orientation. The argument that
explicit protection of the transgendered was superfluous was the one Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani gave last year, and the position that Mayor Bloomberg took
until he changed his mind.

It is true that transgendered people have sometimes been able to employ existing
antidiscrimination laws, but not reliably. Putting specific language into the
city's human rights law removes all doubt that the transgendered are entitled to
equal rights and equal treatment. It also sends a clear message that this sort
of discrimination will not be tolerated.

Because the rights of the transgendered have gotten little attention, it might
seem that New York broke new ground yesterday. But in fact, more than 40 towns,
counties, cities and states -- including Iowa City, Louisville, Kentucky and
Rhode Island -- have written transgendered people into their antidiscrimination
laws. New York City's action yesterday was not path-breaking, but it should
light the way for other jurisdictions to extend protection to their own
transgendered citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TRANSGENDER PERSONS (96%); LEGISLATION (91%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);
LGBT RIGHTS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); CITIES (79%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (79%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%); GENDER IDENTITY
DISORDER (73%); RESTAURANTS (68%); EMPLOYMENT (68%) SEX;  EDITORIALS;
DISCRIMINATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (79%); RUDY GIULIANI (59%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); LOUISVILLE, KY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (96%); KENTUCKY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             173 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Aiding Colombia's War on Terrorism

BYLINE:  By Luis Alberto Moreno;  Luis Alberto Moreno is Colombia's ambassador
to the United States.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While the United States' attention is fixed on fighting terrorism in
Afghanistan, the Middle East and Asia, a grave threat lurks in the Americas.
Colombia is the leading theater of operations for terrorists in the Western
Hemisphere. Under the false pretense of a civil war, Colombian guerrilla groups
have ravaged the nation with violence financed by cocaine consumers in the
United States. The Bush administration, appropriately, is pushing in Congress to
have anti-narcotics aid expanded to strengthen Colombia's ability to defeat
terrorists.

Over the last four years, President Andres Pastrana has strengthened Colombia's
relationship with the United States, improved cooperation on transnational crime
and increased the commitment of the Colombian government and its people to human
rights. This week, the State Department certified Colombia's compliance with
human rights guidelines, allowing the United States to provide military aid.
Attorney General John D. Ashcroft has also moved to support Colombia's efforts.
"Just as we fight terrorism in the mountains of South Asia," he said this week,
"we will fight terrorism in our own hemisphere."

Drugs are the root of almost all violence in Colombia. It is simple: everywhere
there are poppies or coca in Colombia, there are guerrillas and paramilitaries.
The Pastrana administration has moved aggressively to sever ties between the
armed forces and the paramilitary group called the United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia, which is itself involved in the drug trade; in 2001 government forces,
including police, captured 992 paramilitaries and killed 116.

Where there are guerrillas and paramilitaries, there are terror and violence
against civilians. While they may hide behind a Marxist ideology, Colombia's
leftist guerrillas have ceased to be a political insurgency. They have traded
their ideals for drug profits.

The guerrillas were offered many generous opportunities to declare themselves
for peace and to enter meaningful and legitimate peace talks with the
government. They failed to take these opportunities.

No sector of Colombian society has been spared. Guerrillas with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by its Spanish acronym, FARC, have
kidnapped five members of the Colombian Congress, 11 state legislators, the
governor of Antioquia and Ingrid Betancourt, a presidential candidate. Recently
they attempted to assassinate the leading candidate for president. (The election
will take place May 26.) The FARC has murdered Colombia's minister of culture,
Consuelo Araujo, as well as leading religious figures, human rights workers,
labor leaders, journalists, health care workers, police and military personnel
and their relatives, executives, foreign workers, and thousands of civilians.

Colombians understand that nothing less than the future of our democracy is at
stake in this conflict, and we are united to defend it. The international
community has understood the change in the nature of the conflict, and is
supporting our efforts. Mexico recently closed the FARC's office. Other
governments should also close FARC offices in their nations.

President Pastrana has increased defense spending to its highest level in our
nation's history. We have also increased the number of Colombians serving in the
military and police force to an all-time high. But despite these efforts, the
adversaries of peace continue to spread terror throughout Colombia. We need
America's help.

Soon President Pastrana will leave office. His commitment to resolving the
conflict in Colombia and his personal courage set a very high standard. Yet I am
confident a worthy successor will be elected who is equally committed to
bringing peace to our nation. The terrorists will want to test our new president
quickly. It is critical that the United States show that the change in
administration does not signal a change in America's partnership with Colombia.

Since this is no longer an ideological war but a narco-terrorist one, Congress
should, continuing in a bipartisan spirit and recognizing our shared
responsibility in the drug war, quickly approve President Bush's request to
allow the Colombian military to use American military equipment and intelligence
in its war against terrorism. In addition, Congress should pass the long-stalled
Andean Trade Preferences Act, which provides alternatives to the cultivation of
coca and poppy plants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); COCAINE (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
NARCOTERRORISM (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(78%); ASSASSINATION (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (76%); CULTURE
DEPARTMENTS (72%); HEALTH CARE (71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (71%); LAWYERS (70%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); DEFENSE SPENDING (68%); PEACE PROCESS (65%); MURDER
(58%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  TERRORISM;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  DRUG
ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  COCAINE AND CRACK COCAINE;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED SELF-DEFENSE FORCES OF COLOMBIA (54%)

PERSON: MORENO, LUIS ALBERTO (AMB); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); ASIA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (88%); SOUTHERN ASIA (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             178 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Romania Accepts Nazi Guard Expelled by U.S.

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: BUCHAREST, Romania, May 22


A former guard at Nazi concentration camps who was deported from the United
States will be allowed to settle in Romania, the Interior Ministry said today,
but a Jewish human rights group called for his prosecution.

The ex-guard, Nikolaus Schiffer, 83, who served as a guard in Nazi camps during
World War II, arrived in Romania late Tuesday after being put on a plane by
American authorities. He was born in Philadelphia to Romanian parents and
arrived in Romania when he was a year old.

"Having in mind the age and the situation of Nikolaus Schiffer, the Interior
Ministry has taken all steps" to give him identity documents, a ministry
statement said.

The Simon Wiesenthal Center, the Holocaust remembrance and human rights
organization named for the Holocaust survivor and Nazi hunter, urged the
Romanian authorities to investigate Mr. Schiffer's actions in World War II "with
a view to prosecuting him for his crimes."

"It would be unthinkable for a person with his record to be allowed to live in
Romania in peace and tranquillity as if he had never been involved in any of the
crimes in the Holocaust," the center's Jerusalem office said in a statement.

Romanian officials and representatives of Romanian Jews were not available for
comment.

Mr. Schiffer, who is officially stateless, will be granted identity papers
allowing him all the rights of a Romanian citizen apart from the right to run
for office, a ministry spokesman said.

At the age of 24, Mr. Schiffer joined the Romanian Army -- at that time an ally
of Nazi Germany -- and eventually served in the Waffen-SS as a prison guard at
the camps of Sachsenhausen and Hersbruck in Germany and Maidanek and Trawniki in
Poland from 1943 to 1945. He returned to the United States in 1953.

A federal judge stripped him of his American citizenship in 1993 after
investigations showed that he had hidden his involvement with the Nazis when
applying for naturalization.

Immigration judges ordered Mr. Schiffer to be deported in 1997 but the move was
delayed by his appeals.

Mr. Schiffer, who acknowledged serving as a camp guard, has denied witnessing
beatings or deaths. He also denied being a member of the Nazi Party.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); WORLD WAR II (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); DENATURALIZATION (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); NATURALIZATION (76%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); JUDGES (67%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (66%);
CITIZENSHIP (66%); POLITICAL PARTIES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: JSC SS AS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: SIMON WIESENTHAL CENTER (56%)

CITY: BUCHAREST, ROMANIA (58%)

COUNTRY: ROMANIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); GERMANY (92%); POLAND (78%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (73%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 6, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Several U.S. Allies Criticized in Powell Report on Slave Trading

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


South Korea, Romania and Israel all stepped up efforts to stop slave trafficking
within their borders last year, but some of the United States' closest allies,
including Turkey, Saudi Arabia and several Persian Gulf states, did not,
according to a State Department report issued today.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said that the United States was resolved "to
stop this appalling assault on the dignity of men, women and children," that
victimizes an estimated 700,000 to 4 million people a year worldwide through
coercion and outright kidnapping -- most of them women and children -- including
some 50,000 in the United States.

But the law that mandated creation of the report two years ago does not provide
for imposition of penalties until next year, when countries judged not in
compliance with certain minimum standards will face penalties in the form of
withheld aid, and votes by the United States against loans from international
organizations like the World Bank.

In the current report, the 19 countries in that category, called Tier 3, include
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Myanmar, Greece, Iran, Lebanon, Qatar, Russia, Saudi
Arabia, Tajikistan, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. They were judged to
have made no real effort to stop a commerce in human beings who are forced to
work in brothels, sweatshops and other involuntary servitude.

"There were absolutely no political considerations entering into this," said
Nancy Ely-Raphel, who presented the report and is a senior adviser to Secretary
Powell on the issue. "Some of our closest allies are on Tier 3, and they were on
Tier 3 last year. This is a straight-out, objective report determining whether a
country meets the minimum standards and whether it's making serious and
sustained efforts to meet those minimum standards."

Countries that make such efforts can move up to Tier 2, which this year includes
such American allies as India, Israel, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, the Philippines
and Pakistan, which rose from the lowest category last year, angering some human
rights groups. South Korea, a key ally, leapfrogged from Tier 3 to the top
level.

Representative Christopher H. Smith, Republican of New Jersey, who sponsored the
law requiring the report, expressed disappointment that "both last year and this
year, the report omits from Tier 3 countries including India, Thailand and
Vietnam -- all of which have serious trafficking problems in which government
officials appear to be actively involved."

He noted that "several of the nations omitted from Tier 3 have governments with
which the United States is trying to improve relations." But, he added, "For
governments whose own high-ranking officials are deeply involved in trafficking,
holding an occasional training session with an international organization, or
even a few ineffectual prosecutions, do not amount to 'significant efforts.' "

Ms. Ely-Raphel noted that the number of Tier 3 countries decreased to 19 from 23
last year, and praised Romania, South Korea and Israel for taking significant
steps to crack down on the practice.

Theresa Loar, president of Vital Voices, a nonprofit organization that promotes
human rights and democracy for women, said the government needed to do more to
work with nations and nongovernmental organizations to provide training and
tools to fight trafficking.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); DOMESTIC
TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SWEATSHOPS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (66%); FOREIGN LENDING (53%) SLAVERY;
WOMEN;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

PERSON: CHRIS SMITH (52%) PURDUM, TODD S; POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); TURKEY (93%); ISRAEL (93%);
INDIA (92%); BAHRAIN (79%); JAPAN (79%); TAJIKISTAN (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); QATAR (79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (79%); LEBANON (79%); THAILAND (75%); MOROCCO (74%); GULF STATES (73%);
GREECE (73%); AFGHANISTAN (70%)

REGION: TURKEY;  SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
There Are Ways To Make Them Talk

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AMERICAN officials, riding high on their announcement that they had broken up a
plot to detonate a "dirty bomb" in the United States, said that they were helped
by information from Abu Zubaydah, a former lieutenant to Osama bin Laden.

But how are they getting that information? And how are they getting information
from the hundreds of suspected Taliban and Qaeda fighters, some of whom have
been trained to withstand questioning, being held at the American naval base at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba?

Since Sept. 11, there has been some public discussion in this country of whether
torture would be justified if it produced information that could save American
lives. William H. Webster, a former director of central intelligence and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, has urged the Pentagon to inject truth serum
into defiant Qaeda and Taliban prisoners.

Military officials say torture is not an option. But, they said, under the
Geneva Conventions, anything short of torture is permissible to get a hardened
Qaeda operative to spill a few scraps of information that could prevent
terrorist attacks.

Interrogators acknowledge that they push psychological gamesmanship to the
limits to prey on a prisoner's fears and desires, sexual stereotypes and
cultural sensitivities.

"We're looking for any kind of wedge to put a chink in their sense of security,"
said a senior military intelligence officer.

The setting must put the prisoner at a disadvantage. "If you're dealing with
someone from a cold climate, you'd want to put them in the hottest room
possible," said one senior military interrogator.

Simple incentives like being kind to a terrified young conscript or offering a
cigarette to a long-deprived chain-smoker might wheedle a key name, date or
location from an uncooperative captive, military officials said. So might the
threat of returning him to a less-than-friendly welcome from authorities in his
home country.

BUT the methods avoid physical contact, military officials said. They said they
conform to military and international law that prohibits physical abuse.
Interrogators are not supposed to deprive prisoners of food and water, carry
weapons into an interview room or use drugs to coerce information. Military
lawyers are supposed to monitor interrogation sessions to prevent any abuses.

"We don't beat people with rubber hoses," said a senior military official
familiar with interrogation techniques. "That's not how we do business."

Human rights groups concur. "My gut tells me that the military is being very
scrupulous," said Tom Malinowski, a spokesman for Human Rights Watch. "Law
enforcement professionals in this country understand that torture is a wonderful
technique for getting confessions from innocent people and a lousy technique for
getting truth out of guilty people."

Certainly, the United States military's past history is not pristine on this
score. Foreign graduates of the Pentagon's School of the Americas at Fort
Benning, Ga., have been implicated in atrocities in Latin America. Training
manuals used at the school included references to torture.

And American officials won't comment on the methods of allies that are
questioning dozens of suspects that have been transported to foreign countries
in the past nine months. Historically, they have accepted information obtained
from other countries where harsher interrogation methods are used.

The small band of American military, intelligence and law enforcement officials
who run interrogations -- in Afghanistan, Guantanamo, and other, undisclosed
locations around the world -- are predictably tight-lipped, as much about what
they do and how they do it as about what they have learned.

"We don't want to tip someone off who may be a guest of ours soon," said Lt.
Col. Dennis Fink, a spokesman for the interrogation unit at Guantanamo, known as
Joint Task Force 170.

There are now more than 500 prisoners of nearly three dozen nationalities at
Guantanamo who might have crucial information about Al Qaeda's next planned
attack or Osama bin Laden's whereabouts. Just over 100 captives remain in
Afghanistan, and most of them will be flown to Cuba in the next few weeks.

Handling the interviews there are some three dozen interrogators -- the Army
calls them "human intelligence collectors" -- from the military, the F.B.I. and
the Central Intelligence Agency, and a handful of foreign intelligence officers.

A general idea of their methods can be pieced together from interviews with
interrogators and from training manuals and courses the military and government
offer to budding interrogators at, for instance, the Army's interrogation school
at Fort Huachuca, Ariz.

Interrogators typically work in teams of two or three. They map out questions
before each interview based on a psychological profile of each prisoner.
Military interrogators want to hear about immediate threats to troops or
tactical information about enemy locations. At Guantanamo, the F.B.I. wants
information about terrorist activity inside the United States while the C.I.A.
focuses on Al Qaeda cells overseas and the location and network of group
leaders. They often conduct joint interviews.

Interrogation teams are mixed and matched; questioners often play good cop, bad
cop. Interrogators try to establish a prisoner's identity -- many have multiple
aliases -- and then pose questions whose answers they know to test the captive's
truthfulness.

Senior terrorists usually draw interrogators who speak their language. Most
other prisoners are interviewed through interpreters. The government has had to
scramble to find qualified civilian linguists who speak the various languages
used in Afghanistan, like Dari or Pashto, and the Army has pulled cooks and
mechanics out of their jobs if they have needed foreign language skills.

SOME of the methods interrogators acknowledge using are almost amusingly
straightforward. With terrorists from cultures where women are subservient to
men, American officials have found that assigning a female interrogator to a
case can throw some suspects off stride.

"He may want to prove his manhood and show he is worthy of a male interrogator
by giving you some information," said one military official. "You need to know
which cultural buttons to push."

And much of the benefit from interrogation comes from plain hard work, American
officials said. Slowly and painstakingly, investigators are piecing together
information gleaned from interviews and matching it against data from notebooks
and computer hard-drives seized from Al Qaeda hideouts in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. They also match the information with information from interviews with
other captured Al Qaeda members.

That, officials say, is how questioners proceeded with Mr. Zubaydah, who dropped
cryptic clues over the course of nearly 100 interviews after he was captured in
Pakistan.

"A lot of folks expect interrogations to reveal a smoking gun, but the value of
what you get is really determined by an analyst later," said one American
intelligence official. "What seems insignificant may actually fill in a missing
piece or lead to a new line of questioning."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); DIRTY BOMBS (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); ADMISSIONS &
CONFESSIONS (76%); MILITARY BASES (76%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%); LAW OF
WAR (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (72%); NAVIES (71%); SMOKING (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%);
FOREIGN STUDENTS (66%); LAWYERS (62%) TERRORISM;  TORTURE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (56%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) SCHMITT, ERIC; WEBSTER, WILLIAM H

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             190 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tokyo Journal;
Fujimori, the Exile, Repackages His Peruvian Past

BYLINE:  By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 10


What does a former president do after he has led his country for 10 years,
crushed two guerrilla insurgencies, gone into exile and dodged an international
warrant for his arrest?

If you are Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru, you repackage yourself as an expert on
terrorism, with an eye toward a political comeback.

The former Peruvian strongman broke a yearlong public silence today with a guest
lecture at a university here that was vintage Fujimori.

Dressed in a black business suit and starched white shirt, Mr. Fujimori, a trim
63-year-old former engineer, held forth before an audience of his choosing on a
topic of his choosing -- how to crush terrorists. He refused to take questions.

The performance was reminiscent of his didactic televised addresses to Peruvians
during his often authoritarian rule, but it was more notable for what it said
about how the former president, who remains highly popular in Japan, seems to
view his political future.

Mr. Fujimori, who has lived in self-imposed exile here since resigning from
office in 2000, has reportedly consulted leaders of the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party about running for a seat in Japan's Parliament. It would be
only a short walk. Supported financially by conservative political friends, he
lives in a downtown high-rise apartment that has a view of the Parliament
building and the Imperial Palace.

His political friends were said to have advised him to wait a year or so, as
voters might see a candidacy as a play to duck his extradition on charges of
involvement in human rights abuses and embezzlement during his time in office.

Although Mr. Fujimori speaks Japanese well, his address today was given only in
Spanish, perhaps a sign that he also sees a political audience in Peru, where
for the time being he remains something of a pariah.

In his presentation, Mr. Fujimori used slides of statistics and showed a
gruesome 20-minute color video of terrorist carnage in Peru in the 1990's. A
battery of 12 television cameras and a packed press section recorded his every
word.

"Paradoxically, fewer errors were made in military courts than in civilian
courts," he said, seeming to tip his hat to President Bush's plan to try some
terrorism suspects in military tribunals. "In the civilian courts, the
terrorists threatened the families of judges and made a mockery of the law."

Expounding on the recipe that he successfully used against the Shining Path and
Tupac Amaru guerrillas -- intelligence, targeted social spending and persistence
-- Mr. Fujimori appeared to be positioning himself as a terrorism commentator.
With one book on terrorism coming out in Japanese next month, he has been
inspired to write a second one after the attacks of Sept. 11.

But more than a commentator, Mr. Fujimori evidently believes he has a political
future back in Peru. Since 1980, two other former Peruvian presidents have
returned from exile to run for president. Luis Alvarez Silva, a Peruvian
journalist here, said, "He wants to go back."

What makes this self-exile different is that Interpol has warrants for his
arrest, and Mr. Fujimori has become the object of a tug of war between Japan and
Peru, which wants him returned for trial.

He is accused of having run a vast ring of control and corruption from the
presidential palace with his former spy master, Vladimiro L. Montesinos, who
sits in a Peruvian jail and has accused his former boss of hiding "under geisha
skirts."

"Our view is that if he is responsible for wrongdoing as Peru's president, he
should return to Peru," Makoto Teranaka, secretary general of Amnesty
International Japan, said today. The organization plans to mount a campaign to
pressure Japan to send Mr. Fujimori home.

"Keep an eye out, an extradition request will be coming," Luis J. Machiavello,
Peru's ambassador here, said at an embassy reception held hours after Mr.
Fujimori's speech.

No matter. Japan says it will not return Mr. Fujimori because it does not have
an extradition treaty with Peru and because Japan rarely allows the extradition
of Japanese citizens. Although it usually takes years to obtain Japanese
citizenship, Mr. Fujimori won his in December 2000, the month after he took
refuge here. (His parents, and some say Mr. Fujimori himself, were born here.)

Beyond the legal arguments, however, Mr. Fujimori has protected himself with a
carefully constructed cocoon of good will, partly the fruit of cultivating the
Japanese press during his 10 years as Peru's president.

"He easily has the support of 90 percent of Japanese parliamentarians," said a
Foreign Ministry official. "For Japanese, strong political leadership has been
missing for many years. People see that in Fujimori."

The exiled Peruvian's powerful friends in Japan include Shintaro Ishihara,
Tokyo's conservative governor, and Ryutaro Hashimoto, a former prime minister
and the leader of a large parliamentary faction.

"Fujimori is very strongly protected by the Japanese right," Mr. Alvarez, the
journalist, said at the embassy reception this evening. Out of earshot of the
ambassador, he added in a low voice, "No one is going to get him out of here."

As a measure of his popularity in Japan, Mr. Fujimori managed to make Peru one
of Japan's top foreign aid recipients in the 1990's, getting about $3 billion in
the decade. But since his ouster, Japan's foreign aid to Peru has plummeted to
one-tenth of that level.

Although protesters in Lima still gather outside the Japanese Embassy demanding
his extradition, Mr. Fujimori continues communicating with Peruvians through his
Web site, www.fujimorialberto.com, where he updates a missive called "From
Tokyo" about twice a week.

"They can take the plaques away from each of my public works," he writes on the
introduction page, "from each of the inaugurated schools, from the border
markers, but at the end, the voice of the people will be heard: Fujimori did
this!"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberto K. Fujimori, Peru's former president, waved to
supporters yesterday after he delivered an address in Tokyo. Mr. Fujimori, who
faces criminal charges in Peru, lives in self-imposed exile in Japan. (David
Guttenfelder/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); TERRORISM (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); EXTRADITION (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%);
POLITICS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ETHICS (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); MILITARY COURTS
(65%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ETHICS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
EMBEZZLEMENT;  EXTRADITION;  ELECTIONS;  LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) BROOKE, JAMES; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (94%)

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); JAPAN (94%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             191 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: MILITARY;
U.S. Is Taking War Captives To Cuba Base

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 947 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


A C-17 Globemaster cargo plane carrying 20 heavily guarded Taliban and Al Qaeda
prisoners left a Marine Corps base in southern Afghanistan today on its way to
the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the first wave of hundreds
of detainees who will be held there.

The Pentagon provided few details about the flight, but senior military
officials said more than 40 specially trained military police officers guarded
the prisoners on the flight, which was expected to make one stop before reaching
Cuba, possibly as early as Friday morning.

The prisoners, their hands and feet shackled and their heads covered by hoods,
were loaded single file onto the plane at Kandahar Airport. Pentagon officials
said some prisoners might also be sedated during the more-than-20-hour flight,
but it was not clear whether that had happened.

A Pentagon official said earlier this week that the United States did not
consider the detainees prisoners of war, but that they were still being afforded
the protections under the Geneva Convention guidelines.

At Guantanamo Bay, the prisoners will be taken to a makeshift detention center
known as Camp X-Ray, where they will be locked in 6-by-8-foot cages made of
concrete and chain-link fence to await intensive interrogation and, possibly,
trial before military tribunals.

As workers prepared the camp in Cuba for as many as 2,000 prisoners, search
crews in Pakistan continued to comb the wreckage of a Marine Corps tanker plane
that crashed on Wednesday in southwestern Pakistan. Seven marines died in the
fiery accident.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that there was no evidence
that the crash had been caused by hostile fire.

Pentagon officials also said today that the United States was preparing to send
a force of more than 100 soldiers, many of them Special Operations forces, to
the Philippines to help train Filipino troops to fight Muslim militants from the
Abu Sayyaf group.

Though the American forces are expected to be involved initially in advising and
training Filipino counterterrorist units, senior American military officials
have said they could become involved in direct military action if the Philippine
government requested it.

Amnesty International issued a statement today saying that sedating prisoners or
shackling them for an entire flight would violate international standards
prohibiting "cruel, inhuman or degrading" treatment.

Mr. Rumsfeld said today that he did not know how the prisoners would be
restrained during the flight. But he defended the use of strong measures, saying
the Pentagon had closely studied violent uprisings by Taliban and Al Qaeda
prisoners held in the northern Afghan city of Mazar-i-Sharif and in Pakistan.

About 20 minutes after the C-17 lifted off from the base at Kandahar Airport,
marines came under small-arms fire near one of the runways. No one was injured
and the identify of the snipers remained unknown tonight, military officials
said.

Military officials also said John Walker Lindh, the American who was captured
with Taliban forces near Mazar-i-Sharif, was not among the prisoners transferred
today. Mr. Walker is still being held aboard the assault ship Bataan in the
Arabian Sea, the officials said.

American forces in Afghanistan were holding a total of 371 prisoners today,
including 351 at Kandahar and 19 at Bagram air base north of Kabul. But the
number keeps rising as American military and intelligence officials continue
interviewing thousands of prisoners held by anti-Taliban militias.

Camp X-Ray has cells for about 100 detainees, and will soon be expanded to hold
220. During the next few months, military work crews will build permanent
facilities for as many as 2,000 prisoners.

Mr. Rumsfeld declined to discuss details about the growing American involvement
in the Philippines, where Abu Sayyaf guerrillas have been battling government
troops in the southern island of Basilan. The rebels, who have been linked to Al
Qaeda in the past, are holding two American hostages for ransom.

But earlier this week, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz said that
American Special Operations forces might become involved in "direct support of
Philippine military operations," though he added that the government seemed
"anxious" to do the job itself.

"There's no question that we believe that if they could clear the Abu Sayyaf
group out of Basilan Island, that would be a small blow against the extended Al
Qaeda network," Mr. Wolfowitz said.

In November, President Bush promised to give the Philippines a $100 million
antiterrorism aid package that would include weapons, training and shared
intelligence. Since then, the United States has sent an array of equipment to
the Philippine military, including a C-130 cargo plane, 30,000 M-16 rifles and 8
UH-1 Huey helicopters.

In eastern Afghanistan, American B-1 and B-52 bombers dropped precision-guided
weapons on the sprawling Al Qaeda training camp at Zhawar Kili near the Pakistan
border today for the sixth time in just over a week.

Senior military officials have said they are increasingly concerned that there
are other equally sophisticated and well-fortified underground complexes
elsewhere in Afghanistan that could become guerrilla bases for remnants of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda forces.

At the Pentagon, Mr. Bush signed a $318 billion military spending bill today for
the 2002 fiscal year. "Today more than ever we also owe those in uniform the
resources they need to maintain a very high state of readiness," Mr. Bush said.
"Our enemies rely upon surprise and deception. They used to rely upon the fact
that they thought we were soft. I don't think they think that way anymore."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Soldiers of the 101st Airborne Division responded to gunfire
yesterday at Kandahar Airport in Afghanistan as a plane carrying 20 Taliban and
Al Qaeda prisoners headed toward the United States Navy base in Cuba.
(Photographs by Mario Tama/Getty Images)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
MILITARY BASES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); NAVIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AIRPORTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY
COURTS (78%); AIRPORT RUNWAYS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (78%); AIRLINES (78%); HIJACKING (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); MARINE TANKERS (73%); CRUEL &
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%);
STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (60%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT (58%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (52%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  PRISONERS OF WAR;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
(59%); US NAVY (59%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: DAO, JAMES; RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (92%); NEW YORK,
NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (96%); CUBA (96%); PHILIPPINES (94%);
PAKISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MAZAR-I-SHARIF
(AFGHANISTAN);  PAKISTAN;  KANDAHAR (AFGHANISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             192 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Supports Colombian On Ultimatum to Rebels

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


The Bush administration today voiced support for President Andres Pastrana's
ultimatum to leftist rebels in Colombia, even as officials and experts expressed
misgivings that it could lead to further violence and disrupt counternarcotics
efforts.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell laid blame on the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia, or FARC, for the collapse of peace talks after three years and for
Mr. Pastrana's order that rebels vacate a demilitarized area within 48 hours.

"It is a serious situation, and I hope the FARC recognizes that it is its
failure to negotiate in seriousness that has caused this crisis to come about,"
Secretary Powell said.

He and other officials held out a faint hope that rebel commanders might take
advantage of the two days they have been given to evacuate the zone, to revive
peace talks with significant new concessions.

"I hope there may still be found a way to move forward in whatever way President
Pastrana decides, but in an atmosphere that does not encourage new and serious
violence," Secretary Powell said.

Most Colombia experts conceded that it is likely that Mr. Pastrana will be
compelled to follow through on his threat and deploy troops in the demilitarized
area, which is the size of Switzerland. But they warned that such a show of
force could ultimately backfire if the Colombian armed forces proved unable to
establish control or if all-out civil war ensues.

"It's a gamble -- it's a high-risk situation," said Michael Shifter, a senior
analyst at the Inter-American Dialogue, a forum of hemisphere leaders. "It's a
question of whether the security forces and state are capable of following
through if the FARC doesn't budge."

Administration officials took pains to say Mr. Pastrana's decision to curtail
the peace effort on which he staked his presidency was his own. But privately
experts said Mr. Pastrana has been under considerable pressure -- including
influence by the United States -- to take a tougher line against the rebels.

Last summer, a senior State Department official, Marc Grossman, told Mr.
Pastrana of American concerns that the FARC was using the demilitarized zone to
train terrorists, hide kidnapping victims and raise money by trafficking in
drugs. Secretary Powell had been expected to convey a similar message in a visit
to Colombia but was forced to return to Washington because of the Sept. 11
terrorist attack.

"There are a lot of people in the U.S. government who have been very critical of
this policy all along," said Bill Spencer, the deputy director of the Washington
Office on Latin America, a liberal policy group that monitors human rights. "The
only reason for hope is that this might serve as a wake-up call -- rather than a
death notice -- for the peace process itself."

Administration officials have publicly backed the peace talks because they have
concluded that Colombia's security forces are incapable of victory over the
17,000-member FARC. But they acknowledge that Mr. Pastrana has nothing to show
for the negotiations and say the rebels, who have increased their numbers and
wealth in the interim, have little incentive to make a deal.

"We've had this repeated sort of crisis with the FARC because the attempts by
President Pastrana to open up peace talks or open up discussions about how to
resolve this situation have really led nowhere," said Richard Boucher, the State
Department spokesman. "And in the meantime, the FARC has continued to carry out
its activities."

Mr. Pastrana's move comes within four months of presidential elections in which
he cannot run for re-election, and some experts wonder why he did not leave a
showdown with the FARC for his successor.

Max Manwaring, a professor of military strategy at the United States Army War
College in Carlisle, Pa., said Mr. Pastrana's hand had been forced by the chiefs
of Colombia's armed forces, who are troubled that they are losing credibility
and relative strength as the FARC thrives in its safe zone.

"It essentially is an internal Colombian military decision," Mr. Manwaring said.
"The military just doesn't feel that it can wait until the end of Mr. Pastrana's
term."

He warned that a military incursion into the demilitarized zone, if mishandled,
could result in a strategic or human rights "disaster" if rebels held their
ground or right-wing paramilitary forces and their military allies turn their
wrath on the 90,000 civilians living in the zone.

An all-out war could also undermine American efforts to eradicate drug crops and
dismantle Colombia-based smuggling networks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PEACE PROCESS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); NARCOTERRORISM (89%); DRUG POLICY (89%); LIBERALISM (89%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (82%); TERRORISM (77%); DRUG INTERDICTION (77%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (68%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); SWITZERLAND (79%); LATIN AMERICA
(58%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             194 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Is America's Place In the World Now?

BYLINE:  By ALEXANDER STILLE

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1730 words


Here's a test:
What lessons should America's policymakers take from the complex whirl of events
that followed Sept. 11?

A) The need to fight terrorism requires working with other nations.

B) The quick victory in Afghanistan shows that only go-it-alone action gets
results.

C) Potential threats in the world's troubled regions call for the United States
to become a new kind of imperialist power.

D) The targeting of America proves the dangers of playing the world's policeman.

E) Terrorism is best met with hard, military power.

F) Terrorism is best fought through the "soft power" of economic growth and
cultural values like democracy and human rights.

If the choices seem confusing or mutually exclusive, so do the opinions of the
experts. Ask the most prominent strategic thinkers around, and they will all
agree that pretty much every cherished notion about America's role in the world
must be revised -- except, of course, their own.

Clearly, the world has changed. Developments in technology have given small
groups of people the kind of destructive power once available only to national
governments. Distant problems that could previously be ignored have suddenly
popped up in America's backyard. "National security always meant protection
against external threats," said John Gaddis, a professor of history at Yale
University. "The idea that national security is national, or homeland security,
is a revolution in strategic thinking."

But just where does this revolution lead?

For some strategic thinkers, it leads to what might be considered an antique and
antidemocratic proposal: empire. "A new imperial moment has arrived," the
British journalist Sebastian Mallaby writes in a forthcoming article in Foreign
Affairs. "The chaos out there in the world is too threatening to ignore, and the
existing tools for dealing with chaos have been tried and found wanting."

The logic for a new kind of imperialism, Mr. Mallaby argues is this: the
decolonalization of the 1940's and 1950's left a power vacuum in much of the
world. The principal mechanisms the world has devised to deal with them --
foreign aid, nongovernmental institutions, the World Bank, the United Nations --
have not succeededin dealing with the most troublesome and difficult cases. "The
problem isn't going away," Mr. Mallaby said in a telephone interview. "World
population is going to go from six to eight billion. All that growth is going to
happen in poor countries. You are going to get more state failures. They do
threaten our interests: drugs in Columbia and Afghanistan, the diamond trade in
Sierra Leone, with the criminal elements that come from clandestine trade. After
Sept. 11, these are not things we can simply ignore."

While Mr. Mallaby and other neo-imperialists do not foresee a return to the
British Raj, they do see a world in which readiness to send troops to distant
parts of the world to maintain or re-establish order becomes increasingly
common. In some sense, they argue, this has already begun to happen, in Albania,
Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan. "In Sierra Leone, the local population welcomed
the arrival of British troops," he said, as did people in Afghanistan.

This idea isn't simply a product of recent events. Two years ago, Mr. Gaddis
came to similar conclusions in an article in The Atlantic, as did the British
historian Niall Ferguson in his recent book, "The Cash Nexus." "Whatever else
you can say about empire, it had the advantage of maintaining order and
suppressing anarchy," Mr. Gaddis said. "We may need some kind of structure -- we
wouldn't call it empire, call it spheres of influence, to deal with these
problems."

But other thinkers argue that extending American power is precisely the problem.
"We need to come to grips with an ironic possibility: that the very
preponderance of American power may now make us not more secure but less
secure," Benjamin Schwarz and Christopher Layne wrote not long ago in of The
Atlantic. Recent foreign policy -- based on the idea of maintaining the United
States as the most powerful nation and de facto policeman of the globe -- is,
they wrote, precisely what has made it the target of terrorist attack.

Therefore, the United States should adopt a minimalist foreign policy, they
wrote, using diplomacy and proxies whenever possible, getting involved abroad
only as a last resort: "The less America does, and the less others expect it to
do, the more other states will do to help themselves."

But to Stephen Walt, a professor of international relations at Harvard
University, the minimalists are unrealistic. "One of the principal lessons of
Sept. 11 is that failed states are not just a humanitarian problem, they are a
national security problem," he said. States that have virtually collapsed, he
went on, like Sierra Leone, Liberia, Rwanda, Afghanistan and Somalia, are
breeding grounds of instability, mass migration and murder as well as terrorism.

The neo-imperialists also have it wrong, Mr. Walt said. "In the era of great
European overseas empires, there was nothing that the people who were subjects
could do," he explained. "The people who didn't like the British Empire couldn't
come to London and blow up Westminster Abbey. The capacity of the people
affected by our actions to inflict pain is much greater. In order to do that,
you have to be willing to put your own forces on the ground. You can't just bomb
from 15,000 feet.  There are going to be limits to this."

Mr. Walt believes the answer is not more imperial control, but more
international cooperation. His colleague at the Kennedy School at Harvard,
Joseph Nye, said, "The fact that information technology decentralizes power and
puts it in the hands of individuals scattered around the world means you are
going to need a lot of people who will cooperate with you." Mr. Nye just
published a book whose title suggests its main point: "The Paradox of American
Power: Why the World's Superpower Can't Go It Alone."

Of course, even enthusiastic multilateralists now concede that international
entities like the United Nations, NATO, the European Union and nongovernmental
health and environmental organizations have all been relegated to the sidelines
in recent months.

"All the most important agreements were made on a state-by-state basis," said
Christopher Hill, a lecturer in international affairs at Yale, pointing to
assistance offered the United States after Sept. 11 by Britain, Italy, Germany,
Russia, Pakistan and other nations. "Pick any problem out there -- AIDS, the
environment or terrorism," he added, "if the state isn't effective in its
jurisdiction, then the problem isn't going to get solved."

Such thinking runs counter to what has been the fashion in academic circles.
Since the end of the cold war, many people have argued that the nation-state is
an outmoded concept inadequate to the borderless world of electronic information
and international commerce. "In the 1990's, the forces of globalization and
fragmentation were hitting states pretty hard," Mr. Gaddis said, and the
emergence of an international terrorist network like Al Qaeda seemed like a
textbook example of a powerful stateless entity. "Sept.  11 was an attack on the
notion of the state itself."

But the response to the attacks, Mr. Gaddis said, actually reaffirms the value
of state power. "It suggests that reports of the death of states have been
exaggerated," he said. "The whole reason we have states is protection against
anarchy -- 9-11 shows that states are rather good things to have around."

Indeed, for scholars like John Mearsheimer, a political scientist at the
University of Chicago, Sept. 11 shows that old-fashioned power politics still
operates in this new world.

Countries must singlemindedly pursue their interests, Mr. Mearsheimer said, no
matter what anybody else thinks. And that's just what the Bush administration is
doing, he said.

"We told all those states that were not allied with us, 'You are either with us
or against us and if you are against us you will pay a price,' " he said.
"That's unilateralism."

Power is the currency of the international system, Mr. Mearsheimer argues, and
the United States should use it when it sees fit. To Mr. Nye, that definition of
power is too narrow. American influence in the world, he argued, rests as much
on culture -- democracy, human rights, feminism, movies, consumerism -- as on
military hardware. After all, he said, what the terrorists "really object to is
American ideas, American culture."

Ultimately, the differences between the multilateralists the unilateralists, the
neo-imperialists, the minimalists and all the others "ists" may not be as sharp
as many make out. People like Mr. Gaddis and Mr. Hill who emphasize traditional
power politics and vital interests both acknowledge that democracy in the third
world has emerged as a major diplomatic issue. "It's increasingly clear that the
failure of the Arab states to improve the lives of their citizens has created a
great fund of discontent and the solution is ultimately democratization," Mr.
Gaddis said. "Realism and idealism have come together." Meanwhile, those who
favor cooperation, like Mr. Walt, say they do so out of self-interest: "I remain
a multilateralist on very selfish grounds," Mr. Walt said. "It's a way for the
U.S. to make its extraordinary power acceptable to others. "

If theoretical boundaries are blurring, it may be because policies have done the
same. The Clinton administration was multilateralist, stressing the use of "soft
power" but using military force in Bosnia and Kosovo in a way that struck
European allies as unilateral.

The Bush administration has done its own brand of mix-and-match. After showing
isolationist instincts -- withdrawing from an active role in the
Israel-Palestinian negotiations and dismissing the idea of nation-building -- it
has been sampling from the theoretical buffet.

Washington acted unilaterally in Afghanistan but worked hard to create
international consensus around its objective. It made decisive use of military
power, but sent troops in to do some nation-building and has spoken of the
importance of democracy and women's rights in the Islamic world. It has even
done something the minimalists would applaud: getting a local proxy, the
Northern Alliance, to do the bulk of the fighting.

So when it comes to taking the test, don't worry.

The answer is all of the above.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hard power, soft power: Some theorists say terrorism is best
countered militarily (top), while others favor encouraging economic development
and democracy (above). (Jewel Samad/Agence-France Presse); (Ariana
Cubillos/Associated press)(pg. B9) Drawing (Istvan Orosz)(pg. B7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
PUBLIC POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (77%); HIJACKING (77%);
POPULATION SIZE (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (69%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (68%); WRITERS (63%); INTERVIEWS (63%);
DIAMOND MARKETS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) TERRORISM;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: YALE UNIVERSITY (54%)

PERSON: STILLE, ALEXANDER

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); FRANCE
(77%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PRISONERS;
U.S. Holding British Subject In Detention At Cuba Base

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE and THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


The United States has notified Britain that a British subject is one of the 20
detainees from Afghanistan being held at the United States Naval Base at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a Foreign Office spokesman in London said today.

The spokesman said that Britain would defer to the United States on how the
person should be handled but that it wanted its diplomats to be allowed access
to him. His identity has not been made public.

Pentagon spokesmen who were reached today could not confirm that a British
subject was in captivity and could not say whether such access would be granted
to the British.

The Vienna Convention on Consular Access, which the United States has signed,
requires Washington to notify consular officials when their nationals are
detained by any law enforcement agency or other branch of the federal
government.

It is not known whether the United States has notified the home countries of the
other detainees who arrived in Cuba on Friday.

Nor is it known to what degree the United States is adhering to a broad set of
military regulations issued in 1997 governing the treatment of prisoners of war
and other detainees.

The regulations say all captives shall be treated humanely under the Geneva
Protocols until their status is determined by a screening tribunal of three
commissioned officers. They require that a written record be made of the
proceedings, that the prisoner be advised of his rights, be allowed to attend
the sessions, can have an interpreter, can call witnesses and that his status
shall be determined by a majority vote based on a preponderance of evidence. It
makes no reference to whether a detainee can have a lawyer.

The regulations state that anyone determined by a tribunal not to be entitled to
prisoner-of-war status "may not be executed, imprisoned, or otherwise penalized
without further proceedings to determine what acts they have committed and what
penalty should be imposed."

It is not clear whether the military has conducted such screening tribunals. As
recently as Friday, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said the military
was still figuring out how to categorize the prisoners, but he made a point of
calling the first batch of 20 detainees sent to Cuba "unlawful combatants."

He said: "They will be handled not as prisoners of war, because they're not, but
as unlawful combatants. As I understand it, technically, unlawful combatants do
not have any rights under the Geneva Convention. We have indicated that we do
plan to, for the most part, treat them in a manner that is reasonably consistent
with the Geneva Conventions, to the extent they are appropriate, and that is
exactly what we have been doing."

Jamie Fellner of Human Rights Watch said the phrase "unlawful combatants"
provided for the least amount of privileges and protections of any category of
prisoner. "The United States is lumping all these captured people under the
rubric of 'unlawful combatants' because it suits their political agenda," she
said.

In Afghanistan, the resilience of the Al Qaeda network has prompted renewed
bombing of a terrorist training camp that was a target earlier in the conflict,
American military officials said today.

A spokesman for the United States Central Command said a known terrorist
training base at Zawar Kili, in Khost Province, was bombed on Friday because
detailed intelligence from multiple sources showed that the camp had been
reoccupied by Al Qaeda members.

It is believed that the Qaeda fighters were using the camp as a staging area
before fleeing to safety out of Afghanistan, officials said.

The United States Central Command said today that investigators had finally made
their way to the site where a Marine KC-130 tanker had crashed, killing its crew
of seven, and that a recovery operation and investigation was now under way.

By late today, the bodies of five of the seven marines had been recovered.

No final cause of the crash has yet been determined, officials said, although
enemy fire has been ruled out as a cause.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); HIJACKING (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
NAVIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(75%); AL-QAEDA (74%); FINES & PENALTIES (74%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (74%);
AGENCY RULEMAKING (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); LAWYERS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); WITNESSES
(69%); EVIDENCE (64%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL
BASE (CUBA);  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (82%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; SHANKER, THOM

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (88%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (86%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (86%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ZAWAR KILI
(AFGHANISTAN);  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             199 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syrian at U.N. Compares Israeli Actions to the Sept. 11 Attack

BYLINE:  By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 18


A daylong Security Council session on combating terrorism flared up today when
Syria compared Israeli demolition of Palestinian houses in Gaza to the Sept. 11
attacks on the World Trade Center.

The Syrian representative, speaking for the first time since his country assumed
one of the rotating seats on the 15-member Council, said the body was practicing
a double standard in not denouncing Israel's actions against the Palestinians.

The scene of Palestinian houses' being demolished by Israeli tanks in the Rafah
refugee camp, he said at one point, was "not much different from the scene of
the World Trade Center, which was destroyed by the terrorists whom we have all
agreed here to combat and eliminate."

An American official, speaking to reporters outside the Council chamber, called
the speech outrageous. In the Council, the Israeli representative, Yehuda
Lancry, denounced the charges as an attempt by Syria to divert attention from
the fact that it "supports, encourages, finances and harbors a vast gamut of
terrorist organizations."

India and Pakistan also crossed rhetorical swords over Kashmir. The Indian
representative, Kamalesh Sharma, condemned militant Islamic groups that have
carried out terrorist attacks in the fight for Kashmir, and he demanded that the
Council demonstrate that it "means business."

That brought a response from the Pakistani ambassador, Shamshad Ahmad, who said
his government had taken resolute action against terrorism, and charged that
India, through its "foreign occupation" of Kashmir, was also a "perpetrator of
terrorism."

The flare-ups were exceptions in what diplomats otherwise characterized as an
unusually open debate on counterterrorism.

The purpose of the meeting was to review the work of a committee set up after
Sept. 11 under Britain's leadership to process reports that all United Nations
members are required to submit on measures they are taking to fight terrorism.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British ambassador, was praised by many speakers for
his efforts to focus the campaign on practical steps to combat terrorism, rather
than letting it become mired in endless debates over "who is a terrorist."

Sir Jeremy took pains in his address to stress what the committee was not.

"It is not a tribunal for judging states," he said. "It will not trespass onto
areas of competence of other parts of the U.N. system. It is not going to define
terrorism in a legal sense, although we will have a fair idea of what is blatant
terrorism. It has no plans to issue lists of terrorist organizations."

The day's speeches followed several broad themes. One was the concern that the
war on terrorism could provide cover for governments to settle scores with
critics or opponents. That was raised, among others, by Kofi Annan, the
secretary general, who told the Council, "We should all be clear that there is
no trade-off between effective action against terrorism and the protection of
human rights."

Another theme stressed by several countries was that a war on terrorism must
include a war on its causes. Bernd Niehaus, of Costa Rica, said Latin American
countries were "well aware that political repression, extreme poverty and
violations of human rights fed the extremist feelings that led to terrorist
attacks."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); WAR
ON TERROR (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
REFUGEES (71%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (70%);
RELIGION (52%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED
NATIONS

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); ASIA
(93%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GAZA STRIP;  SYRIA

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             200 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Start of Mideast Conflict

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

Yoel Esteron (Op-Ed, Jan. 13) presents himself as sympathetic to the plight of
the Palestinian refugees while suggesting that the United Nations has "inflated"
their numbers and blaming "their Arab neighbors" for their misery.

Worse, he demands that Palestinians renounce their right of return simply
because it might undermine the "Jewish nature" of the Israeli state. Mr.

Esteron is in favor of excluding the Palestinians simply because of their
ethnicity.

The right of return for refugees is guaranteed by all basic human rights
treaties and was explicitly applied to the Palestinian refugees by United
Nations Resolution 194. Mr. Esteron would have Palestinians renounce their basic
human rights to accommodate Jewish ethno-nationalism.

HUSSEIN IBISH
Communications Director
American-Arab
Anti-Discrimination Committee
Washington, Jan. 13, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (92%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); ARAB AMERICANS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); IMMIGRATION (72%); ETHNICITY (68%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (52%) IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE
(59%) AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE

PERSON: IBISH, HUSSEIN

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             201 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 22, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: ASIAN TERROR;
Beijing Says Chinese Muslims Were Trained as Terrorists With Money From bin
Laden

BYLINE:  By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Jan. 21


Seeking to justify its harsh treatment of Muslims living in China's far western
region of Xinjiang, Chinese officials asserted today that a small separatist
movement there was being financed and supported by Osama bin Laden and that more
than 100 terrorists who had trained at camps in Afghanistan had been arrested in
China.

In a new report, the government asserted that Mr. bin Laden himself had met with
radical Chinese Muslims and that "bin Laden terrorists and Taliban leaders" had
allocated "a fabulous sum of money for the training of the 'East Turkistan'
terrorists."

East Turkistan is the name favored by some members of the Muslim Uighur minority
for a separate homeland in Xinjiang.

Adopting the vocabulary of the United States-led war on terrorism, the report
contends that, since 1998, East Turkistan terrorists have established more than
a dozen training bases in China, which taught skills like making bombs.

Most of the allegations in the report, released today by China's State Council
Information Office, were being made public for the first time. It was by far the
most direct attempt by the Chinese government to link -- and thereby justify --
its crackdown on Uighurs in Xinjiang, with the American campaign against Mr. bin
Laden's organization, Al Qaeda.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States, Chinese officials have
repeatedly defended the government's surveillance and arrests of Muslims as part
of the international effort against terrorists. While they have said that
Chinese citizens fought with the Taliban, they have never before suggested that
Al Qaeda helped organize and finance terrorism within China.

Since last fall, human rights groups and some diplomats have criticized China
for seizing on the war on terror as an excuse to curtail religious freedom and
the voice of a restive ethnic minority. Arrests of Muslims in Xinjiang, mostly
Uighurs, have increased in the last six months, said a Western diplomat who
monitors the situation.

Today, Uighur exile groups criticized the report.

"I can totally deny the assertion by the Chinese government about assistance
coming from bin Laden," said Dilixiadi Rasheed, the Swedish-based spokesman for
the East Turkistan Information Center. "The reason why they're making it is
because they want to crack down on anyone exercising freedom of speech to demand
autonomy, by linking them to terrorist crimes.

Uighurs are a Turkic-speaking people who are Muslim but have generally shown
little interest in Islamic fundamentalism. They have, however, shown intense
devotion to preserving their language and culture -- some to the extent of
calling for an independent state. There is generally strong pro-Western
sentiment among China's Uighurs, stemming from the belief that only foreign
pressure will bring attention to their plight, academics who study Uighurs say.

Since the beginning of the war in Afghanistan, Chinese officials have at various
times estimated that between 500 and 1,000 Uighurs were fighting with the
Taliban. United States officials have acknowledged that a few Chinese
passport-holders have been discovered among the fighters there.

But Chinese scholars estimate that only "dozens" of Uighurs have trained in
Afghanistan's camps. And Mr. Rasheed said that even if a small number were
found, it would not signify widespread Uighur radicalism or collusion with
terrorists.

He pointed out that some Uighurs went to Afghanistan in the 1980's to support
the resistance to the occupying Soviet forces -- a cause that was generally
supported by the Chinese government, as well as the United States. He said other
Uighurs have fled across the border to Afghanistan to avoid religious
repression, adding: "I'm not sure what the number is, but altogether it can't be
many. And in any case they don't represent the Uighurs or their aspirations.

"To say that is like saying John Walker represents all Americans because he is a
U.S. citizen," Mr. Rasheed said, referring to the young American who fought with
the Taliban.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); RELIGION (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TALIBAN (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES
(78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); MISSING
PERSONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(68%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (68%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (63%); ETHNICITY (62%)
TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (95%) BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (97%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (90%);
XINJIANG, CHINA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SWEDEN (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  XINJIANG (CHINA);  AFGHANISTAN;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             202 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 22, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Captured in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 156 words


To the Editor:

"On Defensive, General Says Prisoners Get Mats, Even Bagels" (news article, Jan.
17) reports that the issue of classifying Al Qaeda and Taliban troops as
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions is "complicated by the fact that
no war has been declared."

An important characteristic of the Geneva Conventions is that they apply during
armed conflict, whether declared or not.

One article states that the Geneva Conventions apply "to all cases of declared
war or of any other armed conflict which may arise between two or more of the
High Contracting Parties, even if the state of war is not recognized by one of
them."

The United States and Afghanistan are such parties. People captured by the
military in Afghanistan are entitled to prisoner-of-war status until a competent
tribunal, as provided by the conventions, determines otherwise.

JOHN SIFTON
New York, Jan. 17, 2002

The writer is a lawyer at Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
LAW OF WAR (90%); TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); AL-QAEDA (88%); ARMED FORCES (88%); HIJACKING
(88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  PRISONERS OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: ;SIFTON, JOHN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (65%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             203 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
RUMSFELD DEFENDS TREATMENT BY U.S. OF CUBA DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1064 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Frustrated by an international outcry over the American treatment of prisoners
in Cuba, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld defended the United States'
conduct at length today and dismissed the criticism as breathless armchair
hyperbole.

"I am telling you what I believe in every inch of my body to be the truth, and I
have spent a lot of time on secure video with the people down there," he told
reporters, referring to the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
where 158 prisoners from the war in Afghanistan are being jailed. "I haven't
found a single scrap of any kind of information that suggests that anyone has
been treated anything other than humanely."

Mr. Rumsfeld spoke in an unusual briefing that stretched over an hour in an
attempt, he said, to "tap down some of this hyperbole." It was prompted by a
rising tide of international criticism after the Defense Department released
photographs over the weekend that showed some of the prisoners kneeling before
their captors, their legs in shackles, their hands bound in manacles, their
mouths covered by surgical masks and their eyes blinded by large goggles with
black tape.

His comments came as criticism swelled from abroad. Critics said the United
States was using sensory deprivation and other psychological control techniques
to weaken the prisoners so that interrogations would be more fruitful. The
International Committee of the Red Cross, in a rare break with its code of not
publicly criticizing detaining governments, said the United States might have
violated Geneva Convention rules against making a spectacle of prisoners by
distributing the pictures, which were published worldwide.

Amnesty International sought access to the prisoners in Guantanamo and said they
should be allowed to have lawyers.

"Keeping prisoners incommunicado, sensory deprivation, the use of unnecessary
restraint and the humiliation of people through tactics such as shaving them are
all classic techniques employed to break the spirit of individuals ahead of
interrogation," the organization said.

Several governments joined the chorus, saying the prisoners should be granted
prisoner of war status under the Geneva Convention. Such status would accord
them the highest level of protections.

Javier Solana, the European Union foreign policy chief, said that despite the
Sept. 11 atrocities, "changing our values and our way of life would be
terrorism's first victory." The Netherlands also urged Washington to recognize
the detainees as prisoners of war, saying, "In the fight, we need to uphold our
norms and values."

While debate raged elsewhere, Britain and Spain supported the United States.
Prime Minister Tony Blair's office said the three British prisoners at the
detention center, called Camp X-Ray, "had no complaints about their treatment."
Spanish Foreign Minister Josep Pique said the Spanish government "does not have
the slightest doubt regarding the position of the U.S. government."

The warden at Camp X-Ray, Col. Terry Carrico, said he was determined at all
times to maintain what he called "positive control" over the prisoners. Bill
Nash, a retired Army major general and senior fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations, said this amounted to "imposing on them a psychological sense of
isolation, domination and futility, and trying to establish the conditions by
which you can then reward them for information, as oppose to punish them."

Mr. Rumsfeld said it was "probably unfortunate" that the photographs were
released, at least without an explanation. He said the prisoners had been
photographed in a holding area just before their restraints were removed and
they were put in their cages.

"If you want to think the worst about things, you can," he said. But he argued
that whenever prisoners, especially those who are dangerous and suicidal, are
transported, it only makes sense to lock them in restraints. "When they are
being moved from place to place, will they be restrained in a way so that they
are less likely to be able to kill an American soldier? You bet. Is it inhumane
to do that? No. Would it be stupid to do anything else? Yes."

It is not clear why the United States has not officially designated the
detainees as prisoners of war, especially since Mr. Rumsfeld said they are
essentially being treated as such.

"They're in legal limbo," said Michael F. Noone, professor of military law at
Catholic University. "The United States has to get moving on screening these
people and determining whether or not they're P.O.W.'s. There is no explanation
for the delay."

Mr. Rumsfeld said the Pentagon's clear priority with the prisoners was to
extract information from them to prevent future attacks. "These people are
committed terrorists," he said. "We are keeping them off the street and out of
the airlines and out of nuclear power plants and out of ports across this
country and across other countries."

And yet, officials at Guantanamo have said that no interrogation has taken place
on the base and that the prisoners do not have lawyers.

Asked what benefit the United States gets by not classifying the captives as
prisoners of war, Mr. Rumsfeld said, "I don't know enough of the legal
technicalities to answer your question. I know that the process of gathering the
intelligence information has not been concluded."

Mr. Rumsfeld said one of the complicating factors was that the Geneva
Conventions give protection to prisoners from countries but not from terrorist
organizations, like Al Qaeda, to which some of the prisoners apparently belong.
"To give standing under a Geneva Convention to a terrorist organization that's
not a country is something that I think some of the lawyers who did not drop out
of law school as I did worry about as a precedent," he said.

Officials have said the prisoners come from a range of countries, -- Britain,
Yemen, China, Saudi Arabia and Australia among them -- and that has also
complicated the legal picture.

In Los Angeles, a federal district judge questioned today whether he had the
authority to consider a challenge to the detention of the prisoners in Cuba.

"I have grave doubts about whether I have jurisdiction," said the judge, A.
Howard Matz. He spoke at a hearing on a petition filed on Sunday by a group of
lawyers, clerics and professors who demand that the detainees be identified,
taken before a court and told of the charges against them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in a holding area at the
military detention center known as Camp X-Ray in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (Shane T.
McCoy/U.S. Navy, via Associated Press)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); FOREIGN
POLICY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); NAVIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%);
LAWYERS (71%); OPHTHALMIC GOODS (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (69%); EUROPEAN UNION (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (64%); HIJACKING (64%); EUROPEAN UNION REGULATION &
POLICY (64%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (64%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (60%);
AL-QAEDA (60%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (60%); PRIME MINISTERS (60%) TERRORISM;
PRISONERS OF WAR;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
SPAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;
PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
(59%); US NAVY (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (54%);
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (54%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST
GROUP); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; RED CROSS

PERSON: JAVIER SOLANA (50%); TONY BLAIR (50%) SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; RUMSFELD,
DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (87%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (95%); SPAIN (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(71%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  GREAT BRITAIN;  SPAIN;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);
NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             204 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2002 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
U.S. Suspends the Transport Of Terror Suspects to Cuba

BYLINE:   By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE with STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


The Pentagon today suspended the transfer of Taliban and Al Qaeda prisoners from
Afghanistan to its naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Officials said flights were suspended because the base had run out of space, for
the time being. Washington is facing sharp criticism from its closest allies
over its treatment of the prisoners, and officials said they did not want to
overcrowd the stockade.

The United States also began to question prisoners today for the first time
since they started arriving at Guantanamo two weeks ago, officials said, though
some had been interrogated in Afghanistan. The sessions today were held in a
tent by several United States agencies, officials said. No foreign governments
are taking part at this time, nor do the prisoners have lawyers.

The compound is holding 158 prisoners and has 160 cages built of chain-link
fencing. The military intends to construct 320 more temporary cages and then
move all prisoners into cells with solid walls. Total capacity is planned for
1,000.

Maj. Stephen A. Cox of the Marines said in an interview from Guantanamo that the
flights of prisoners were being halted only temporarily.

"Rather than put ourselves in the position of bringing them out here and
doubling them up in two per unit, which is not good from a detainee perspective
or from a security perspective, we said, 'Let's hold on for a second,' " he
said. "But we will resume the flow soon."

Another military official in Washington said, "They don't necessarily want to
put more people in those cells now," referring to the 8-foot by 8-foot cages.
"They don't want it to be perceived that we're jamming them in there."

The United States' treatment of the prisoners has drawn especially blunt
criticism from Europe, where it has raised fears that Washington may be applying
international law selectively.

The decision by the Pentagon to keep the detainees outside the United States and
not to classify them as prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions has
troubled European and other allies. The United States may be "making up the
rules as it goes along," said a West European ambassador here.

"This is international law a la carte, like multilateralism a la carte," the
ambassador said. "It annoys your allies in the war against terrorism and it
creates problems for our Muslim allies, too. It puts at stake the moral
credibility of the war against terrorism."

In the last few days, the German and Dutch governments and the European Union
have openly criticized the treatment of the captives. They were spurred by a
Pentagon photograph of bound, shackled prisoners, their heads and eyes covered,
kneeling before American soldiers.

Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany and the European Union director of
security, Javier Solana, said the Geneva Conventions must be applied to the
prisoners, which would mean the prisoners are not obliged to submit to
interrogation.

There has also been criticism of the physical treatment from the United Nations
commissioner for human rights, Mary Robinson, and groups like Amnesty
International and Doctors Without Borders.

The photographs of shackled prisoners caused the British foreign secretary, Jack
Straw, to protest to Washington more than a week ago, in the first open
criticism of the Bush administration by the British since Sept. 11. He was
reportedly reassured about the treatment of the prisoners, but was appalled by
the damage that the issue could do to the coalition against terrorism.

Mr. Straw's concerns proved prescient, as the cascade of criticism continued.
The defense secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld, was prompted to devote an hour-long
news conference to the subject on Tuesday.

Mr. Rumsfeld called the publication of the photos "probably unfortunate." He
insisted that the prisoners, who he said were extremely dangerous, were being
held under humane conditions "consistent with the Geneva Convention" and had
been visited by Red Cross representatives.

Europeans saw the photographs as evidence that the United States was failing to
protect the prisoners' fundamental rights against humiliation and psychological
torture. But the Europeans' concerns went beyond specifics.

"A lot of the European reaction to Guantanamo is not because people care about
the feelings of the prisoners there," said Charles Grant, director of the Center
for European Reform, a research group in London. "It's touched a neuralgic
point, which is the European concern that America doesn't believe in
international law, doesn't believe in submitting itself to rules, organizations
or norms that limit its freedom of action."

The Bush administration has withdrawn from the Kyoto treaty on the environment,
for example, arguing that it will not solve the problem of greenhouse gases.
Washington has also said it will not take part in an international criminal
court set up by the United Nations because American officials and soldiers could
be tried there.

These trans-Atlantic arguments about international obligations were heated
before Sept. 11, but became muted after. The war against terrorism has brought
them forward in a new way, Mr. Grant said.

European voters and governments are asking, "How can we argue the case that the
moral thing to do is to fight terrorism if we're not prepared to apply basic
human rights and international law to the detainees?" Mr. Grant said.

That argument was echoed by Jacques Amalric in a commentary in the French
newspaper Liberation. "The prisoners, already presumed guilty, have been denied
the protection of the judicial guarantees afforded by the American institutional
system," he wrote. "Certainly nothing will be the same after Sept. 11, but
should this be true of justice?" he asked.

"Beyond the issue of human rights," he warned, "the credibility of the war
against terrorism is at stake."

Today the Anglican bishop of Birmingham, England, the Right Rev. Mark Santer,
said the British-American alliance against terrorism was risking its "moral
credibility in the eyes of the world" and risked provoking further terrorism.

"It is not edifying that the strongest country, America, has set itself up as
prosecutor, judge, jury and executioner of its case," he said. "The argument
that the Taliban is appalling, therefore it doesn't matter how we treat them, is
degrading to our own claim to be upholding the standards of civilization."

For their part, British politicians reacted angrily to Secretary Rumsfeld's
attack on them for criticizing Guantanamo from "a comfortable distance."

"We've supported the United States," said Ann Clwyd, a legislator from the
ruling Labor Party. "It seems rather crass to dismiss legitimate concerns out of
hand. We don't want to be insulted by Donald Rumsfeld."

America's reputation for generosity is at stake, said Vittorio Zucconi, in a
comment in the Italian daily Corriere della Sera. "It is from the way these men
will be treated, from the justice they will receive, that America, and we as
allies, will find out if the military and technological superiority showed in
the battle field can turn into juridical and moral superiority," he wrote.

If Taliban prisoners return home, as America's German and Italian and Japanese
prisoners did after World War II, with memories of humane and just treatment, he
said, "another phase of this war against terror will be achieved."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 30, 2002



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Thursday about the Pentagon's suspension of
the transfer of Taliban and Al Qaeda captives from Afghanistan to its naval base
in Guantanamo Bay misidentified the newspaper that carried a commentary by an
Italian journalist, Vittorio Zucconi, on their treatment. It was La Repubblica,
not Corriere della Sera.

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the American stockade at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a captive,
bending at left, got a water ration yesterday. The sign at top points toward
Mecca, which the Muslim prisoners face in prayer five times a day. (Joe
Skipper/Reuters)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); NAVIES (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); EUROPEAN UNION (85%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (74%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (74%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); AIRLINES (73%); INTERVIEWS (72%); LAWYERS
(70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (61%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  PRISONERS
OF WAR

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: JAVIER SOLANA (54%) ;SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; ERLANGER, STEVEN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%); EUROPE (94%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); GERMANY (86%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL
BASE (CUBA);

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             205 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE FIGHTING;
U.S. Forces Strike Taliban At Camps Near Kandahar

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT with TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


In the most intense fighting of recent weeks in Afghanistan, American troops
killed as many as 15 Taliban fighters and captured 27 others in a predawn raid
today 60 miles north of Kandahar, Pentagon officials said. One American soldier
was wounded in the ankle by enemy fire.

The raid, conducted by Army Special Forces supported by AC-130 gunships, could
indicate an escalation in attacks on mountain hide-outs north of Kandahar, the
Taliban's political and spiritual capital.

The simultaneous strikes against two Taliban leadership compounds less than 10
miles apart shortly after midnight suggested that American forces hoped to use
the element of surprise to seize high-ranking militia leaders as well as their
computer hard drives and phone books, which have proved valuable in tracking
down other terrorist cells.

The Pentagon did not disclose how many troops were involved or other details,
because operations are still under way.

"We still have eyes on the targets there, and there is a potential for further
action," Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, told
reporters.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the strike showed that pockets of
resistance remained despite the American-backed rout of Osama bin Laden's
network, Al Qaeda, and the Taliban government.

"They are able to move around the country in some narrow, confined areas in the
mountains," Mr. Rumsfeld said. "They are able to hide."

Once American soldiers scoured the compounds, they determined that Taliban
fighters, not members of Al Qaeda from outside Afghanistan, had been using the
sites. Officials said a large cache of weapons and ammunition discovered at the
compounds was destroyed by an AC-130 gunship. The battle took place near Hazar
Qadem in Oruzgan Province.

General Myers said the American forces were still sorting through the prisoners
to determine if there were any senior leaders among them.

While troops engaged in combat in Afghanistan, the military also trod a delicate
diplomatic line today, with the commander of the American military campaign in
Afghanistan thanking Uzbekistan's authoritarian government for its cooperation,
even as the State Department criticized Uzbekistan's coming presidential
referendum as a virtual sham.

It was not the first time since Sept. 11 that the Bush administration has had to
balance its pursuit of military objectives against its concerns about human
rights in South and Central Asia. But the contrast today between the comments of
Gen. Tommy R. Franks and the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, was
striking just the same.

In Tashkent, the Uzbek capital, General Franks thanked the government of
President Islam Karimov for opening air bases to American forces. "The support
we have received across the region has been considerable," he said. "It has
indeed met our every need, and we look forward to being recipients of this
continued support."

General Franks also pledged continued efforts to root out remaining elements of
the radical Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, which has been allied with the
Taliban and which Mr. Karimov has used to justify repressive measures against
opposition to him. The movement was one of two extremist groups besides Al Qaeda
that President Bush identified in his speech to Congress after the Sept. 11
attacks.

But at the State Department, Mr. Boucher took some pains to note that, with
expectations nonexistent, neither the United States nor the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe was bothering to send monitors to observe the
Sunday referendum that is expected to extend the term of Mr. Karimov.

"The conditions are such there's little hope that it would be free and fair
expression of people's views," Mr. Boucher said today. "Therefore, we're not
participating or observing or otherwise associating ourselves with it."

Joshua Spero, a former planner for the Joint Chiefs of Staff who teaches
political science at Merrimack College in North Andover, Mass., said, "This is
absolutely one of those age-old democratic dilemmas we face, where the
political-diplomatic and military dimensions don't necessarily diverge, but
cannot always work from the same sheet of music."

"It's very discouraging when I see the State Department saying we're not even
going to send election monitors for this so-called presidential referendum
because it's just symptomatic of the difficulties of democratization there," Mr.
Spero said. "We're very frustrated with what we see not developing
democratically there, but on the other hand we've got our strong interest in the
international coalition against terrorism."

A senior administration official, while acknowledging the seeming contradiction,
said Washington was "trying to have a policy that hangs together on both
fronts," adding, "We don't see these as opposite ends of the spectrum -- human
rights and cooperation against terrorism."

Later, General Franks was asked if Washington was competing with Russia in
Central Asia. He replied: "There is no competition. Russia is a very strong
nation and also a good friend in the coalition."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (85%);
ARMIES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY BASES (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); MOUNTAINS (71%); RELIGION (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); US PRESIDENTS (65%);
REFERENDUMS (50%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (55%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) SCHMITT, ERIC; PURDUM, TODD S

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN
(52%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UZBEKISTAN (93%); CENTRAL ASIA
(79%); ASIA (79%); SOUTH CENTRAL ASIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             207 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE TREATMENT;
Prisoners Straddle an Ideological Chasm

BYLINE:  By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


The White House tried mightily today to dismiss the arguments about how the
United States treats captives of the war in Afghanistan as an abstruse argument
among government lawyers, rather than a fundamental split between America and
its allies, or between Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other leaders of
President Bush's national security team.

But clearly, the dispute is over something deeper than just legalisms.

There is an ideological aversion among leading members of the administration --
led by Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld --
to be bound by aging international treaties in an era of new conflicts. And not
for the first time, that view has caused problems for Mr. Powell, whose job it
is to keep a fragile international coalition together for the war on terror.

Mr. Cheney summed up his view of the prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
quite succinctly on Friday: "Nobody should feel defensive or unhappy about the
quality of treatment they've received," he told an audience in Cincinnati,
proclaiming that the captives are cared for in a manner "consistent" with
America's obligations under the Geneva Conventions.

"It's probably better than they deserve," he added.

Mr. Cheney, Attorney General John Ashcroft and others have contended that since
the Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters represented no legitimate government and
fought outside the rules, they should be considered "unlawful combatants"
undeserving of full protection under the famed 1949 Geneva accord on the
treatment of prisoners of war.

Earlier this month, Mr. Bush agreed.

As the president's legal counsel, Albert Gonzales, wrote in a memorandum on
Friday, a decision to avoid invoking the Geneva Conventions "preserves
flexibility" as Mr. Bush conducts the war. He appeared to be referring to the
ability to interrogate prisoners at length, in hopes of getting them to reveal
secrets of the terrorist organization, but his meaning was not entirely clear.

Mr. Gonzales's memorandum, which leaked with astonishing speed, recommended
rejecting an unusual request by Mr. Powell that Mr. Bush reconsider his
decision.

As they struggled to explain the disagreement, some aides said that Mr. Bush's
decision that the captives were not prisoners of war was made in informal
discussions, and apparently without fully consulting his traveling secretary of
state.

In a White House that prides itself on a corporate-style decision-making
process, this decision appears to have been made quickly and viscerally.

"That's why there are all these legal memorandums flying all over town today,"
said one White House official, as more of those memos came across the fax
machine into the office of Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser.
Another added: "It was more like, 'Decide first, write the memos later.' "

Meanwhile, Germany called in the American ambassador to express its concerns
about human rights. Jack Straw, the British foreign secretary, said any British
prisoners should be tried at home, not by the Americans, who might sentence some
of them to death.

Perhaps the most searing critique came from Christopher Patten, the vice
chairman of the European Commission and the last British governor of Hong Kong,
where he regularly spoke out against Chinese human rights abuses.

"Having won the campaign," Mr. Patten said this week, "it would be a huge error
if the international coalition were to lose the peace."

Mr. Powell called for a review after returning to the United States from a trip
to India, Pakistan and Afghanistan, and from an international conference in
Tokyo on rebuilding Afghanistan.

Curiously, what Mr. Powell seeks is a change in some legal niceties, rather than
a real change in the way prisoners are ultimately defined or treated at
Guantanamo.

Mr. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff agrees with
President Bush, administration officials said today, that the captives in
Guantanamo were not "prisoners of war" under the definition of the conventions.

But the Geneva Conventions require due process for determining the status of
captives, and Mr. Powell contends that the United States must acknowledge that
international law -- not the administration's desire -- governs how they should
be treated. He has told Mr. Bush, officials say, that acknowledging the
supremacy of the Geneva Conventions is the only way to answer European criticism
and to protect American soldiers who may be captured in the future.

"This is not about how we treat the prisoners; that's already humane," said one
administration official eager for Mr. Bush to reverse his decision. "It's about
the political statement we send to the world, and about recognizing our
international obligations."

And in that sense, it's just the latest in a series of arguments between the
internationalist wing of Mr. Bush's team and the "America-first" wing. The
president's views are still taking form -- he has no objection to international
treaties, he says, as long as they protect American interests and reflect the
reality of the world today.

But in the next day or two, Mr. Bush faces a difficult choice.

To continue on his current path is to publicly undercut his secretary of state
and to reject the views of close allies, some of whom will be stationing
peacekeepers in Afghanistan.

Yet if Mr. Bush changes his position, it will appear he did so under pressure.
And that would amount to a tacit acknowledgment that his first take on the issue
may have been hasty.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HIJACKING (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(71%); AL-QAEDA (68%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  TERRORISM;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) SANGER,
DAVID E; CHENEY, DICK (VICE PRES); RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC); BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             208 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Qaeda Suspect's Bosnian Wife Says He's No Terrorist

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Jan. 27


Her husband came to Bosnia in late 1995 as an Islamic missionary and, Anela
Belkacem says, to marry a Bosnian woman. What he did for the previous four years
is a little foggy. She confirmed that he had arrived here on a forged Yemeni
passport.

But she said that does not make her husband, Bansayah Belkacem, a top operative
of Al Qaeda in Europe. American officials charged that he was, after he and five
other Algerians were deported a week ago and turned over to the Americans, who
transported them to the naval prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Ms. Belkacem said she never even saw her husband with a mobile phone: how then
could he have made repeated cellular calls to one of Osama bin Laden's top aides
after Sept. 11, as United States officials allege?

"He never had one," she said in the only detailed interview she has granted. "He
doesn't have a car or a satellite dish. That would be very odd for a Qaeda
member."

She is angry, but so are many other Bosnian Muslims who do not have her personal
stake in the arrest of the so-called Algerian Six. And to many, whether the men
are guilty is almost beside the point.

The painful memories of the war from 1992 to 1995 that destroyed Bosnia are
entwining themselves tightly here into America's new war on terrorism. The
issues are many, and they include allegations that the United States ran
roughshod over Bosnia's fragile justice system in gaining custody of the men.

But the emotional core for many Bosnian Muslims is this: why did the United
States act so quickly against six Muslim men but lag in the cases against
Radovan Karadzic, the wartime Bosnian Serb leader, and Ratko Mladic, the top
Bosnian Serb general, both still at large though they were indicted in 1995 for
war crimes against Bosnian Muslims?

Several Bosnian and international experts say the anger runs deep and threatens
to chip away at support for the United States among Bosnia's Muslims, who are
largely pro-Western and are mostly moderate in their religious practices.

Their support, experts say, is vital because of the numbers of Islamic activists
here, like Mr. Belkacem, and because of fears that Bosnia may become a breeding
ground for extremism.

"For principled reasons, and also for political reasons, it should not appear
that the international community is biased," Wolfgang Petritsch, the chief
administrator for international organizations here in Bosnia, said in an
interview.

The deportations of the six Algerians, he said, should "motivate us to move
against Karadzic now."

In fact, there does seem to be something of a renewed effort to arrest the two
men, though it is impossible to tell how serious that effort is after years of
stalling and disagreements among Western nations about what to do about them.

It is widely assumed that Dr. Karadzic moves around Bosnia, possibly staying in
Orthodox monasteries, and in the neighboring Yugoslav republic of Montenegro,
while General Mladic reportedly hides in Belgrade, the capital of both
Yugoslavia and its larger republic, Serbia.

Last week an official in Washington described a "redoubling" of efforts to catch
the two men but would not be more specific. Also last week, the American Embassy
here plastered the capital, Sarajevo, with posters offering up to $5 million for
information leading to the arrest of Dr. Karadzic and General Mladic. Eventually
posters will be put up around Bosnia, officials said.

Karen Williams, spokeswoman for the embassy, said the poster campaign had been
planned long ago and was not aimed at diluting anger over the deportation of the
Algerians.

"It has nothing to do with the six guys -- categorically," she said.

Bosnian officials arrested the six Algerians in early October, saying they were
planning attacks on the United States Embassy as well as on the American
military here, which includes 3,100 American soldiers as part of the broader
effort to keep the peace in Bosnia.

Of the six, five had Bosnian citizenship and one was a permanent resident. All
were married, including one with two wives. Most arrived after the war, but at
least one fought beside the Bosnian Muslims in the war, as did many men who came
from Muslim countries for that purpose.

Several knew each other in Algeria, and all have worked for Islamic relief
groups, which are often considered centers for a more fundamentalist form of
Islam.

Mr. Belkacem, 39, was singled out by American officials, who said they had
monitored phone calls between him and Abu Zubaydah, the operations chief of Al
Qaeda, believed to be one of a handful of men entrusted with running the
terrorism network in the event of Osama bin Laden's death or capture.

Bosnian officials recovered phone lists from his home in Zenica, where many
Muslim militants live, with what they said was Mr. Zubaydah's phone number in
Pakistan.

More recently, American investigators have described Mr. Belkacem as one of Mr.
bin Laden's chief lieutenants in Europe -- and the men's presence in Bosnia as a
"credible threat."

Little is known otherwise about Mr. Belkacem, and he has provided little
information since his arrest, though he was interrogated twice by American
officials here.

His lawyer, Nermina Pivic, said he left Algeria in 1991 to go on a pilgrimage to
Saudi Arabia. She said he stayed there, moving between Mecca and Medina, until
1995, when he saw an advertisement for Islamic missionaries in Bosnia.

His wife said that she did not have a precise accounting for how he had spent
those years, but that he had not visited Afghanistan or Pakistan. Using a fake
Yemeni passport -- his lawyer said he had obtained it because he had lost his
Algerian passport -- he arrived in Bosnia in November 1995.

The war was ending, so he did not fight. He went to work for an Islamic relief
group, the Balkan Islamic Center in Zenica.

Esad Hecimovic, a reporter in Zenica for Dani, a respected weekly magazine, who
has investigated Mr. Belkacem, said: "Everyone who worked at the Balkan Islamic
Center shared a package of beliefs. It's the standard: anti-Western,
anti-Israeli, conspiracy theories against Islam."

But he said Mr. Belkacem had not drawn particular attention, and even now he
said it was difficult to piece together a picture of him and his activities.
Bosnian authorities forced the group to close down in 1997, the same year Mr.
Belkacem was married. Since then, his wife said, he has supported her and their
two young daughters by selling perfume and silver.

Despite his strong religious beliefs, she said, he did not force Islam on
others, not even on her.

"He didn't tell me to cover my face or my hair," said Mrs. Belkacem, 27, whose
head and face are veiled. "It was my choice."

She said he never mentioned Osama bin Laden, did not socialize much, never
received phone calls from abroad and never called anyone outside Bosnia except
his family in Algeria. His landlords in Zenica said they had noticed nothing
unusual in the six months he lived in their three-unit apartment building off a
main road in Zenica.

They said they believed that the arrest was unfair, particularly since Dr.
Karadzic and General Mladic were still free.

"It irritates us," said Dzemila Alajbegovic, 46, who owns the building with her
husband. "Everyone knows there is proof of what Karadzic and Mladic have done.
But this man, as far as I know, there is no evidence."

Nadja Dizdarevic, the wife of Boudella Hadz, 36, another of the deported
Algerians, said that "someone is just playing with the law in Bosnia."

The Bosnian government has acknowledged that the United States exerted heavy
pressure to hand over the men. Rather than extraditing them, a more complicated
legal procedure, Bosnian officials stripped them of their citizenship and
deported them on Oct. 18.

The day before, both Bosnia's highest court and the top human rights panel
ordered the men's release for lack of evidence that they were planning a
terrorist attack, though not ending further investigation.

Human rights groups, including the top United Nations human rights advocate
here, criticized the deportation. Dani magazine, which has written strongly
against Islamic fundamentalists in Bosnia, ran a cover depicting Uncle Sam
urinating on Bosnia's Constitution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The wives of the six Algerians deported from Bosnia to
Guantanamo Naval Base were among those praying in the snow on Friday during a
protest in front of the Bosnian government building in downtown Sarajevo.
(Associated Press); A wanted poster for Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, the
top wartime Bosnian Serb leaders, was posted, offering a $5 million reward.
(Alan Chin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERVIEWS
(88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (76%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); INDICTMENTS (76%); DEPORTATION (76%); NAVIES
(75%); MOBILE & CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); WAR CRIMES (70%); HIJACKING (69%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (69%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ISLAM;  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (71%) BELKACEM, BENSAYAH; BELKACEM, ANELA; MLADIC,
RATKO; KARADZIC, RADOVAN; FISHER, IAN

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (71%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); EUROPE (93%); CUBA
(90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%)

REGION: EUROPE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;
ALGERIA;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             210 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Forgotten Prisoners of War

BYLINE:  By Jennifer Leaning and John Heffernan; Jennifer Leaning, a physician,
is a professor at the Harvard School of Public Health and a board member of
Physicians for Human Rights. John Heffernan is a consultant to Physicians for
Human Rights.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


While the world's attention has been focused on the living conditions and legal
status of Qaeda suspects in Guantanamo Bay, a much larger group of Taliban
prisoners in Afghanistan is at risk of dying in detention. Some 3,500 Afghan and
Pakistani Taliban men are being held in dangerously squalid conditions in the
Shebarghan prison in northern Afghanistan. In our visit to the prison on Jan.
20, we found cell blocks designed for 20 prisoners holding up to 100 men; 8 to
10 toilets for each 1,000 men; bathing facilities outdoors in the mud; and
grossly inadequate food and medical care. Dysentery is epidemic. The prison's
commander, General Jarobak, told us that "many, many, many men" had already
died.

The American military knows about these conditions and has a duty under
international law to ensure that the prisoners are treated humanely. This
obligation falls on both the Afghan government and the United States, which led
the war in Afghanistan. Regardless of whether the United States captured these
prisoners or has actual custody of them, it shares with the Afghan government
responsibility for their decent care.

General Jarobak, who said he reported to Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, deputy
defense minister in the interim government of Hamid Karzai, seemed genuinely
distressed by the deplorable situation at Shebarghan and appealed to us to ask
the United States and other donors for assistance. He said that he had already
submitted requests for further assistance and resources to the international
community but the response had been minimal. The month-old government of Mr.
Karzai does not have the resources even to continue its current spending for the
upkeep of the prison, much less to raise standards in conformity with
international law.

To our knowledge, we were the first human rights observers to enter the
facility. But we were not the prisoners' first visitors. Until mid-January, the
American military controlled access and American officers interviewed the
captives. They took away the prisoners whom they wished to interrogate further.

The rest remain at Shebarghan, where more will die unless help is promptly
offered. There is almost nothing in Afghanistan that doesn't require
international assistance. After conducting health assessments in Mazar-i-Sharif
and Kabul as well as at the prison, we came away staggered by the enormity of
the destruction, suffering and need in this ruined land. But a great military
power like the United States has a particular obligation to care for captured
combatants whose fate it is in a position to influence.

The United States, as leader of the coalition forces, should work with its
allies, the Afghan government and the United Nations to provide resources to
remedy these prison conditions and to determine as soon as possible the legal
status of these prisoners, any charges against them and the judicial process
required to resolve their cases. Beyond Shebarghan prison, the Afghan government
needs help carrying out a census of military detainees and prisoners of war and
acting to assure that conditions of confinement meet international standards.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); LIVING CONDITIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); MEN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (69%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (84%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             211 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Trials Won't Be Fair, Critics Say

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 9


Cambodians said today that they felt betrayed and abandoned after the United
Nations gave up its effort to create an international tribunal to try former
leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

Worn down by the stubbornness of the Cambodian government, the United Nations
said on Friday that it was ending nearly five years of negotiations over the
makeup and procedures of the tribunal.

This leaves the government to proceed on its own with trials that both Cambodian
and foreign analysts say will not meet international standards of fairness and
impartiality and are likely to spare most major figures.

"This is a victory for Pol Pot and the top leaders of the Khmer Rouge regime,"
said Kao Kim Hourn, a leading Cambodian political analyst. "This is the end of
the possibility of bringing to justice the people who were responsible for
crimes against humanity in Cambodia."

The radical communist Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, were responsible for the
deaths of more than a million people when they held power from 1975 to 1979. Pol
Pot died in 1998.

As international tribunals have been set up to bring justice for more recent
atrocities in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the Cambodian government has
stymied one attempt after another by the United Nations to create a tribunal
here.

"This is the outcome they wanted," a Western diplomat said today. "The
government never wanted United Nations interference. They want something they
can control, and now they are getting it."

He said the objections of China, a long-term sponsor of the Khmer Rouge, played
a decisive role in holding Cambodia back from an agreement.

Left to its own devices, most analysts say, the government is likely to pick and
choose any future defendants and to hand down preordained sentences as it has in
previous politically important trials.

"I think a real trial with genuine justice will not be possible if the United
Nations stays with its decision not to participate," said Youk Chhang, director
of the Documentation Center of Cambodia, which has been collecting documentary
evidence against Khmer Rouge leaders.

"This is not only about Cambodia but about humanity; the government and the
United Nations bear equal responsibility to work on this issue," he said. "So
just saying, 'Sorry, goodbye, wish you luck' -- you are undermining the rule of
law and international integrity."

Once again, Cambodia finds itself a sideshow, as it did during the Vietnam war,
Mr. Kao Kim Hourn said. Now it is the war on terror that is preoccupying the
attention of world.

"The shifting of the focus of the United Nations to Afghanistan and other areas
has overshadowed Cambodia," he said, "and now the United Nations is just washing
its hands of Cambodia.

"So from now on, Ieng Sary and the other top leaders can live out their lives
safely and happily," he said. Mr. Ieng Sary, one of the key surviving leaders,
is likely to be protected by an ad hoc amnesty issued by the government,
analysts said.

Other leaders who may escape indictment are Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, top
confidants of Pol Pot who surrendered at the end of 1998 and were welcomed with
an embrace by Prime Minister Hun Sen.

At the time, Mr. Hun Sen suggested that Cambodia "dig a hole and bury the past."
He has remained coy about the prospects for trials.

If Cambodia does proceed with trials, two likely defendants will be Ta Mok, a
brutal military chief, and Kaing Kek Ieu, known as Duch, who ran the Tuol Sleng
torture center. They are the only former Khmer Rouge leaders now in custody.

"He has no love for any of these people," a European diplomat said. "But there
is still the lingering doubt that if he cannot control the trial, it could
produce some evidence that would be embarrassing either for people close to him
or for himself."

Mr. Hun Sen was a low-level commander for the Khmer Rouge who defected and
participated in their ouster by an invading Vietnamese force in 1979.
Researchers have found no evidence that he was involved in atrocities.

In announcing its withdrawal from the negotiations, the United Nations said the
Cambodian framework for trials, embodied in a new law, left too many loopholes.
The government said its law was non-negotiable and could not be modified.

Cambodian officials said today they would proceed on their own.

"No problem at all," said Sok An, the cabinet minister who has led the
negotiations on the Cambodian side.

The United States, which has worked with Cambodia on a complex model that would
use a combination of foreign and local judges and prosecutors, said it was
disappointed by the United Nations pullout.

American diplomats have been among those who argue that a less-than-perfect
trial is better than no trial at all. With the former Khmer Rouge leaders
growing older and more frail, the diplomats argue, it is important to seize this
last chance to bring them to account.

Others, like Kek Galabru, a leading human rights advocate here, say an imperfect
trial would set a dangerous precedent for the future. "If it cooperated with
such a tribunal that doesn't meet international standards, the United Nations
will lose all credibility," she said today.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); POLITICS (88%);
VIETNAM WAR (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); RULE OF LAW (72%); TERRORISM (67%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS
(61%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; POL POT (1925-98)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); RWANDA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             214 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberia Rounds Up Youths

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 144 words

DATELINE: MONROVIA, Liberia, Feb. 11


In a roundup that it justified by a state of emergency, the government has put
scores of street youths in jail, officials said today.

The city, Liberia's capital, was frequently the scene of deadly street fighting
during a civil war in the 1990's. It has been on edge since rebels struck 22
miles away on Thursday.

Security forces have since driven the rebels back. But the police said they had
locked up the youths for terrorizing residents and would keep them until their
parents came. The human rights group Amnesty International accused President
Charles Taylor's forces of using the emergency as a cover for rights violations,
including forcible recruitment.

Liberia's return to chaos has raised concerns in neighboring Sierra Leone, where
Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, over the weekend, hailed efforts that
ended a war by Liberian-backed rebels.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (88%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); RIOTS
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); POLITICS (67%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (65%) CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%)

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (88%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); SIERRA LEONE (79%)

REGION: LIBERIA;  MONROVIA (LIBERIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             216 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

DEFIANT, MILOSEVIC BEGINS HIS DEFENSE BY ASSAILING NATO

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER and MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1293 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 14


A driven and indignant Slobodan Milosevic today laid blame for a decade of
carnage in the Balkans on everyone but himself, waving away charges that he was
responsible for war crimes in four words: "It is all lies."

"The real crime," he added, "was the killing of Yugoslavia and crucifying me
here."

In a dramatic and tense four-hour statement, Mr. Milosevic, largely unpopular at
home, seemed to seize a new political mission in his trial here: to defend
himself, and fellow Serbs, by attacking NATO and casting himself as an
antiglobalist hero resisting the double standards of the world's powers. He even
turned President Bush's epithet -- "evil-doers" -- back onto the West.

"The Americans go right to the other side of the globe to fight against
terrorism -- Afghanistan a case in point," Mr. Milosevic told his judges, with
finger jabs and a confidence that left no doubt that this is a man used to his
authority. "And that is considered to be logical and normal. Whereas here the
struggle against terrorism, in the heart of one's own country, in one's own home
is considered to be a crime."

The first head of state to be tried for war crimes, Mr. Milosevic today also
turned much conventional history on its head. He denied that his troops killed
thousands of civilians in Kosovo in 1999, as prosecutors in the United Nations
tribunal allege, saying they only fought a war against Albanian separatist
"terrorists."

Civilian killings in Kosovo, he said, were carried out by ethnic Albanian rebels
or by NATO planes, which bombed Serbia and Kosovo for 78 days in 1999.

In the spectators' gallery, Nekibe Kelmendi watched, pale and tense, appalled at
Mr. Milosevic's version of the truth. Her husband, a prominent human rights
lawyer, and their two sons were found dead in Kosovo at the start of the war
after being arrested by Serbian secret police.

"I feel sick to my stomach listening to all his lies," said Ms. Kelmendi, a
judge who served as minister of justice for Kosovo after the war. "When I look
at Milosevic, I see a killer."

In his testimony today, Mr. Milosevic also engaged in a duel of images,
producing photographs and videos that were even more ghastly than those shown by
prosecutors earlier this week, this time of the victims of NATO airstrikes. At
his request, courtroom monitors flashed images of bombed sites, charred and
mangled bodies and severed human limbs and heads.

"The bombing of civilian targets was merciless," he said solemnly. "The more
suffering of civilians, the better."

For his indictments accusing him of crimes in three wars, he showed only
contempt, describing them variously as a "terrible fabrication," a "nebulous
construction" and a "miserable opus."

Court officials said they had expected Mr. Milosevic to focus on NATO, since
that had been the underlying theme of earlier outbursts in the court. During Mr.
Milosevic's speech, which was well-prepared, delivered in Serbian and is to
continue on Friday, Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor, occasionally shot a
smile at other prosecutors in apparent incredulity. Ms. Del Ponte's spokeswoman,
Florence Hartmann, said that however awful the civilian deaths caused by NATO,
"what he presented today was not a defense."

Mr. Milosevic, the leader of the Serbs for 13 years, is charged with genocide
against Bosnian Muslims in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, from 1992 to 1995, and
with other crimes from the wars in Croatia in 1991 and Kosovo in 1999. The first
part of the trial is devoted to Kosovo -- an order that gave Mr. Milosevic the
opportunity to focus his own attack on NATO.

In earlier court appearances, he said he did not recognize the tribunal and
therefore would not appoint lawyers to defend him. But after his speech today, a
more immediate reason emerged: he clearly wanted to speak for himself.

With today's session, the third day of a trial that may last two years, he also
achieved what had been his goal since his arrival in The Hague in June: the
transformation of the courtroom into his political platform.

Seated in a navy suit and a tie with the red, white and blue colors of the
Serbian flag, Mr. Milosevic made his case by working his way down a stack of
papers several inches high.

Almost surely aware that his trial is drawing a fascinated television audience
at home among admirers and victims, Mr. Milosevic seemed to be largely
addressing Serbs, casting himself as fighter and victim against forces far
larger than himself, a recurring theme in Serbian history.

"There is not a single element of a fair trial or of equality between these
parties," he complained. "There is an enormous apparatus on one side," he said.
"Everything is at your disposal. What is on my side? I only have a public
telephone booth in the prison."

The trial is being covered extensively in Yugoslavia, and even his opponents in
Serbia may be pleased with his outrage against the widely resented NATO
bombings.

More than that, he seems to be looking to his place in Serbian history, linking
his fate at the tribunal with that of all Serbs by tapping into what he called
the "sensitive" question of collective guilt.

"In all the indictments, they are accusing a whole nation," he said. "Such dirty
crimes cannot be ascribed to an army, a police, a people, a nation, their
government."

It is unclear if he believes it possible to be found innocent, but he spent much
time rebutting specific accusations and snipping the connections that
prosecutors made in their opening statements between him and the atrocities
across the Serbian border in Bosnia and Croatia.

One man alone, he ridiculed, could not possibly do all the things prosecutors
allege.

"He probably thinks that I am superhuman, having these superhuman powers of
influencing people and responsibility and accountability outside the territory
of my country," he said. "He has ascribed to me some magical, God-like powers."

While he did not address the worst atrocity of the war -- the massacre of 7,000
Bosnian Muslims in Srebrenica -- he specifically distanced himself from other
serious accusations.

He said he regularly condemned the shelling of Sarajevo by Bosnian Serbs, which
claimed an estimated 10,000 lives. He also said he was lied to about the
existence of concentration camps in northwestern Bosnia in 1992.

"When I heard there were some camps, I asked for an explanation: 'Is it possible
Serbs were setting up any camps?' " he said. "The explanation I received was the
following: 'There were no camps. There were only prisons for prisoners of war.'
"

From his stack of papers, he showed dozens of photographs, of bombed factories,
houses, bridges, a train and a convoy of Albanians to make his case that NATO
was equally responsible for civilian deaths in the Balkans.

While some 4,000 corpses have been unearthed in Kosovo, most of them Albanian,
Human Rights Watch estimates that NATO bombings killed at least 500 civilians,
acts which it said violated the Geneva Conventions but did not rise to the level
of war crime. Mr. Milosevic disagreed, asking when NATO would be tried for the
bombing.

"This aggression shows that the NATO pact was not an alliance but an appendage
of the American administration, which used it as it deemed when it deemed fit,"
he said.

The reason, he said, "was the geo-strategic spreading of NATO's interests and
its areas and also to create a precedent for using force."

And he asked to be set free, at least during the trial, so he could prepare
himself properly.

"You know full well I am not going to escape," he said. "Let me go free so that
as a free man I can take an active stand in this regard. You want us to engage
in a swimming competition -- 100 meters -- but you want to tie my hands and feet
and let me swim that way and you consider that to be a fair trial."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of Yugoslavia, began
his defense yesterday before the war crimes tribunal at The Hague. (ICTY, via
APTN)(pg. A1); Reporters watched a large screen as Slobodan Milosevic, the
former president of Yugoslavia, delivered his opening statement yesterday before
the United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague. (Associated Press)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (76%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); LAWYERS (74%); RELIGION (74%); ARRESTS
(73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (64%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
ISLAM;  CONCENTRATION CAMPS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED NATIONS (82%) INTERNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; FISHER, IAN; SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); ALBANIA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CROATIA (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA;  SARAJEVO (BOSNIA);  ALBANIA;
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Pointed Finger

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 16


In the Balkans, where the wars were often fought from house to house, among
neighbors, candid Serbs often say, yes, our people committed war crimes, but we
were not the only ones. In civil war, all are guilty.

By making NATO the focus of his own defense, Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav leader, has extended that justification a distinct notch: you in the
West, he says, with your nice homes and radar-skirting bombers -- you, too, are
bloodied. For two days, he presented his evidence: photo after photo of what the
United States military calls "collateral damage," people killed by NATO bombs.

"This is the corpse of Ljiljana Specic," Mr. Milosevic, on trial here for
genocide and other war crimes, said on Friday morning. "She was seven months
pregnant. She was killed on a street corner."

It might comfort some to dismiss Mr. Milosevic as a lunatic, but his performance
is deliberate. His defense taps into real grievances of Serbs, the lack of easy
solutions in the Balkans, palpable misgivings among other poor nations about the
extent of American power -- if twisted surreally to deny any blame at all for
himself. He is raving with a purpose, as he always has.

"He's not crazy," said Richard Dicker, a lawyer with Human Rights Watch, who has
been attending the trial. "What we have heard in the last two days is a very
shrewd, canny political offensive. Indeed he's trying to turn everything upside
down, casting himself as the victim, NATO as the criminal and the court as
accomplice to the crime.

"He speaks as if he's the prince of peace," he added. "That to me is the
ultimate cynicism."

Of course, it is Mr. Milosevic, not NATO, who is on trial, so little of his
broadside is likely to help him in court, where he is the first head of state to
be tried for genocide. (He is not the first head of state to be tried for war
crimes: that was Adm. Karl Donitz, who led Germany for just more than a week
after Hitler died. He spent 10 years in prison.)

While he blames others, in opening statements where both sides are allowed much
oratorical latitude, prosecutors will bring witnesses to try to show that he had
direct command responsibility for some of the worst horrors of the late 20th
century: more than 200,000 killed, more than 2 million uprooted from their homes
in "ethnic cleansing," the imponderable execution of 7,000 Bosnian Muslims who
lived in Srebrenica.

They must prove that Mr. Milosevic "knew or had reason to know" what
subordinates did and that he himself either did nothing to prevent crimes or let
them go unpunished.

In their opening statements, Carla Del Ponte, the tribunal's chief prosecutor,
and her team spent two days showing how they intended to do that.

For the wars in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the prosecutors have
tried to show financial, military and political links between Mr. Milosevic and
Serbs in those states to create a "Greater Serbia." By then, Croatia and Bosnia
had broken off from Yugoslavia, so Mr. Milosevic was not in legal command there.

The prosecutors have not yet, for these two wars, produced a smoking gun. For
that, Ms. Del Ponte says she will produce inside witnesses, people close to Mr.
Milosevic.

Like Mr. Milosevic, she also emphasized the global scope of the trial, but in a
different way. Although she did not identify the countries, she said nations
that so far had been unwilling to allow sensitive intelligence to be used in
court must begin to do so to ensure Mr. Milosevic's conviction. Her words, by
implication, pointed to the United States and Britain.

"People throughout the world following these proceedings will be watching to see
the extent to which their own leaders are committed to achieving the aims of
international justice," she said in court on Tuesday, the first day of the
trial.

The 1999 war in Kosovo, a part of Serbia, may be a different matter: Mr.
Milosevic had actual control of Serbian forces there. The prosecution will have
to prove it was those forces that deported 850,000 Kosovo Albanians and killed
more than 5,000 of them.

On Kosovo, Mr. Milosevic counters with what most historians would say is an
outrageous claim: that NATO bombs and Albanian rebels did the killing and the
rousting.

An unanswerable question is whether he believes that. Serbian journalists,
seeing Mr. Milosevic in action up close for the first time, say they are stunned
to think that he may well have convinced himself.

Either way, it allows him to make his points, however irrelevant they may be to
his defense and certainly no justification for mass killings. But they are not
necessarily irrelevant in a broader sense. "And you call yourselves a tribunal,"
he chided the court on Friday and so questioned the right of "international
justice" to try him.

In a similar way, the United States has balked at the idea of a permanent
international criminal court, for fear its own military leaders would be
unfairly tried before a sometimes hostile world.

He presented a bone-chilling demonstration of what the "collateral damage" of
NATO bombs looks like -- at a time when many people are uncomfortable, after the
damage of stray bombs in Afghanistan, about what it really means to fight from
15,000 feet.

His complaints about reverse ethnic cleansing of Serbs in Kosovo, after NATO
arrived in 1999, by long-aggrieved ethnic Albanians, along with the worries
about Albanian organized crime, are shared by many thoughtful Balkans experts.

Mr. Milosevic sees his trial not strictly as a way to defend himself. This man
-- who rarely gave interviews, who in a decade of war did not visit Serbian
refugees or fighters -- is now claiming the role of a soldier of truth. He is
speaking, as he often put it this week, to "the public."

As one former judge here said: "It's going to be a unique trial."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Slobodan Milosevic has made NATO the focus of his defense. (Pool
photo by Fred Ernst)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
BOMBINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); WITNESSES (75%);
JAIL SENTENCING (73%); RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); GERMANY (79%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             218 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Where the Bodies Are Buried in Peru

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1279 words

DATELINE: QUISPILLACTA, Peru, Feb. 16


For 19 years, Cristina Huamani Quispe knew where her husband was buried, just up
the dirt road from this Quechua Indian hamlet, in a shallow grave were his
bullet-riddled body was tossed with those of six other men.

But Mrs. Huamani, 46, never sought help from the authorities because an army
patrol had killed the men after accusing them of being members of Shining Path,
a radical rebel group. She could not recover the body of her husband, Pedro
Nunez, fearing retribution from soldiers. So she simply tried to forget.

"I could not do anything," she recalled in Quechua, speaking through an
interpreter. "I always felt alone. I would just cry."

Now, 15 months after the fall of the autocratic government of President Alberto
K. Fujimori, a special government commission is opening a window into 20 years
of state-sponsored repression and rebel terror that tore this country apart. It
is starting the emotionally wrenching process of investigating the killings and
disappearances of thousands of people, many of them from this province,
Ayacucho.

The group has begun interviewing relatives of victims here in southern Peru and
disinterring the remains of Mr. Nunez and the six other men, who were buried
here on May 14, 1983, at the height of the violence.

Taking advantage of a political opening that would have been unthinkable a short
time ago, the commission will collect testimony in private and hold public
hearings, a first in Latin America, where victims of violence and public
officials can give their accounts.

The work of the group, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, is aimed at
determining the root causes and political climate that led to the deaths of
30,000 people in Peru. The commission is intent on assigning blame; its findings
can be forwarded to prosecutors for possible legal action against rights
violators.

"The truth commission in Peru can name names, institutions, and it can say
so-and-so military official killed so-and-so farmer," said Javier Ciurlizza,
executive secretary of the commission. "We decided that this will not be closed.
We need to vent these things."

How much will be vented, though, is unclear. Though the commission has ambitious
goals and a broader mandate than similar commissions in Latin America, it is
underfinanced. Only $3 million of the $10.7 million it needs to operate has been
collected, Mr. Ciurlizza said, with nearly half coming from the United States.

Investigators are also in a race against time because their work must be
completed next year, when a voluminous report tracing Peruvian violence through
three presidential administrations is to be made public.

Commission workers said the work had been overwhelming. There are thousands of
interviews to be conducted, including those of two former presidents, Fernando
Belaunde Terry and Alan Garcia Perez, under whose administrations most of the
violence took place.

The commission is also intent on studying reams of American documents, including
newly declassified diplomatic cables that show how United States officials in
Lima had received unconfirmed reports about extrajudicial killings and death
squad activities from sources in the Peruvian security services.

Commission members acknowledge that the sheer magnitude of the task might limit
what they learn.  "This is what makes us sleepless at night," Mr. Ciurlizza
said, "that if we do not do this right, then we lose the trust of the country."

The community with the most riding on the results is here in Ayacucho, a
poverty-stricken region of vast mountains and lush fields where Shining Path
embarked in 1980 on a rampage of mass killings, bombings and assassinations in
an effort to turn Peru into a radical Maoist state.

The army responded with vicious repression in which hundreds accused of being
rebel members or collaborators were killed, usually Quechua-speaking young men
who had been forced from their homes.

"They killed people who were Indians, people who did not know what the soldiers
were saying to them," said Rosio Vargas, the government's human rights ombudsman
in this province. "They were the most vulnerable people, the easiest to kill."

Now the commission is trying to give the people of Ayacucho a voice they never
had.

Detailed testimony is being collected from villagers to determine how relatives
or neighbors were killed, and by whom. Because the region is dotted with
unmarked graves -- nearly 6,000 people were "disappeared" in Peru, most from
Ayacucho and two neighboring provinces -- the commission is trying to determine
where mass graves are situated and whose bodies are in them. Remains are to be
cataloged, then turned over to relatives for reburial.

The forensic team that is handling exhumations is especially determined to find
out who gave the orders for the deaths. Jose Pablo Baraybar, who leads the team,
said many graves were concentrated around a former military base east of here,
in Totos, where prisoners were tortured and killed. Already, investigators know
about two captains who commanded soldiers in the region, officers known to
investigators only by their aliases, Jackal and Hyena.

Leonidas Pacotaype, 45, whose husband was tortured and killed by soldiers,
remembers Jackal well, saying the tall, light-skinned officer was "abusive to
our community" and "the one who sent our people to Totos, the one who made the
decisions."

Her husband, Francisco Huamani Galindo, 37, disappeared hours after kissing her
and their three children goodbye early one morning in 1983 as he left for a long
hike to a nearby village to buy provisions. Ms. Pacotaype later learned that he
had been intercepted by an army patrol, tortured with a group of 14 other men in
a town named Chiuschi and then shot dead, their bodies left in a pit that was
then covered by soldiers.

Now, she has provided the commission with everything she remembers from those
violent days -- not just what she heard about her husband's disappearance, but
what he was wearing that day, whether he had ever suffered broken bones or had
dental work, details crucial to the identification of remains.

"At the very least, I want to one day see the bones of my husband," Ms.
Pacotaype said. "I ask for justice. That is all I want."

Commission workers have tried to assure the relatives of the dead, or those who
suffered torture or other acts of violence, that they will be heard. But the
commission has also warned that not every grave will be uncovered, given limited
resources and time.

Instead, the commission hopes to unearth perhaps 20 graves, with the hope that
the findings and publicity will galvanize President Alejandro Toledo to adopt a
long-range plan to disinter bodies across the country.

That does not sit well with the victims' families, said Angelica Mendoza, who
leads an organization of mothers and wives of men who disappeared.

"There will be no justice for us, no peace for our people, until we find all the
bodies," said Ms. Mendoza, whose son, Arquimides Ascarza, 19, was taken from her
home in 1983 and never seen again. "They can not leave behind the rest. We want
all the mass graves opened."

For now, though, the villagers of Quispillacta have welcomed the commission's
work, saying the exhumation of the seven bodies buried near here has finally put
the past to rest for some families. The relatives of the dead, like Cristina
Huamani, received the bones of their loved ones in small, wooden boxes, which
they promptly reburied after holding ceremonies.

"My father was killed like a dog and buried nowhere," said Roberto Nunez
Huamani, 33, whose father, Julian Nunez, was among those who died with Ms.
Huamani's husband. "Now I feel like we have given him some justice."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Leonidas Pacotaype, of Ayacucho Province, telling the
government commission about the killing of her husband by soldiers in 1983.;
Wives and other relatives of men who disappeared during 20 years of rebel terror
and state-sponsored repression met in Ayacucho Province last week with Peru's
new Truth and Reconciliation Commission. (Photographs by Paolo Aguilar for The
New York Times) Map of Peru highlighting Ayacucho.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); POLITICS (76%);
INTERVIEWS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (83%) SHINING PATH (GUERRILLA ORGN); TRUTH AND
RECONCILIATION COMMISSION (PERU)

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); LATIN AMERICA (90%)

REGION: PERU;  AYACUCHO PROVINCE (PERU)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             219 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Witness Says Milosevic Knew Early About Abuses in Kosovo

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 18


Prosecutors at Slobodan Milosevic's war crimes trial moved swiftly today to try
to show that the ousted Yugoslav leader knew or should have known of the actions
of his underlings, did nothing and therefore bears responsibility for any
atrocities they committed.

The first witness called by the prosecution, Mahmat Bakalli, a Kosovo Albanian
who once was that province's Communist leader, said he had warned Mr. Milosevic
early on about police abuses in Kosovo.

At two meetings in mid-1998, Mr. Bakalli said, he mentioned police and army
abuses, citing a raid earlier that year on the home of a known member of the
Kosovo Liberation Army, an Albanian rebel group that had begun ambushing police
officers.

In a series of raids in the Drenica Valley, 83 Kosovar Albanians were killed,
including 24 women and children in February and March 1998, according to Human
Rights Watch.

"I said, 'You are killing civilians, you are killing women and children,' " Mr.
Bakalli testified. "Milosevic commented by saying, 'We are fighting against
terrorists.' "

Mr. Bakalli said he responded by saying, " 'But there are women and children
being killed.'

"He said, 'We gave them two hours to get away, to get out of the building.' "

Geoffrey Nice, one of the prosecutors, asked, "So he knew of this event?"

"Yes, yes," Mr. Bakalli said. "Yes. Definitely."

There are likely to be several hundred witnesses in a complicated trial that may
last up to two years before the tribunal's judges decide whether Mr. Milosevic,
60, is guilty as charged of genocide and other crimes in the three Balkan wars
-- in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo.

On Tuesday, Mr. Milosevic, who is in effect conducting his own defense, will
have the opportunity to cross-examine Mr. Bakalli.

Before the witness appeared, Mr. Milosevic ended his third day of an opening
statement. Impassioned, angry, mocking, he rejected every suggestion that he was
at all to blame for the collapse of the old Yugoslavia or the wars that
followed.

He repeatedly turned the accusation of genocide -- against Muslims in Bosnia --
on its head, suggesting that it was the Serbs who had faced "genocide."

"I have nothing to defend myself from," he said. "I can only be proud, and I can
only accuse my accusers and their bosses. I, arrested and in prison, am
nevertheless free."

His speech -- and particularly his dismissal of atrocities -- has angered many
of the war's victims.

"In my eyes, his ability to lie is just amazing," said Emir Suljagic, a Bosnian
Muslim whose father, grandfather, uncle and four cousins were among the 7,000
Bosnian Muslims massacred by Bosnian Serb forces at Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia
in 1995.

"He says every criminal usually covers a crime with another," said Mr. Suljagic,
who is helping cover the trial for a Bosnian weekly magazine. "That's him. He is
that criminal. He actually has blood running from his hands."

For the first time, Mr. Milosevic addressed the slaughter at Srebrenica, by far
the worst massacre of the war. He said that he had heard about it for the first
time from Carl Bildt, the European Union envoy to the Balkans, and that he had
immediately called Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader also indicted for
war crimes but still free.

"Karadzic, when I rang him up on the phone after I heard it happened, he swore
he knew nothing about it," he said.

The Bosnian Serb military leader, Gen. Ratko Mladic, who is also charged with
war crimes but remains free, was at Srebrenica.

Mr. Milosevic dismissed links between him and the Bosnian Serbs as "one of the
most nonsensical things that could be said here," though those alleged links are
indeed the heart of the prosecution's case. Mr. Milosevic is accused of
providing military, political and financial support to the Bosnian Serbs and
commanding Yugoslav troops who conducted brutal attacks on areas of Croatia and
Bosnia.

Today, Mr. Milosevic broke new ground by arguing that Western diplomacy helped
push Yugoslavia toward war in the 1990's. Unlike other observers of those
events, however, he did not mention Serbian nationalism and his own rise to
power.

He showed a videotaped documentary stating that Slovenia's 1990 vote to secede,
then German support of Croatia's independence in 1991 set the stage for war --
largely, he said, because it instilled fear in Serbs outside of Serbia with
memories of the hundreds of thousands Serbs massacred by the Nazi-sanctioned
Croatian Ustase movement in World War II.

He complained, too, that the news media had attacked his family -- his wife,
daughter and son, who is often reported to be involved in shady business deals
-- "in a savage way." He said the international conspiracy against him went
beyond politics: "When it comes to me," he said, "there is personal hatred."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WITNESSES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (79%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TERRORISM (72%); RELIGION (65%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (64%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (56%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; BAKALLI, MAHMAT

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA (96%); ALBANIA (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); CROATIA (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             220 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2002 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
Red Cross Man in Guantanamo: A 'Busybody,' but Not Unwelcome

BYLINE:   By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


As the first human rights official to inspect the American military prison at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, Urs Boegli was expecting a frosty, even hostile,
reception.

At the time, President Bush had refused to grant the men captured in the Afghan
war protection under the Geneva Conventions -- the accords at the heart of Mr.
Boegli's authority to ensure that the men flown to the Cuban base were being
treated humanely. But European countries were openly questioning the American
military's handling of the detainees, from blindfolding and sedating them to
holding them in metal cages.

It was up to Mr. Boegli, the chief Washington delegate of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to thread his way through the loud debate and win
the soldiers' cooperation on the scene. To his surprise, Mr. Boegli, a
50-year-old Swiss, was welcomed as what he called "a necessary annoyance."

"They said, 'Good to have you busybodies here,' " Mr. Boegli said. "They said
they knew that if they were ever in trouble we would come and look after them,
too."

Like members of other professional armies, the American soldiers at Guantanamo
Bay look at the Geneva-based organization as an insurance policy. If they were
ever trapped in a prison in a desolate country, a visit from the Red Cross could
mean the difference between life and death.

"At a minimum our visits give the prisoner the solace of an hour's conversation
with a reasonable human being in his own language," Mr. Boegli said. "In the
most extreme cases a visit can prevent the prisoner from disappearance and
death."

Since Sept. 11 Mr. Boegli has been a very busy man.

At the start of the Afghanistan campaign, he worked with the Pentagon to ensure
that the military avoided attacking relief operations. When American jets
nonetheless bombed the Red Cross warehouses in Kabul twice in the belief they
were under the control of the Taliban, he went back to protest. The incident,
Mr. Boegli said, "reminds us we're working in a damned dangerous business."

Now he is his organization's point man overseeing how the United States treats
the first group of war captives it has detained since World War II. In Korea,
the American military handed over captured soldiers to their South Korean
allies. In Vietnam, prisoners were given to the South Vietnamese. In the Persian
Gulf war, they were turned over to Kuwait or other coalition members.

After 20 years as the quiet neutral trying to impose the rule of law in the
middle of war, Mr. Boegli has developed a dry humor about his job. He and his
fellow Red Cross delegates are the only nonpartisans to have interviewed the
more than 100 detainees at Guantanamo Bay about their treatment, but he is
forbidden to discuss those conversations.

"We have a very low profile with the press and quite a high profile with the
prisoners, and that's the way it should be," he said.

At other moments in other wars, Mr. Boegli has been less sanguine. In the early
years of the Bosnia conflict, in 1992 and 1993, his neutrality openly warred
with his sense of right and wrong. He was sent to monitor Muslim enclaves where
the only international military presence was sent to protect food aid, not the
people who were being killed in what became known as ethnic cleansing. "They
spit at you -- you're the only foreigner they see and the only thing you can do
for them is to make sure they are fed before they are shot," he said.

Mr. Boegli was headed toward a career in international business when he ran into
a fellow Swiss at a bar in Khartoum. "He was with the I.C.R.C., which I knew
nothing about, really," he said. "It sounded intriguing and within a few months
I was a relief worker."

He started in 1972 and has since had to adjust to what he calls the "bitter
complexities" of modern wars that kill far more civilians than soldiers and
where neutrality is often considered a dirty word. "It has a bad image, like
we're sitting on a fence, doing nothing," he said.

His postings have taken him to Angola, Sudan, Lebanon, Thailand, Cambodia and
now Washington, all along negotiating the release of political prisoners,
tracing lost family members, ensuring that the most vulnerable in war receive
food and medicine, training foreign military forces on the Geneva Conventions
and carrying out the bread-and-butter mission of visiting prisoners.

"We're admired -- we've won three Nobel Peace Prizes -- but we're not liked," he
said. "We have to be the one organization accepted by all sides, which means we
can't reveal what either side wants to hear, not even casualty figures."

Last year alone the organization visited 216,684 prisoners of war, civilian
internees or detainees in 68 countries, adding to the catalog of despair that
becomes the organization's confidential reports.

Yet Mr. Boegli said he had never regretted his decision to work for the Red
Cross. Not when he was surrounded by 25 men in Banja Luca, Bosnia, who
threatened to kill him if he did not get them out of harm's way. Not in 1986
when he agreed to drop one of the organization's old Swiss-bound traditions and
allow a medical doctor from the American Red Cross to work with refugees along
the Thai-Cambodian border.

The doctor, Luisa Chan, showed up, and a few years later they married. "As a
reward for my openness of mind I got my wife," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 2, 2002



CORRECTION: An article on Feb. 20 about Urs Boegli of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the first human rights official to inspect the
conditions under which prisoners from Afghanistan are being held at the United
States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, referred incorrectly to the
precedents for the United States' holding of war captives. The prisoners in Cuba
are not the first the United States has detained since World War II. In the
Korean War, the United States and South Korea briefly maintained separate
prisoner camps before they were consolidated under the United Nations. The
Americans did not hand the captured soldiers over to the South Koreans.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Urs Boegli of the International Committee of the Red Cross in
his office in Washington. Since Sept. 11, he has been a very busy man. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (85%); DESERT STORM (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); KOREAN WAR (78%); WORLD
WAR II (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); NAVIES (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(72%); HIJACKING (67%); MISSING PERSONS (63%); AIRLINES (62%); AL-QAEDA (61%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
PENTAGON BUILDING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (83%);
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (83%) RED CROSS; AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (51%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (51%)

PERSON: BECKER, ELIZABETH; BOEGLI, URS

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(70%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); EUROPE (92%);
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); KUWAIT (79%);
VIET NAM (66%); GULF STATES (51%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  WASHINGTON (DC);

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             223 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
The War on Terror Points a Country Toward Peace

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1033 words


JUST over the horizon from Afghanistan, another war on terror may be drawing to
a close. A week ago, the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam, one of Asia's most ruthless and totalitarian rebel movements,
agreed to a firm cease-fire, with the promise of peace talks to come. It is not
a coincidence that this should occur within months of Sept. 11, many Sri Lankans
and foreign experts say. A new international environment, born of the revulsion,
shock or just plain fear engendered by attacks on the United States, has made it
possible.

The situation has parallels in Northern Ireland, where it has been widely
assumed that a decision by the Irish Republican Army in October to start turning
in arms was also related to a new atmosphere low on romanticism for violent
causes.

But the new environment works two ways. In other areas, as worried human rights
organizations point out, countries have felt emboldened to deal more harshly
with rebel movements -- from Russia to Uzbekistan, India, China, Colombia and
the Philippines. Far from pushing these conflicts toward negotiation, the
zero-tolerance approach has worked to intensify the push for a military solution
-- if only because both sides feel they can win.

Robert B. Oakley, a former American ambassador in Pakistan, Somalia and Congo
and a former State Department counterterrorism director, says the American
campaign against Al Qaeda "sort of puts a damper on a movement, and it
encourages people to take a stronger stand against it." At the same time, he
said, governments find it easier to label any rebel a terrorist. "It encourages
people to say: 'Hey! Come help me deal with my internal problems because they
all are terrorist related.' "

In Sri Lanka, there is no longer much dispute about the nature of the Tamil
rebellion, which began as a movement to rectify discrimination by the country's
ethnic Sinhalese majority and turned, under the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, into a brutal campaign of terror that annihilated the moderate opposition
through assassination and dragooned children, who were taught to embrace
suicide. At least 65,000 people have died.

Well before Sept. 11, the United States and Britain had declared the Tigers a
terrorist organization; so had India, which once trained them but is now seeking
the extradition of their leader, Velupillai Prabakharan, for plotting the
assassination in 1991 of the Indian leader Rajiv Gandhi. Many governments have
vowed to stop the rebels' global fund-raising.

An issue more relevant now to Sri Lankans and others in need of help to achieve
peace is whether their wars on terrorism matter to important nations, most of
all the United States. Last Monday, Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe appealed
for concrete outside help in keeping pressure on the Tigers to honor this truce,
and in rebuilding the economy.

Sri Lankans know there are disadvantages in being far off the beaten track from
the hunt for Al Qaeda. Not only are there no significant links to Muslim
terrorists, a Sri Lankan official said. "We don't have oil. We are of no use to
the United States or other powers." Nepal, facing a Maoist rebellion of intense
violence, is also off the American radar. Instead, American troops have rushed
to the southern Philippines to train Filipino troops battling Abu Sayaf, a less
threatening group by many measures, except for reported links to Al Qaeda.

Most recently, the Bush administration began considering military assistance to
Yemen, where suicide bombers killed 17 sailors on the destroyer Cole in 2000,
and to Georgia, where a border area is believed to be the staging ground for
Muslims who, with help from Al Qaeda fighters, are rebelling against Russian
rule in Chechnya. But the possibility of putting American troops as trainers in
that sensitive area sets off alarms in Russia -- and also among human rights
groups, who fear it would only encourage Russia in its brutal tactics against
Chechen separatists.

IN Colombia, President Andres Pastrana has abruptly abandoned a peace agreement
after provocative rebel kidnappings and scattered attacks, and last week resumed
war against leftist guerrillas allied with drug dealers. Victoria Sanford, an
anthropology professor at the University of Notre Dame who has worked in
Colombia recently, said American objectives there may actually be hindering
peace moves. "I think that Pastrana deeply cares about peace in Colombia," she
said, "but Pastrana can only implement and push for peace if he is supported by
the United States. If the United States isn't going to back up his peace
initiatives, they fall apart."

In Sri Lanka, Norway alone has come to the aid of the peace-minded government by
talking the Tigers into a truce. Now cease-fire monitors from the Nordic
countries are preparing bases, and roads are being opened to allow freer
movement by Sri Lankans who have lived in privation under Tiger rule and a
government economic embargo. That is only a small beginning, said Radikha
Coomaraswamy, director of the International Center for Ethnic Studies in
Colombo, adding that there will have to be a major international presence in
Tiger territory.

Teresita C. Schaffer, who was the American ambassador to Sri Lanka from 1992 to
1995, expressed reservations about how much foreign efforts to ban the Tigers
and stop their money-raising would hinder the group, which has a worldwide
network of front companies, its own shipping line, and a history of overrunning
Sri Lankan army bases to steal arms.

STILL, she said, the Tigers may be weakened militarily, which could explain
their inability to recapture Jaffna. "Why did they stop?" she said. "I have to
believe it was because they couldn't go on."

In the end, that may be the deciding factor in whether the no-tolerance
atmosphere toward terrorism pushes a particular conflict toward negotiation or
war.  Even if the Tigers are now hoping only to buy time for rearming and
recruitment, as many Sri Lankans fear, there is a peace constituency in the
country as well as an antiterrorism sentiment outside, Ms. Schaffer said. And in
that country, at least, the combination may make this the moment to make an
agreement stick.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: On Sept. 19, hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankans demonstrated
in favor of peace talks by joining hands publicly, like these office workers in
Colombo, the capital. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); WAR ON TERROR (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
ASSASSINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); AL-QAEDA (73%); NEWS BRIEFS (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); DISCRIMINATION
(73%); EXTRADITION (71%); FUNDRAISING (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); AL-QAEDA (54%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (56%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
ASIA (92%); CHINA (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); SOMALIA (79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             225 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'The Lessons of Terror'

SECTION: Section 7; Column 4; Book Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 199 words


To the Editor:

As the executive director of Human Rights Watch, I would like to respond to
Michael Ignatieff's review of "The Lessons of Terror," by Caleb Carr (Feb. 17).
Ignatieff enters dangerous territory in suggesting that government armies are
less culpable than terrorists when they resort to the barbaric treatment of
civilians.

In his view, "aggrieved descendants" of the civilian victims "may not care
whether they were killed by terrorists or armies pursuing a just cause by unjust
means. Yet these distinctions matter intensely."

They shouldn't. One need not embrace moral relativism to recognize that even
many terrorists believe in the justice of their cause. A rule that forbids
attacks on civilians only when the cause is unjust is a thin reed on which to
build protection for civilians in time of war. Rather, as the Geneva Conventions
prescribe, intentional attacks on civilians should be prohibited regardless of
the cause.

Ignatieff correctly notes that there is a moral difference between a government
army inadvertently causing civilian deaths and a terrorist deliberately killing
civilians. But the difference is the intent, not the status, of the actor.

Kenneth Roth
New York

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: LESSONS OF TERROR, THE (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%);
LAW OF WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%) BOOKS AND
LITERATURE

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH; CARR, CALEB; IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             226 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hard-Liners Put Iranian Journalist on Trial on Spying Charges

BYLINE:  By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, March 13


A 73-year-old former journalist has gone on trial behind closed doors, charged
with espionage and threatening national security in what is considered part of a
new current of repression against intellectuals in Iran.

The former journalist, Siamak Pourzand, director of the Artistic and Cultural
Complex in Tehran, was arrested late last year by the Office of the Public
Morals Police and the State Inspectorate, a shadowy apparatus normally
responsible for dealing with religious offenses.

More than a dozen intellectuals, including a painter and filmmaker, were
summoned by the same office after Mr. Pourzand's arrest. All undertook an oath
not to reveal information about the interrogations.

A state-run newspaper, Iran, unexpectedly announced on Saturday that the trial
had begun last Thursday, just before President Mohammad Khatami's trip to
Austria and Greece. During his past visits to European countries, hard-liners
have arrested reformers back home in order to embarrass him.

The daily reported later that Mr. Pourzand admitted the nine charges against
him, confessing that he had been in contact with people close to Reza Pahlavi,
the son of the late Shah, who was ousted in 1979.

According to the newspaper, Mr. Pourzand also admitted to working for the Shah's
secret service before the revolution.

Mehrangiz Kar, Mr. Purzand's wife, said by telephone today from Washington,
where she is undergoing treatment for cancer, that she considered anything Mr.
Pourzand reportedly said to be baseless, because the statements "have been
extracted under duress."

Ms. Kar, a lawyer, spent 52 days in jail in the summer of 2000 after attending a
conference on Iran in Berlin. She said in the interview that her husband had
been interrogated after every visit he made to her in prison.

Ms. Kar said Mr. Pourzand telephoned their daughter, who is also in Washington,
on Friday, sarcastically delivering what he termed the "good news" that he had
been promised a transfer to the notorious Evin jail after his trial. "This only
suggests the extent of torture and pressure on him, that going to Evin has
become a dream and a better place for him," Ms. Kar said.

The hard-line judiciary has staged similar trials against pro-reform activists
and has publicized their confessions in the past with the apparent intention of
turning the public opinion against them.

Last year, the confessions of a student leader, Ali Afshari, were broadcast on
national news, saying he had attempted to cause unrest and overthrow the supreme
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

This month, released from jail, he told a news conference that he had been under
"tremendous pressure" and tricked that the confession would not be broadcast. He
said he had spent 328 days of the 356 days of his detention in solitary
confinement and undergone long and intimidating interrogations.

Mr. Pourzand has been in detention since Nov. 29 and his family is not aware of
his whereabouts. His sister in Tehran, Mahin Pourzand, has seen him only at the
downtown Tehran offices of the Public Morals Police and the State Inspectorate.

Human Rights Watch condemned the trial. "The judicial authorities are making a
mockery of rule of law in Iran," said Hanny Megally, executive director of the
Middle East and North Africa division. "The Iranian authorities have given no
reason to hold Mr. Pourzand, and by law they should release him immediately."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%);
WRITERS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); VISUAL ARTISTS (77%); POLITICS (69%) FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS;  ESPIONAGE;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (57%) FATHI, NAZILA; POURZAND, SIAMAK; PAHLEVI, MOHAMMED
RIZA (SHAH) (1919-80)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (90%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAN (90%);
GERMANY (79%); GREECE (71%); EUROPE (71%); AUSTRIA (56%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             233 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Rules The Hearing For a Detainee Must Be Open

BYLINE:  By DANNY HAKIM with SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, April 3


A federal judge here ruled today that an immigration hearing for a local suspect
in the government's terror sweep could not be closed to reporters.

The ruling was the first in a federal court on the Justice Department's effort
to keep such cases closed and could have ramifications for hundreds of other
immigration hearings that are pending for men of Arab descent since the Sept. 11
attacks.

"Openness is necessary for the public to maintain confidence in the value and
soundness of the government's actions, as secrecy only breeds suspicion," Judge
Nancy G. Edmunds of Federal District Court ruled in rejecting the argument that
the cases should be closed for national security reasons.

In another matter involving detainees, the inspector general's office of the
Justice Department said today that it would review the conditions at one or
possibly two jails where dozens of Muslim men have been held in virtual secrecy
after their arrests.

Officials said the review would also examine whether the detainees' civil rights
have been protected during their imprisonment, including their right to legal
representation and right to know in a timely manner what, if any, charges they
face.

Paul K. Martin, a counselor to the inspector general, Glenn A. Fine, declined to
say when the inspection would begin or how long it would take. Nor would Mr.
Martin say how many federal detainees remain in the two jails selected as
candidates for inspection -- the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn and
the Passaic County Jail in Paterson, N.J.

Civil rights groups have complained that many detainees were not allowed to
contact family members or lawyers after their arrests and that they have been
held under especially harsh conditions for people charged only with minor
immigration violations.

An investigation by Amnesty International, based on the accounts of former
prisoners and the few lawyers who have visited the jails, also found evidence
that some prisoners have been kept in solitary confinement for long periods or
were subjected to verbal or physical abuse.

As of mid-February, Amnesty International reported, 327 of the 1,200 people
detained after Sept. 11 were still in government custody.

The ruling on open immigration hearings was in the case of Rabih Haddad, a
native of Lebanon and resident of Ann Arbor, Mich., who faces an immigration
hearing on April 10. Mr. Haddad is a founder of the Global Relief Foundation, an
Islamic charity that has come under federal scrutiny for possible links to
terror groups.

Officials at the American Civil Liberties Union called the ruling an important
victory for civil rights in the first federal court decision concerning the
government's actions following Sept. 11.

"The broader significance of the decision is that the court sent a clear message
that the judiciary should not just rubber-stamp the government's Sept. 11
policies," said Lee Gelernt, senior staff lawyer for the group's Immigrants'
Rights Project.

The Justice Department may appeal the case to the United States Court of Appeals
for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, before Mr. Haddad's hearing next week.

Barbara Comstock, a spokeswoman for the department, said the ruling was being
reviewed. "No decision has been made at this time as to what our next step will
be," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); JUDGES (92%);
TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LAWYERS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); PRISONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (78%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(76%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); RELIGION (68%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (62%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%)
;AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

PERSON: EDMUNDS, NANCY G (JUDGE)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); DETROIT, MI, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); MICHIGAN, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  DETROIT (MICH);  NEW YORK CITY;
PATERSON (NJ)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             236 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
The Helping Hand Gets Limp Shakes

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


IT should have been easy. The Bush administration wanted to expand its war on
terror to Asia, to places on whose soil bad guys with links to Al Qaeda might be
operating. Indonesia and the Philippines were considered the two obvious
targets: countries friendly to the United States that needed help. Since to
Washington's way of thinking this is war, the recipe called for American
military assistance.

But extending a friendly hand has raised suspicions, rekindled old debates about
colonization in the Philippines and set off accusations of meddling in
Indonesia.

That the leaders of both countries are new to power and are strongly backed by
their military forces has presented its own set of problems.

But there is also a cautionary lesson for the United States: American military
power isn't always greeted with a welcome mat, even in nations that the United
States believes want to do the right thing. In many places history is freighted
with bad memories of what American military power can bring.

The Philippines is a treaty ally of the United States and is now led by a
pro-American president, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, a graduate of Georgetown
University. But even there, the politics of putting American boots on the ground
has proven delicate and divisive. In the closing years of the cold war, American
bases were widely resented; America had, after all, been close to the corrupt
dictator Ferdinand Marcos.

Even today, the departure of the American military from Subic Bay in 1991
remains a scar on the Filipino psyche, and the "Yankee go home" cries from back
then have not been transformed into "Yankee hurry back."

Mrs. Arroyo, the only leader in Asia to invite American troops since Sept. 11,
argues that she took political risks in accepting President Bush's offer of
training for her army and help in hunting a gang of Muslim kidnappers, known as
the Abu Sayyaf, on the southern island of Basilan. (Mrs. Arroyo had to curb
President Bush's enthusiasm for American combat troops, pointing out that the
Filipino constitution forbade such intervention.)

Since arriving in the Philippines in February, 600 American troops -- 160 of
them Special Operations forces based on Basilan -- have dealt as much with
political fears about their presence as with military matters. When two American
soldiers with M-16 rifles were photographed outside a bank while their
compatriots withdrew money, screaming headlines demanded to know: What were
armed American soldiers in civilian clothes doing on a Filipino city street?

So far, the American soldiers have been passive as the Filipino army continues
its effort, now six years old, to stamp out the Abu Sayyaf.

Mrs. Arroyo, it turns out, wants it both ways. While she is happy to have the
Americans on her territory, she doesn't want them to upstage the Philippines'
soldiers. And the American troops go along, knowing they could harm Mrs.
Arroyo's political fortunes -- for example, if a Filipino child were killed
accidentally by an American soldier, or if there were a public spat with the
Filipino military.

Political considerations aside, the American troops do not have a lot of choice.
The Philippine military is insisting that it is in charge of the efforts to
defeat the Abu Sayyaf, and that the American military stay in the background
during operations. So the Americans have yet to go deep into the jungles of
Basilan with Filipino troops.

But the Filipino military suffers from chronic divisions among its services.
When the army and the Marines compete to claim victory over the Abu Sayyaf, it
hampers the ability of both to stage successful maneuvers, American officials
say.

DESPITE the frustration, in private the Americans are not complaining too much.
They are discouraged that an American missionary couple, Martin and Gracia
Burnham, who have been in the hands of the Abu Sayyaf for 10 months, have not
been rescued. But, they say, the United States needs the Philippines for the
long haul. If the southern Philippines, where Muslim separatists have long
operated, can be stabilized, the islands there could make a perfect future
listening post, and good jumping off point, for guarding the whole range of
American interests in the Pacific.

Indonesia presents a different picture. President Megawati Sukarnoputri, like
Mrs. Arroyo, has been in office since last year and she too visited President
Bush after Sept. 11.

But she is a far more reluctant suitor when military aid is concerned. She leads
a country -- the world's most populous Muslim nation -- that prides itself on
neutrality these days. American assistance is looked upon with such distrust
that the Indonesian military turned down an offer from the Pentagon to deliver
aid during floods in Jakarta in February. The Pentagon had a major training role
in Indonesia during the cold war, but became estranged in the 1990's over the
question of Indonesian human rights abuses.

Any hint of an American presence in Indonesia today would probably end Mrs.
Megawati's young presidency, and for that reason Washington officials say they
would not consider barging in. In the last month, in fact, the Bush
administration has tempered its description of the threat in Indonesia,
asserting that it is a potential, rather than a current, haven.

Nevertheless, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz, who was ambassador
in Indonesia for three years, has made no secret of his desire to help the armed
forces against what he sees as a burgeoning band of Islamic extremists. Mr.
Wolfowitz has spoken of helping the Indonesians to form an internal peacekeeping
force. He is not contemplating the presence of American combat troops, but
rather training for the army and the police, he said.

BUT the army's human rights record presents a significant stumbling block. A
1999 law whose author was Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, forbids
American assistance to the Indonesian army until it brings to account officers
responsible for more than 100 civilian deaths during a rampage of
military-backed militia in East Timor that year.

Many in the Bush administration would like to get around this restriction,
arguing that reform is not possible unless the United States guides it by
renewing ties with the military. American officials have tried to encourage Mrs.
Megawati to be more open-minded by asserting that Congress is not demanding the
wholesale prosecution of the Indonesian Army but, simply, a serious effort
toward reform. Still, a trial here involving human rights in East Timor, which
the Indonesian government has billed as its answer to Washington's concerns,
shows little sign of satisfying Congress.

In a show of sympathy for Mrs. Megawati, Senators Ted Stevens, Republican of
Alaska, and Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, told her during a visit last
week that they agreed with her that the military was the most important
institution in the country. They told her they opposed the Congressional
restrictions at the time of their passage but warned her that as much as they
wanted to provide training, they could not encourage policies that flouted the
law. President Megawati listened politely, but made no promises.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: American troops in the Philipplines practice a helicopter
evacuation. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); ARMIES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); COLD
WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (71%); POLITICS (71%); NEWS
BRIEFS (63%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (62%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (79%) PERLEZ, JANE

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PHILIPPINES (98%); INDONESIA (94%); ASIA (93%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  PHILIPPINES

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Led By China, Executions Soar

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 76 words


Governments executed at least 3,048 of their citizens last year, more than
double the number in 2000, the human rights group Amnesty International said.
China, which is cracking down on crime, accounted for 81 percent of the total,
executing at least 2,468 people. Of the 31 countries using the death penalty,
Iran ranked second with 139 reported executions and Saudi Arabia third with 79.
The United States was fourth with 66 executions, the group said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (88%) CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (91%); UNITED STATES (90%); SAUDI ARABIA
(90%)

REGION: CHINA

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             240 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE FUGITIVES;
In Pakistan's Interior, A Troubling Victory In Hunt for Al Qaeda

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1884 words

DATELINE: FAISALABAD, Pakistan, April 9


This industrial city deep in the interior of Pakistan was never high on the list
of places deemed likely to provide sanctuary to Al Qaeda, Osama bin Laden's
terror network.

But on March 28, at about 2 a.m., F.B.I. agents and Pakistani police commandos
raided Shahbaz Cottage, a two-story house on the city's outskirts that had been
rented out only four weeks earlier to what the owner thought was a Pakistani
family trading in auto parts on the other side of town.

After a shootout on a neighbor's roof, the raiders retreated with a group of
captives who included about 20 Arabs, and Faisalabad awoke to find itself at the
heart of a drama with little precedent in its largely uneventful history. Among
those arrested, the Bush administration later confirmed, was a Palestinian born
in Saudi Arabia who uses the pseudonym Abu Zubaydah. He is believed by American
intelligence to be the operations director for Al Qaeda and the highest-ranking
figure of that group to be captured since the Sept. 11 attacks.

Since confirming Mr. Zubaydah's identity and the fact that he was seriously
injured in the shootout, Washington has said almost nothing about the raid or
its implications and has not disclosed where Mr. Zubaydah was taken.

Speculation in Pakistan has centered on the air base at Jacobabad, about 425
miles southwest of Faisalabad. The United States leased the base last fall along
with at least three other bases needed for military operations in Afghanistan.

Another possibility is that Mr. Zubaydah has been flown to the American base at
Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, where other Al Qaeda and Taliban captives are being
held. All that has emerged from statements by the F.B.I. and the Pentagon is
that he and the other captives were transferred to American custody, and that
Mr. Zubaydah, who is said by Pakistani police officials to have been shot three
times, in the chest, groin and thigh, is receiving appropriate medical care.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has also said that Mr. Zubaydah will not be
tortured as his questioners seek information about other Al Qaeda fugitives,
including Mr. bin Laden, the most wanted of them all.

From what is known about the Faisalabad raid and similar raids in the
neighboring city of Lahore that netted suspects, there appears to be a new
dimension to the hunt for Taliban and Al Qaeda figures: the possibility that
other fugitives, too, have disappeared deep into the teeming cities of this
nation of 140 million people. There, help in finding hide-outs from sympathetic
groups would be virtually assured.

Bush administration officials have frequently said that they have no leads on
where Mr. bin Laden or his chief deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, may be, or even if
they are still alive. Still, the recent focus of the American search has been
mainly in the mountainous tribal areas on either side of the Afghan-Pakistani
border, and mostly around the southeastern Afghan city of Khost, where
sympathies for Al Qaeda and the Taliban run high.

Finding Mr. Zubaydah in Faisalabad, along with a group of Al Qaeda men who
Pakistani police said included men from the Palestinian territories, Saudi
Arabia, Syria and Yemen, is the surest indication yet that the possible
hide-outs reach far beyond the tribal areas.

In Faisalabad, the Qaeda men were captured only four weeks after moving into the
rental house. But Pakistani police officials said the breakthrough came when the
fugitives made a mistake others may now avoid -- making telephone calls from
their hide-out, possibly on a satellite phone, that triggered electronic
monitoring systems run by American intelligence.

Although it is Pakistan's third largest city, with a population of more than
three million, Faisalabad could lay claim to being the most anonymous of the
country's major urban areas. Primarily a textile city, it has its share of
radical madrasas, the seminaries that have nurtured a generation of Islamic
militants. It is 200 miles southeast of the closest border point with
Afghanistan, the area near Khost, and has had links to that country since young
men from the madrasas here went to fight Soviet occupation troops there in the
1980's.

But Faisalabad has never had the sort of turbulent reputation that attaches to
Karachi, Lahore and Peshawar, cities that have been factories of Islamic
extremism. Perhaps it was just this anonymity that attracted Al Qaeda.

Certainly, the house the group chose was situated in about as quiet an area as
any Pakistani city could offer. Just off the road leading into the city from
Lahore is a new suburb called Faisal Town, named like the city itself after King
Faisal of Saudi Arabia, who was a major benefactor of Pakistan. Much of Faisal
Town consists of open building plots, and the houses that have been built belong
mostly to lawyers, doctors and well-to-do businessmen.

"It's a peaceful area, and it's just my bad luck that I had to rent it out to Al
Qaeda," said Shaheen Kausar, the travel agent who owned the house.

Although using the telephone led to their capture, the Qaeda men operated, in
other ways, like men disciplined by a clandestine life, using local contacts to
keep their own profile virtually invisible.

Ms. Kausar said her property agent in Faisalabad was approached on Feb. 28 by a
man in his early 30's calling himself Saeed Jibran. The man claimed to be a
Pakistani and said he needed the house urgently for two Pakistani brothers who
were his friends, and for their parents, who the man said were just returning
from a pilgrimage to holy places in Saudi Arabia. A 12-month lease was signed,
at the equivalent of about $270 a month, and the man paid the first month's rent
and a security deposit of about $250.

The only identification used in the transaction, Miss Kausar said, was a
business card Mr. Jibran said belonged to one of the two brothers, identified on
the card as Abdul Jabbar, owner of Millat Autos, an auto parts business on the
city's north side. But a visitor to the area 10 days after the raid found the
premises abandoned. Other traders said it had closed down three months ago, and
that the owners were "clean-shaven men" who showed no sign of being Islamic
militants. "They liked to watch Indian video films, with dancing girls," said a
trader who gave his name as Nasir.

In Faisal Town, immediate neighbors of the rented house said they never saw
anybody entering or leaving the house. Ali Raza, who owns an adjacent house and
runs a business selling textiles, said the first inkling he had that anybody was
living in the house came when he was awakened on the morning of the raid by
shouts from outside his gate demanding that he open up. "Before that night, I
never saw a single person come or go," he said.

Fearing a robbery, Mr. Raza said, he withdrew into an inner bedroom with his
wife and two children, then listened as the men at the gate -- Pakistani
commandos and F.B.I. agents -- broke down the gate and stormed up an outer
staircase to his roof. There, he said, the raiders caught up with several of the
occupants of the rented house who had leaped from a parapet onto his roof.
Gunfire followed that left one of the fugitives dead and another, apparently Mr.
Zubaydah, seriously wounded.

Pakistani newspapers quoted police officials as saying that the dead man was
identified from documents found in the house as a 31-year-old Syrian named Abu
Hasnaid, and that F.B.I. forensic specialists who visited the Faisalabad
hospital where the body was taken removed tissue samples for DNA testing. Senior
police officers said they were unable to confirm these or other details because
they were informed of the raid only at the last minute by superiors in Lahore,
the Punjab capital. "This was something run by the S.S.G., and we were kept in
the dark," said one officer, referring to the Special Services Group, an elite
Pakistani police unit.

Another detail that received extensive coverage in Pakistani newspapers was a
handwritten schedule of duties found taped to the kitchen wall in the house.
Among a list of Muslim names of those detailed to do kitchen duties on
successive days of the week, there was one intriguing entry.

"Saturday, Osama," it said. For days after the schedule was published, Pakistani
papers cited it as evidence that Mr. bin Laden may have been in the house and
left before the raid.

But Faisalabad police officials who were asked about the entry mostly chuckled,
noting that Osama is a common name. In any case, one of the officers said, there
was something improbable in supposing that Mr. bin Laden would have been
assigned to a regular kitchen duties, even if he had been in the house. "Osama
bin Laden is not a man to wash dishes, as I know of him," the officer said.

The raid on the house in Faisal Town was one of two conducted simultaneously in
Faisalabad. Across the city, in an area known as Muslim Town, another mostly
middle-class neighborhood, F.B.I. agents and Pakistani commandos stormed the
home of an education professor at a government-run college, Hamidullah Khan
Niazi, on suspicion of aiding the Qaeda fugitives in Faisal Town. At the
professor's home and that of his brother next door, 12 men, including Mr. Niazi,
relatives and student lodgers, were arrested.

All were released after several days of questioning, and F.B.I. agents who
carried off boxes full of documents, books, audio tapes and computer disks sent
word that everything seized could be recovered from a police intelligence center
in Lahore.

Pakistani newspaper accounts said the raid, like the one in Faisal Town, had
been triggered by American electronic intercepts indicating that Mr. Niazi's
home telephone had been used for calls involving Al Qaeda, and that those making
the calls were loyalists of a banned Pakistani Islamic group with close links to
Al Qaeda, Lashkar-e-Taiba.

Over an evening's discussion, Mr. Niazi insistently denied any connection to Al
Qaeda or Mr. Zubaydah, and said that if his phone had been used to make such
calls, they had to have been made by strangers tapping into his line through
what Pakistanis call a public call office -- a common ruse in Pakistan, where
the lowly paid officials who man the curbside call offices sometimes earn extra
money by placing calls on lines belonging to local homes.

But as the interview continued, it became clear that Mr. Niazi and the men in
his family, all of them with the long beards favored by Islamic conservatives,
were not enemies of Al Qaeda's causes or friends of the United States, even if
they had nothing to do with helping fugitives find a hide-out. After 25 years of
tolerance, and in some cases connivance, from Pakistani civilian and military
governments, pockets of Islamic militancy can be found in virtually every
neighborhood in the country.

"I have this opinion about America," said Ziyad Ikram Niazi, the professor's
nephew. "America is a country that has everything, and still it imposes its will
on distant countries that have nothing. Is that justice?" His uncle, picking up
the theme, said the raid had proved another point about America.

"I am a distinguished professor of the city, and I am hauled from my bed at the
dead of night and humiliated," he said. "The Americans are always crowing about
human rights this, human rights that, but where are the human rights in what
they did here?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A raid by F.B.I. agents and Pakistani police commandos on this
house in Faisalabad led to a shootout and the arrest of Al Qaeda suspects.
(Piers Benatar for The New York Times) Map of Pakistan highlighting Faisalabad:
Faisalabad has lacked the turbulent image of other big Pakistani cities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (95%); TERRORISM (94%); AL-QAEDA (91%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); SHOOTINGS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); POLICE FORCES
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (75%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); MILITARY BASES (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (69%); MOUNTAINS (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  GEOGRAPHIC PROFILES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (95%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%) AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) ;ZUBAYDAH, ABU; BURNS, JOHN F

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); CUBA (68%)

REGION: FAISALABAD (PAKISTAN);  PAKISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             243 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PRISONERS;
U.S. Treatment of War Captives Is Criticized

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


In a harsh evaluation of American policy, Amnesty International says the United
States has violated several international laws in its treatment of those
captured during the war in Afghanistan and has failed to live up to its
statements that it is complying with the Geneva Convention.

"Despite repeated statements that it is committed to international law and
standards, the U.S. government is failing to meet its obligation to apply such
law and standards to those it has in its custody in Afghanistan and Guantanamo
Bay," the human rights organization says in a report to be released on Monday.
"In so doing, it has not only violated the rights of those individuals but
threatens to undermine the rule of law everywhere."

These rights, the report says, include the right to be informed of the reason
for detention, the right to prompt and confidential access to counsel of one's
choice and the presumption of innocence.

The report says the presumption of innocence has been undermined by "a pattern
of public commentary on the presumed guilt of the people" in American custody in
Guantanamo Bay.

The United States is holding 299 prisoners from more than 30 countries at the
United States Naval Air Station at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and about 240 prisoners
in Afghanistan. The government says it is treating the prisoners humanely, even
though it has denied them prisoner of war status, which would entitle them to
certain privileges.

Moreover, as the government has asserted in court papers, it is holding the
prisoners "under the president's authority as commander in chief and under the
laws and usages of war," and the detainees, as aliens with no connection to the
United States, are being held outside sovereign United States territory.

The Amnesty International report says the government was concerned about the
authority under which it was holding the prisoners and demonstrated this when it
discovered that one of them was an American and quickly transferred him out of
Guantanamo Bay.

The report said this quick transfer reflected "official concern" that the
American, who would have access to federal courts, "could have become a test
case for challenging the detention of all prisoners there."

The government has not yet scheduled any tribunals and has not charged any of
the prisoners at Guantanamo Bay with specific crimes. Nor have any of the
prisoners had access to lawyers. The military says that it is still
interrogating the prisoners and that its priority is to extract information that
could prevent attacks.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld has said that because the prisoners are
terrorists, and may be connected with the Sept. 11 attacks, they may not be
released even if acquitted in military tribunals.

The Amnesty report says the military is keeping details of the capture and
detention of the prisoners too secret for the public to be able to evaluate what
it is doing. It cites news reports that the United States had transferred dozens
of prisoners from Afghanistan to Egypt, where, it says, they could be subject to
torture during interrogation.

Mr. Rumsfeld said such reports were irresponsible and wrong, but Amnesty says it
is concerned that he has not issued a categorical denial that prisoners under
American control could still be interrogated in other countries.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (83%); RULE OF LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); MILITARY COURTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%);
NAVIES (73%); ACQUITTAL (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (66%); HIJACKING (64%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (63%); MILITARY WEAPONS (63%); AL-QAEDA (60%); AIRLINES
(60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (57%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (55%)
TERRORISM;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR
(59%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             245 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan's Perpetual President

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 437 words


In the two and a half years since he seized power in a military coup, Gen.
Pervez Musharraf has frequently pledged to return Pakistan to democratic rule.
But General Musharraf deludes himself if he thinks the presidential referendum
he has scheduled at the end of the month is an affirmation of democracy. He is
campaigning unopposed and plans to extend his presidency for five years after
the vote. In a surreal spectacle, General Musharraf has been barnstorming around
Pakistan holding rent-a-crowd rallies while barring anti-referendum
demonstrations. His heavy-handed tactics can only undermine the nation and
weaken its ability to fight terrorism.

Pakistan has been run by military dictators for most of its history. General
Musharraf's coup in 1999 was unjustified but nonetheless accepted by many
Pakistanis who had grown tired of the corruption and abuses by Prime Ministers
Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, both of whom are now in exile. The general has
impressed Americans, and indeed the whole world, with his help in defeating the
Taliban in neighboring Afghanistan and his crackdown on terrorists at home.
President Bush has repeatedly declared his appreciation. General Musharraf was
mistaken if he took these expressions of support as a green light to press his
referendum and avoid democratic accountability.

With the war on terrorism far from won and the Muslim world unsettled by the
situation in the Middle East, General Musharraf may think he is doing the United
States a favor by extending his term. He is wrong, in principle and in practice.
He has, until now, won broad support for his antiterrorism campaign within
Pakistan, especially among the nation's educated elite -- members of its
business and landowning class, politicians, human rights groups and even many
mainstream religious leaders. His recent blunt tactics to promote the referendum
risk alienating the very supporters who have stood by him.

The general's attacks on Ms. Bhutto and Mr. Sharif yesterday appear to have been
inspired by the fact that these two former leaders' supporters are actively
opposing the referendum. General Musharraf said the two would be arrested if
they tried to return to Pakistan. He is not the first leader to equate
endorsement of his leadership with the survival of his country, but such an
overstatement is hardly likely to help get the country back to elected
government.

The Bush administration has mildly questioned the legitimacy of the referendum.
It should more forcefully tell General Musharraf that his plan can only
undermine the respect he has earned throughout the world since Sept. 11.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RULE (90%); TERRORISM (90%); REFERENDUMS (90%); COUPS (90%);
MARTIAL LAW (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); POLITICS
(89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (77%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CORRUPTION (73%);
PRIME MINISTERS (73%); AIRLINES (72%); RELIGION (65%); ARRESTS (50%) EDITORIALS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  REFERENDUMS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
ELECTIONS

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (58%); NAWAZ
SHARIF (58%) MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (70%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             250 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Bosnia: Closer To Europe

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 99 words


Bosnia joined the Council of Europe, the Continent's main human rights watchdog,
a major step toward European integration for the impoverished Balkan country
still struggling with the legacy of its 1992-95 war. Walter Schwimmer, secretary
general of the council, said the move would open new doors for the divided state
in its efforts to forge closer ties with Europe. Beriz Belkic, chairman of
Bosnia's presidency, pledged that the country would reform the judiciary,
strengthen its chronically weak central institutions, fight crime, corruption
and terrorism, and catch war crimes fugitives.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CORRUPTION (88%);
WAR CRIMES (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); TERRORISM (50%) CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (91%) COUNCIL OF EUROPE

COUNTRY: EUROPE (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (92%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             252 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Ugly Trail Of Anti-Semitism

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 166 words


To the Editor:

Re "Anti-Semitism Is Deepening Among Muslims" (Arts & Ideas pages, April 27):

Criticism of Israel and the call for the end of its illegitimate and immoral
occupation of Palestinian West Bank and Gaza should not be equated with
anti-Semitism.

Those who refuse to condemn Israel's violation of human rights and humanitarian
laws are doing a disservice.

Many progressive scholars, human rights activists and social workers, both in
Muslim countries and abroad, including the United States, frequently collaborate
and work together with Jewish intellectuals and activists in a spirit of common
and universal human values.

Despite the notorious and vulgar anti-Semitic imagery used by extremists who are
often supported by dictatorial regimes and monarchs, the vast majority of
Muslims do not engage in anti-Semitic polemics and hatred. Many Muslims have
strongly condemned anti-Semitism, discrimination against Jews and all forms of
bigotry.

TANWEER AKRAM
Alexandria, Va., April 27, 2002


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (95%); RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(88%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) PALESTINIANS;  JEWS;  ANTI-SEMITISM;  ISLAM

PERSON: AKRAM, TANWEER

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (74%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             253 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Set to Renounce Its Role in Pact for World Tribunal

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


The Bush administration has decided to renounce formally any involvement in a
treaty setting up an international criminal court and is expected to declare
that the signing of the document by the Clinton administration is no longer
valid, government officials said today.

The "unsigning" of the treaty, which is expected to be announced on Monday, will
be a decisive rejection by the Bush White House of the concept of a permanent
tribunal designed to prosecute individuals for genocide, crimes against humanity
and other war crimes.

The administration has long argued that the court has the potential to create
havoc for the United States, exposing American soldiers and officials overseas
to capricious and mischievous prosecutions.

"We think it was a mistake to have signed it," an administration official said.
"We have said we will not submit it to the Senate for ratification." The
renunciation, officials said, also means the United States will not recognize
the court's jurisdiction and will not submit to any of its orders.

In addition, other officials said, the United States will simultaneously assert
that it will not be bound by the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, a
1969 pact that outlines the obligations of nations to obey other international
treaties.

Article 18 of the Vienna Convention requires signatory nations like the United
States to refrain from taking steps to undermine treaties they sign, even if
they do not ratify them. As with the treaty for the International Criminal
Court, the United States signed but did not ratify the Vienna agreement.

A government official said the administration planned to make its decision known
on Monday in a speech by Under Secretary of State Marc Grossman in Washington
and in a briefing for foreign journalists by Pierre-Richard Prosper, the State
Department's ambassador for war crimes issues. Representatives of human rights
groups also said they expected the decision, which was first reported by Reuters
news service on Friday, to be announced then.

The pointed repudiation of the International Criminal Court, while not
unexpected, is certain to add to the friction between the United States and much
of the world, notably Europe, where policy makers have grumbled ever more loudly
about the Bush administration's inclination to steer away from multinational
obligations.

Despite the strong stance by the United States, the International Criminal Court
will begin operations next year in The Hague. More than the required number of
60 nations had signed the treaty as of last month, and the court's jurisdiction
will cover crimes committed after July 1 of this year.

It will become the first new international judicial body since the International
Court of Justice, or World Court, was created in 1945 to adjudicate disputes
between states. Until now, individuals were tried in ad hoc or specially created
tribunals for war crimes like those now in operation for offenses committed in
Rwanda and the countries that formerly made up Yugoslavia, both modeled on the
Nuremberg trials of Nazi officials following World War II.

Harold Hongju Koh, a Yale law professor and a former assistant secretary of
state in the Clinton administration, said the retraction of the signature on the
treaty would be a profound error.

"The result is that the administration is losing a major opportunity to shape
the court so it could be useful to the United States," Mr. Koh said. "Now that
the court exists, it's important to deal with it. If the administration leaves
it unmanaged, it may create difficulties for us and nations like Israel."

He described the opportunity as similar to the United States Supreme Court's
1803 decision in Marbury v. Madison that courts could subject the other branches
of government to its jurisdiction, decisively defining its role in the new
nation.

"This is an international Marbury versus Madison moment," he said.

John R. Bolton, the under secretary of state for arms control, who has been a
leading voice in opposing American participation in the International Criminal
Court, wrote extensively about the subject before he took office, calling it "a
product of fuzzy-minded romanticism" and "not just naive, but dangerous."

Mr. Bolton, in an article in The National Interest in 1999, argued that the
court would force the United States to forfeit some of its sovereignty and
unique concept of due process to a foreign and possibly unrestrained prosecutor.
He said that it was not just American soldiers who would be in the most
jeopardy, but "the president, the cabinet officers who comprise the National
Security Council, and other senior civilian and military leaders responsible for
our defense and foreign policy."

Palitha Kohona, the chief of the treaty section for the United Nations, said it
was unheard of for a nation that signed a treaty to withdraw that signature.
David J. Scheffer, who was ambassador at large for war crimes and who signed the
treaty for the Clinton administration, said that withdrawing the signature
exceeded even the actions of the Reagan administration, which in 1987 decided it
would not seek ratification of an amendment to the Geneva Conventions that the
Carter administration had signed. The action concerned a document known as
Protocol 1, which would have extended protections to soldiers of insurgent
movements.

"There has never been an attempt to literally remove the document," he said.

Mr. Scheffer said the Bush administration's actions would not only undermine
international justice but also damage American interests.

"The perception will be that the United States walked away from international
justice and forfeited its leadership role," he said. "It will be a dramatic
moment in international legal history."

One official said the Bush White House was prepared to say last September that
it would withdraw the signature on the treaty, but the attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon that month delayed an announcement. Officials were
not only occupied with the sudden fight against terrorism but also thought that
renouncing the treaty would appear unseemly, the official said.

Most democratic nations and all European Union countries have ratified the
treaty -- except Greece, which is in the process of doing so -- along with
Canada, New Zealand and a number of African, Eastern European and Central Asian
countries. Israel has signed it but not ratified. Egypt, Iran and Syria have
signed. India, Pakistan and China have neither signed nor ratified. Russia has
signed but not ratified.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); JOURNALISM (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (62%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: LEWIS, NEIL A; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CLINTON, BILL

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); NETHERLANDS (90%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             254 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Political Prisoners

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 156 words


To the Editor:

Re "Ending Repression in Myanmar" (editorial, May 7):

Now that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has been released from house arrest, the title of
"world's most prominent political prisoner" clearly should belong to Anwar
Ibrahim, the former deputy prime minister of Malaysia who was beaten nearly to
death by Malaysia's chief of police and then convicted of corruption and sodomy
in a sham trial that has rightly been condemned by governments around the world,
including our own.

The State Department's human rights report calls Anwar Ibrahim a political
prisoner, and Amnesty International has labeled him a prisoner of conscience. As
American ambassador to Malaysia at the time, I can attest that Anwar Ibrahim
committed only one crime -- to voice political and economic differences with his
superior, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed. For this, he was sentenced to 15
years in prison.

JOHN R. MALOTT
Laguna Niguel, Calif., May 7, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); CORRUPTION (88%); LITIGATION
(88%); ARRESTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); PRISONS (87%); SENTENCING (87%); POLITICS (87%);
PRIME MINISTERS (87%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); POLICE FORCES
(55%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  POLITICAL PRISONERS

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI (88%) MALOTT, JOHN R; AUNG SAN SUU KYI, DAW; ANWAR
IBRAHIM

COUNTRY: MALAYSIA (95%); MYANMAR (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: MALAYSIA;  MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             255 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trials Test the Faith of Rwandans

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1302 words


Every day, it is the mass spilling of blood that dominates the debates in the
rambling courthouse of Arusha, a town in Tanzania. Always the questions are
grave, but sometimes they weigh more heavily, as they do now.

Five clergymen are to be tried in this East African town on charges that have
shaken the trust of many Christians in the region. Their cases have drawn less
attention than the turbulence over sexual abuse by priests in the United States
and other countries.

But the accusations in Arusha are more serious. The five men are accused of
genocide.

Three are Roman Catholic priests, one is a Seventh-day Adventist pastor, one an
Anglican bishop. Prosecutors at the United Nations war crimes tribunal for
Rwanda maintain that the five collaborated with killers in their congregations
during the 1994 civil war, when more than 500,000 people were slain.

Each of the accused will be prosecuted separately and the pastor's trial is now
under way. Two others are due to start later this year.

It is the first time that any member of the clergy has stood accused of genocide
before an international tribunal like the court in The Hague that deals with the
former Yugoslavia.

The clergymen, all of them Rwandan citizens, will be judged for their individual
responsibility. But human rights groups hope that the event will force the
churches to re-examine broader issues, like the role of senior members of the
clergy in Rwandan politics and the near passivity of the church hierarchy while
the killing frenzy was going on.

Soul-searching debates have not come into the open, and rights groups complain
that numerous letters to Roman Catholic Church leaders, including Pope John Paul
II, have evoked no response. But some remarkable signs of change have quietly
appeared.

Court officials say the Catholic Church, which until now had been shielding
priests and nuns accused of wrongdoing in Rwanda, has begun to cooperate with
the tribunal.

"There's been a clear turnabout in the Catholic Church," said a senior official
with the prosecutor's office. "In the last few months they have done everything
to facilitate our work. It's a major change."

He declined to give details but noted that two indicted priests had recently
given themselves up to the tribunal, on orders from their superiors.

One is the Rev. Athanase Seromba, accused of helping to kill about 2,000 people
who had taken refuge in his church, by ordering bulldozers to crush the
building. Later, Father Seromba worked as a priest in Italy under an assumed
name and then went into hiding after the tribunal tried to have him extradited.
He surrendered in early February after international pressure was put on the
Italian government and the Vatican.

The second Catholic priest is the Rev. Hormisdas Nsengimana, who had been living
under the protection of a monastery in Cameroon. Prosecutors charge him with
playing a prominent role when a group of Hutus attacked and killed refugees in
and around the Christ-Roi College, where he was rector. Both men were recently
transferred to the United Nations jail in Arusha.

They joined a third priest, the Rev. Emmanuel Rukundo, an army chaplain, who was
sent to Arusha after being detained in Geneva last year.

It is not known if there are more clergymen among the tribunal's secret
indictments.

The role of church workers during the slaughter in Rwanda, where more than 80
percent of the population is Christian, has already been the subject of much
scrutiny in the news media.

Critics have pointed to several Catholic and Protestant leaders who sided openly
with the Hutu government in the months before it orchestrated the slaughter of
Tutsi and moderate Hutu.

Christian Terras, the author of "The Lost Honor of the Church," published in
France, said many Hutus in the clergy had been aware of political meetings of
extremist Hutus before the wave of killings, or had even attended them. "As many
as 100 pastors, priests and nuns played an active role, siding with the Hutu
militias," Mr. Terras said.

The killing frenzy lasted three months, and during that time the church
hierarchy called for peace. "But at best, leaders sometimes sounded ambiguous
and they never used their moral power to condemn or stop the massacres," he
said.

Reports abound of heroic pastors, priests and nuns who stood up to the killers
and saved people. According to estimates, at least 300 clergymen and nuns were
slain themselves because they were Tutsi or because they were helping others.

But there is also evidence of refugees seeking protection in churches, only to
be trapped and killed after church workers called in armed mobs.

Genocide trials in local courts in Rwanda have already included church workers,
and in 1998 two priests were sentenced to death. They remain in Rwandan jails,
together with at least half a dozen other clergymen.

In Belgium last year, two Rwandan nuns received long prison sentences after a
local jury convicted them of crimes against humanity, finding them guilty of
collaborating with murderous militia gangs.

There has been little public reaction from the Vatican.

Pope John Paul II wrote a letter in 1996, saying that "the church in itself
cannot be held responsible for the misdeeds of its members," but he added that
all church members "who have sinned during the genocide must have the courage to
bear the consequences."

The Anglican Church went further. The archbishop of Canterbury went to Rwanda
himself and apologized. An Anglican bishop, Samuel Musabyimana, is among the
church workers waiting to be tried at the tribunal in Arusha.

The first clergyman to go on trial was the Rev. Elizaphan Ntakirutimana, the
former leader of the Seventh-day Adventist Church in the Kibuye region.

Arrested in Texas in 1996, he fought extradition but finally became the first
person handed over by the United States to an international tribunal.

Pastor Ntakirutimana, 77, is facing a panel of judges from Norway, South Africa
and Senegal, and is charged along with his son Gerard, a doctor. The trial of
the two men, which began in September, is expected to go on until this summer.

Both men have pleaded not guilty to charges that they were linked to the
slaughter at the Mugonero Adventist church and hospital complex, headed by the
pastor.

According to the prosecution, the pastor and his son, both Hutus, took part in
planning the attack on more than 2,000 Tutsi gathered in the complex and the two
were in the convoy that led the attack and later tracked down survivors who had
fled to the nearby hills.

Ramsey Clark, a former United States attorney general and the pastor's lawyer,
said: "The evidence is overwhelming that the pastor was not present during the
assault. He and others left at 7 o'clock that morning, hours before the crowd
arrived and the violence began."

Mr. Clark said he found the indictments of the pastor and of other religious
workers questionable and disturbing. "I'm not religious but I believe in truth
and facts," Mr. Clark said. "People who hate the church have insisted on the
involvement of priests and nuns."

One witness who testified in the small paneled court was "MM," the son of the
Rev. Isaka Rucondo, an Adventist pastor who was killed at the complex.

MM, as the court identifies him, said the accused abandoned his pastors and
congregation.

He described how one night after vespers, his father and five other Tutsi
pastors who were caring for refugees wrote a letter to the accused, asking him
to appeal to the mayor on their behalf.

The letter, which Pastor Ntakirutimana later showed to Philip Gourevitch, a
writer, is now a prosecution exhibit.

Addressed to "Our dear leader," the letter says, "We wish to inform you that we
have heard that tomorrow we will be killed with our families." A reply from the
pastor came back saying that nothing could be done, the witness said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Elizaphan Ntakirutimana was the first Rwandan clergyman
accused of genocide to go on trial at the United Nations tribunal. (Mary
Kimani/Internews)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (96%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(92%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
EXTRADITION (89%); INDICTMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); SEX OFFENSES (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (56%) UNITED NATIONS; ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH; SEVENTH-DAY
ADVENTISTS; ANGLICAN CHURCHES

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (95%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (93%); ITALY (92%); EASTERN
AFRICA (92%); HOLY SEE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); CAMEROON (79%); NETHERLANDS
(79%)

REGION: RWANDA;  ARUSHA (TANZANIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Hostages of '97 Defend Peru Commandos

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 15


Controversy over a Peruvian judge's order to arrest 12 army officers who helped
end a 1997 hostage siege heated up today when two men rescued by the commandos
spoke out in their defense. The case could bear on Peru's bid to try a former
president, Alberto K. Fujimori.

In an inquiry into whether any of the 14 rebels killed were shot after
surrendering, a judge ordered the arrest this week of 12 officers who helped end
the 126-day siege at the Japanese ambassador's residence.

"It's disconcerting that those who did their job and got us out are suddenly
being made out to be the bad guys," a former admiral, Luis Giampietri, said of
the officers in an interview with RPP radio. He was one of 72 hostages held for
four months by members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement.

Another hostage, Alfredo Panizzo, also defended the commandos, saying their only
objective was to "free the hostages."

The case is politically sensitive because if the killings are verified -- and
one rights group says the bodies of several rebels bear execution-style bullet
holes -- that could strengthen Peru's case in its fight to try Mr. Fujimori for
crimes against humanity. Mr. Fujimori lives in exile in Japan.

Investigators are trying to establish whether President Fujimori, who ordered
the raid, also ordered the executions.

The government, which has vowed not to meddle in the inquiry, said it welcomed
the investigation but called the decision to arrest the officers excessive.
Rights groups said the ruling must be respected.

The siege at the ambassador's residence, where some of Peru's most prominent
figures were among the 600 held originally, was one of the most high-profile
events of the civil war, which killed 30,000.

Mr. Fujimori, dismissed as president in November 2000 during a broad corruption
scandal, denies the charges of corruption and human rights abuses against him.

Commandos blasted their way into the residence from underground tunnels. But
accusations, fueled by a Japanese hostage's testimony, swirled that commandos
executed rebels. Last year rebels' bodies were exhumed from their pauper's
graves, but there is no word yet on autopsies conducted on them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOSTAGE TAKING (92%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
CORRUPTION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); ARMIES (78%); JUDGES
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); AUTOPSIES (76%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (75%); SCANDALS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (71%) HOSTAGES;  FOREIGN SERVICE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO

CITY: LIMA, PERU (58%)

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); JAPAN (79%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             259 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Nigeria: President To Study Rights Report

BYLINE:  By Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 89 words


President Olusegun Obasanjo said he would look "clinically" at the findings and
recommendations in a report submitted to him by a panel that has been
investigating three decades of human rights abuses.

The panel, headed by a former Supreme Court judge, Chukwudifu Oputa, recommended
compensating victims of abuses from the first military coup in 1966 to the start
of civilian rule in 1999. Mr. Obsanjo said: "To me, the spirit of forgiveness is
what we need now, not compensation. Money is not the answer."   Norimitsu Onishi
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); MILITARY RULE (86%); POLITICS (86%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (85%);
SUPREME COURTS (55%); COUPS (53%); ARMED FORCES (53%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: ONISHI, NORIMITSU; OBASANJO, OLUSEGUN (PRES)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (93%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: NIGERIA

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             260 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Rape Victims

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

One of the saddest and most infuriating things about the plight of rape victims
in Pakistan is that none of it is news ("In Pakistan, Rape Victims Are the
'Criminals,' " news article, May 17).

The world has known about such practices for as long as they have been going on.

While the United States and many other countries have been quite willing to
condemn apartheid in South Africa and undemocratic governments and practices in
other parts of the world, we seem willing to accept the stoning of rape victims
as merely a difference in cultural values.

By not taking human rights abuses against women seriously, the world community
is implicitly condoning the belief that women deserve less than full recognition
as human beings.

DEANNA GORDON
Berkeley, Calif., May 17, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); SEX OFFENSES (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); RACE & RACISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); WOMEN
(85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) SEX CRIMES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION

PERSON: GORDON, DEANNA

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (64%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europe Police Likely to Get Longer Access To Records

BYLINE:  By PAUL MELLER

SECTION: Section W; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, May 29


Despite fierce opposition from civil rights groups, telecommunications companies
and Internet service providers, the European Parliament is expected to vote on
Thursday to approve a new data protection law that will make it much easier for
the police in the 15 European Union countries to obtain and use communications
records in investigations.

The flash point in the law is a provision inserted in the draft last December by
member governments. It requires phone and Internet service companies to retain
"traffic data" -- information on their customers' phone calls, e-mail messages
and Internet connections -- long after it would be discarded under current law,
at the end of each billing cycle of one or two months. It would also loosen some
restrictions on law enforcement access to the records.

The two biggest political blocs in the Parliament, the Socialist Party and the
moderately conservative European People's Party, initially opposed changes in
the law. But they agreed to a compromise this week that "goes a long way in
granting the national governments what they want," said Tony Bunyan of
Statewatch, which monitors civil liberties issues in Europe.

The compromise language adds a requirement that police surveillance of citizens'
phone and Internet use be appropriate, proportionate and limited in length.

The draft law now also makes reference to the European Convention on Human
Rights, though only in a footnote.

Mr. Bunyan said that even with those concessions, the law will still "pave the
way for blanket surveillance of individuals" and that it is "a myth to say this
is needed in order to tackle terrorism."

The terror attacks last fall softened opposition to the law's data retention
provision by many civil liberties advocates and by Erkki Liikanen, the European
commissioner who oversaw the drafting of the law. He dropped his objection last
fall, saying people must "look at the world differently" after Sept. 11.

"We can live with this compromise," Mr. Liikanen said of the draft law today,
"but we must have a position on the length of data retention, the maximum number
of months it can be held." Some in law enforcement, including senior British
police officials, want the traffic data kept for seven years.

Part of the debate is cost, with the phone and Internet companies afraid that
they will be required to bear it. Neither the companies nor proponents of the
new law have an estimate for how much it will cost.

"This compromise mentions data retention but it doesn't define what data is,"
said Fiona Taylor, a senior adviser to ETNO, a telephone trade group. "It could
include the content of people's messages, as well as the time, duration and
direction of the call or e-mail. Until we know what we need to store, we can't
say how much it will cost."

Jo McNamee of EuroIspa, an Internet companies' trade association, said
retrieving the data when needed may cost even more than storing it. But his main
concern, he said, is the precedent it sets.

"This is the beginning, not the end of data retention," Mr. McNamee said.
"Member states will be able to pass national laws, and there is nothing here in
this E.U. data protection directive to stop them."

Other provisions that the Parliament is expected to approve include a ban on
unsolicited e-mail advertising, known as spam, unless the recipient has
specifically "opted in" and agreed to receive such mailings; companies will be
allowed to go on sending mailings to existing customers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (90%); INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS
(90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (90%);
DATA SECURITY (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNET & WWW
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (90%);
DATA PROTECTION LAWS (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); TERRORISM (86%); APPROVALS (78%); TELEPHONE SERVICES (78%);
POLITICS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); WIRETAPPING (77%); POLICE FORCES
(77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) COMPUTERS AND THE
INTERNET;  LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  TELEPHONES AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS;  ELECTRONIC MAIL;  COMPUTER SECURITY;  WIRETAPPING AND OTHER
EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  TERRORISM;
ADVERTISING;  POLICE;  CRIME AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (84%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (84%) EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: MELLER, PAUL; LIIKANEN, ERKKI

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (98%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
BELGIUM (79%)

REGION: EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             265 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 7, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Half the Afghans, the Women, Fight to Establish Their Rights

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 555 words


When Afghanistan's grand council convenes next week to begin creating a new
political order, one task will be to select the writers of a new Constitution.
There has never been a moment with more promise -- or long-term danger -- for
Afghan women.

Three of them -- a lawyer, a law professor and a judge -- brought that message
to New York this week, along with an urgent plea for help, meeting with American
foundations, law firms and the Bar Association of the City of New York.

Soraya Paikan, a lawyer and member of the grand council, or loya jirga, said in
an interview on Monday that there are signs that newly won women's freedoms are
already under threat, and that women must take part in writing the Constitution
if they are to achieve protection.

The task of drawing women into the process can seem overwhelming. "Afghan women
don't know their rights," said Ms. Paikan, 42, a founder of the Afghan Women
Lawyers and Professionals Association, which emerged in January from four years
underground.

She is in New York with two colleagues from the association's board -- Hangama
Anwari, a law scholar, and Nafisa Kabuli, a judge in the struggling juvenile
justice system. The association has trained 40 women in basic human rights. It
wants to send dozens more across Afghanistan to explain to women in towns and
rural villages about the evolution of political life and how they can work to
ensure that developments work to their advantage.

The women brought a meticulous list of what their association needs, from chairs
and kitchen items to a car and eight computers, to open a center in Kabul. All
told, they need $237,600. It seems a lot to them.

Visibility is equally important. Ms. Anwari, 26, said, "One of the purposes of
our visit here -- beside getting some financial and material support from
outsiders -- is to introduce the aims and the goals and the dreams of Afghan
women lawyers to the international community."

The women spoke at the offices of Equality Now, an organization that works on
women's rights in more than 100 countries.

Afghanistan once had hundreds of women trained in law. For 57 years, before
women were banned by the Taliban, Kabul University graduated coeducational law
classes that included 20 to 40 women a year. But they were not active in
political life and women's rights. Many also left the country during the last 23
years of war.

Ms. Kabuli, 41, was among those who stayed and worked underground, and she is
now a judge dealing with youthful offenders; girls as well as boys are often
charged with robbery in these difficult economic times, she said. During Taliban
rule, from 1996 until last fall, she ran one of hundreds of clandestine home
schools for girls.

"One of the first violations of the Taliban against women was that they
instantly got rid of the female judges," Ms. Kabuli said. "As a consequence of
that, and because the schools were closed, I had a home school and taught up to
300 students. The girls had to come one by one to school because if they came a
group, they might have been arrested."

Ms. Kabuli said the problem with the Taliban was not that they were Muslims.
"Islam brought a certain equality to men and women," she said. "The laws that
the Taliban brought were from pre-Islamic times, based on traditional law."

Those traditions die hard, Ms. Paikan said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (91%); LAWYERS (90%); POLITICS (89%);
WOMEN (89%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (89%); TALIBAN (89%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WRITERS (78%);
BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (76%); JUDGES (76%);
LEGAL SERVICES (76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); ROBBERY (69%);
INTERVIEWS (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (66%) WOMEN;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
;  CONSTITUTIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF THE BAR OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             268 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gangsters Are Blamed in Killing Of a Serbian Security Official

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 435 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 10


Serbian officials blamed gangsters today for the assassination of a police chief
who served under Slobodan Milosevic, then switched sides to help reformers oust
him from power.

The officer, Gen. Bosko Buha, deputy chief of Serbian public security, was shot
several times at close range early this morning in a popular restaurant district
beside the Danube. There was no shortage of speculation about the unidentified
attacker's motives, and General Buha had many enemies. But Justice Minister
Vladan Batic said: "He was not assassinated for political reasons. I think this
was just an underworld showdown with a man who held top positions in the police
for a long time."

General Buha, 42, directed Serbia's main anti-riot unit when Mr. Milosevic,
whose turbulent decade in power saw the emergence of powerful gangland figures
with links to politicians, was still president of Yugoslavia. Serbia is the
dominant republic in Yugoslavia.

Zoran Djindjic, now Serbia's prime minister, and other figures then in
opposition persuaded General Buha to side with them in the days leading up to
the revolution of Oct. 5, 2000, when demonstrators stormed the federal
Parliament in mass protests that culminated in Mr. Milosevic's downfall.

General Buha, who was later promoted to the Interior Ministry, also served in
Kosovo, the separatist province of Serbia, where he was wounded during the 1999
NATO bombing campaign to halt Serbian repression of the Albanian majority, the
Beta news agency reported.

Among the many theories about the assassination was the suggestion that General
Buha had been killed to prevent him from revealing information about atrocities
to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague, where Mr. Milosevic is standing
trial on war crimes charges related to Serbian actions in Kosovo and in Bosnia
earlier in the 1990's.

"There is speculation that Buha might have been aware of mass graves," said
Sonja Biserko of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia. "There is
also talk of a possible link to the biggest mafia group in Belgrade."

Regardless of the reason for the killing, many Serbs were disturbed to see that
20 months after Mr. Milosevic was ousted, their country remained prey to lawless
powers. The chairman of the Serbian parliament's security committee, Dragan
Jocic, called the killing an "attack against the state."

There were several assassinations during Mr. Milosevic's last year in power,
including the shooting of the Serbian warlord Zeljko Raznatovic, known as Arkan,
in a Belgrade hotel in January 2000 and Defense Minister Pavle Bulatovic in a
restaurant the next month.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); WAR
CRIMES (86%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%);
ORGANIZED CRIME (78%); RESTAURANTS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (72%); BOMBINGS (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS
(70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); POLICE FORCES (58%) ASSASSINATIONS AND ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: SIMPSON, DANIEL; BUHA, BOSKO; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); ALBANIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             270 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 13, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Sri Lanka: Rights Group To Meet Rebels

BYLINE:  By Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 92 words


Amnesty International representatives will meet with the leadership of the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka for the first time. Amnesty
delegates will also discuss with government officials what human rights monitors
see as the government's failure to effectively prosecute soldiers and policemen
who have killed or raped civilians. The delegates will talk to the rebels about
their recruitment of child soldiers and the need to allow Muslims -- expelled
from northern Sri Lanka by the Tigers -- to return home.
   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CIVIL WAR (88%); CHILD SOLDIERS (86%);
POLITICS (86%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (86%); SEX OFFENSES (84%);
RELIGION (52%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  SEX
CRIMES;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(91%) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; TAMIL TIGERS

PERSON: DUGGER, CELIA W

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: SRI LANKA

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             275 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 21, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Next Leader Seeks Drug-War Aid

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 20


Alvaro Uribe Velez, Colombia's president-elect, met with President Bush today
and pledged to increase his country's commitment in the fight against drugs and
terrorism, officials said.

Mr. Uribe, a former governor overwhelmingly elected by a war-weary nation last
month, asked administration officials for continued support and, specifically,
help in weaning farmers from drug crops and patrolling regions that are
currently beyond state control.

Mr. Uribe was politely received by the administration, though one senior
official cautioned that the new government must show that Colombians "are
prepared to sacrifice in their own defense."

But he met deeper skepticism on Capitol Hill. Despite the American investment of
nearly $2 billion in Plan Colombia, a mostly military aid package approved by
Congress in 2000, Colombia is no closer to reaching any of its main goals:
reducing violence, cutting drug exports, negotiating peace or improving the lot
of ordinary people.

"The results of Plan Colombia have been disappointing." said Senator Patrick J.
Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who leads a key appropriations subcommittee. "After
spending more than $1.5 billion, in many respects the situation is worse today
than before Plan Colombia began."

But the president-elect told reporters after meeting with Mr. Bush that Plan
Colombia needed American resources "to avoid massacres, abductions and other
kinds of crimes that are striking the Colombian people."

In the informal meeting with the president, Mr. Uribe, who does not take office
until August, emphasized that he would seek to revive peace negotiations with
guerrillas, using United Nations help, and safeguard human rights even as he
cracked down on violence by two leftist insurgencies and a paramilitary
organization.

Mr. Uribe outlined plans to double his nation's security forces and set up a
civilian defense network, and said he would consider imposing a new tax to pay
for them, officials said.

The United States has spent or requested nearly $2 billion in aid to Colombia as
part of a strategy that was originally called Plan Colombia and has since been
expanded into the Andean Regional Initiative. To the frustration of American
officials, the government of the departing president, Andres Pastrana, failed to
live up to its spending commitments under the plan, as did European donors.

"Our message is we want to stand with Colombia," said the administration
official. "We're prepared to do a lot, and Colombia needs to do a lot in all
areas -- human rights, drugs, security."

Despite his negative assessment, which is widely shared, Senator Leahy said he
would continue to support the administration's Colombia strategy. Colombia's
toxic mix of drugs, terrorism and poverty are potentially too destabilizing for
the United States to ignore, lawmakers say.

"The aid will continue, but with conditions designed to protect both Colombia
and the United States," Mr. Leahy said.

Congress is preparing to disburse $550 million in aid this summer, and is
expected to approve an administration request that would allow United States
funds and equipment to be used in the fight against terrorism in addition to
drugs. The administration has allocated $98 million to train Colombians to
protect an oil pipeline that is a favorite target of rebel saboteurs.

A State Department official said today that, in cooperation with Mr. Uribe, the
administration had nearly doubled its goals for aerial eradication of coca
fields. Lino Gutierrez, the deputy assistant secretary of state, said the United
States hoped to see 370,000 acres sprayed with herbicide, compared with 207,000
acres last year.

But the antidrug effort has been plagued with problems. A memo by the General
Accounting Office, Congress's investigative arm, reported this month that the
Colombian Army had been slow in providing about 250 pilots and others for
training on 44 Black Hawk and Huey helicopters supplied by the United States for
moving Colombian troops on drug raids.

American officials, the memo said, have "expressed frustration with the overall
pace of Plan Colombia and the lack of Colombian commitment to the program."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President-elect Alvaro Uribe Velez met President Bush yesterday.
(Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); NARCOTERRORISM (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); DRUG POLICY (90%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); GOVERNORS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); APPROPRIATIONS
(76%); LIBERALISM (75%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); APPROVALS (73%); PEACE PROCESS
(69%); TAXES & TAXATION (65%) DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (93%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%) BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES); URIBE VELEZ, ALVARO; MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             278 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Victim Links Retired General To Torture in El Salvador War

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., June 24


The trial of two retired Salvadoran generals in a two-decade-old torture case
opened here today with a witness singling out one of them as a participant in a
brutal 24-day interrogation.

In a voice that sometimes cracked with emotion, the witness, Dr. Juan Romagoza,
said Gen. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova was present during the weeks in which he
was beaten repeatedly and subjected to electric shocks by members of El
Salvador's military.

The federal civil suit against General Vides and Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, who
have both lived in the United States since 1989, is the second they have faced
in this court. They were cleared of similar charges in an October 2000 suit
brought by relatives of four American churchwomen raped and killed by the
Salvadoran military in 1980.

Today's suit was filed under the Torture Victims Protection Act, which seeks to
hold responsible commanders whose troops commit atrocities. The plaintiffs are
Dr. Romagoza and two other people who say they were tortured in El Salvador
during that era.

The jury in the churchwomen's case found that the generals did not have control
over the troops who had carried out the crimes against the women. But that case
relied heavily on declassified State Department cables expressing American
concern over atrocities linked to military units of the American-backed
government.

This case, by contrast, is expected to rest on details provided by those who say
they were victimized. About 75,000 people died during El Salvador's 12 year
civil war, which ended in 1992 and resulted in an amnesty for those involved in
the armed conflict.

"I was thinking why there is no justice for all the victims of this war in El
Salvador," testified Dr. Romagoza, who now directs a health clinic in
Washington. "I, who am a survivor of that terror, am lucky to be alive. I have a
lot of friends and fellow doctors who were killed by the National Guard, death
squads and the military. I am one of the few who can tell their story."

General Garcia was minister of defense in December 1980, when Dr. Romagoza was
captured by the military and taken to the headquarters of the National Guard.

Dr. Romagoza said General Vides, then a colonel commanding El Salvador's
National Guard, repeatedly asked him during the interrogation about his family's
ties to the leftist guerrillas engaged in a civil war against the government.
Dr. Romagoza, who says his family had no such ties, said he later recognized
General Vides by his voice and clothing, which the doctor was able to see
through a gap in his blindfold.

In their previous trial, the generals insisted that they had done nothing wrong,
and that they had tried to reform the military and establish democratic
institutions, but were undermined by rogue troops. General Vides testified in
the previous case that he was aware that torture had been committed at the
National Guard headquarters, but that he had issued orders banning it when he
assumed office.

But James Green, the lead counsel for the plaintiffs, contended today that the
war's turbulent climate was no excuse for such treatment.

"There may have been a civil war, but there was not a suspension of
civilization," Mr. Green said in his opening argument. "There was no license to
torture."

Dr. Romagoza said he had been working with other physicians treating refugees
displaced by the civil war and had been at a makeshift clinic in the northern
part of the country when he and his colleagues were fired upon by men dressed in
civilian clothes.

He said he was taken to the National Guard headquarters in San Salvador, where
he was kept blindfolded and in his undershorts while being subjected to regular
beatings. He said that a gunshot wound to his ankle, sustained during the attack
on the clinic, went untreated and that worms wiggled around the wound.

At one point, he said, wire was used to suspend him by his hands while he was
beaten. He said that electric clamps were applied to his tongue, ears and
testicles, and that he was later shot in the left arm, which he said he was told
was to mark him for life as a leftist.

Dr. Romagoza, who had been a surgeon, said that the injuries left him with no
feeling in seven fingers.

He said that at one point the beatings eased up when he was visited by the man
he was told was "the big boss," or "the colonel." He said the officer, whose
face he could not see, demanded to know about any links his uncle, also a
colonel in the Salvadoran Army, had with the guerrillas. Dr. Romagoza told him
there were none. He said his inquisitor joked about how ill the doctor appeared.

"He said I looked like a dead man already," Dr. Romagoza said, "that I stank of
death."

Ultimately, Dr. Romagoza said, after he was forced to lie in an open casket for
two days, he was released to his uncle. He said that Colonel Vides stood next to
his uncle at that time, and that Dr. Romagoza later recognized the colonel's
voice from hearing him on the news and that he was "almost 90 percent certain"
that it was the same voice.

During a brief cross-examination, Kurt Klaus Jr., the lawyer for the generals,
suggested that Dr. Romagoza had brought his lawsuit at the urging of human
rights advocates.

"I believe in democracy and justice," Dr. Romagoza replied. "That is why I want
it to be protected."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (92%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); RELIGION (79%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (76%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (76%); SEX OFFENSES (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (70%); LIBERALISM (70%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (67%); AMNESTY (66%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (59%); CLINICS &
OUTPATIENT SERVICES (50%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SEX CRIMES;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: VIDES CASANOVA, CARLOS EUGENIO; GARCIA, JOSE GUILLERMO (GEN); GONZALEZ,
DAVID; ROMAGOZA ARCE, JUAN (DR)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: EL SALVADOR

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             279 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Officials Question Guantanamo Prisoners

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 540 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


In an expansion of international cooperation in the war on terror, intelligence
agents from several nations have interrogated fellow countrymen detained at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and shared the information with the Pentagon.

Without saying which countries have conducted the interviews, the Pentagon said
today that "foreign government delegations have had access to Guantanamo for law
enforcement and intelligence purposes since January."

Officials have attributed new information about terrorist threats to information
gleaned in interrogations at Guantanamo.

Morocco, Britain, Spain and Sweden are among the countries that have sent
officials to Guantanamo to interview their imprisoned citizens, foreign
officials familiar with the intelligence gathering said.

One official said it was often better to have had an intelligence official who
was a native speaker familiar with the prisoner's homeland, from its culture to
the shape of its terrorist networks, questioning detainees rather than an
American official working through interpreters.

By knowing what follow-up questions to pose and what hunches to rely on, these
foreign agents are said to have provided critical help to American
interrogators.

"These interviews are done in close conjunction with American officials, not in
private meetings," said a foreign official who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Legal experts see this new cooperation as an ad hoc military version of Interpol
but without the legal oversight provided for those arrested on criminal charges.

"We hadn't heard of foreign agents questioning the prisoners before," said
Vienna Colucci of Amnesty International, "but if the goal is to get better
information, then they should be guaranteed their rights and informed of the
charges against them." Instead, human rights officials said they had believed
that foreign officials were visiting their citizens held at Guantanamo to ensure
that they were not being mistreated.

The Bush administration has said that although it will not give the detainees
prisoner-of-war status, it will guarantee them protection under the Geneva
Conventions.

At the same time, the-more-than-500 prisoners from at least 33 countries being
held at Guantanamo could have information about the next attack planned by Al
Qaeda. The legal problem is how to solicit that information without compromising
the prisoners' rights to a fair trial.

"One minute they're described as suspects, the next minute they're considered
intelligence assets," said Michael Noon, a professor of law at Catholic
University of America.

"It's one thing to interrogate for intelligence purposes and another with a view
to prosecuting someone before a military tribunal," Mr. Noon said.

The United States and its allies have cooperated on interrogations in World War
II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars, officials said.

By monitoring the interrogations at Guantanamo, American officials should be
able to guarantee that no foreign agent treats a detainee improperly, some legal
experts said.

"I'm 100 percent certain that the standards that the U.S. has imposed as terms
and conditions of detention will be honored in all interrogations," said Eugene
R. Fidell, president of the National Institute of Military Justice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); POWS
& MIAS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
PRISONS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); MILITARY COURTS
(78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (76%);
JAIL SENTENCING (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); VIETNAM
WAR (73%); KOREAN WAR (73%); ARRESTS (65%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (65%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  GUANTANAMO (SHIP);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  TERRORISM;  INTELLIGENCE SERVICES

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION
(INTERPOL) (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

PERSON: BECKER, ELIZABETH

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%); SPAIN (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
MOROCCO (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 26, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Envoy Faults Salvador Army Over Torture

BYLINE:  By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., June 25


Testifying in a civil suit brought by three Salvadorans who accuse their
country's military of torturing them two decades ago, a former United States
ambassador to El Salvador said today that the failure of military leaders to
rein in murderous troops had been the biggest obstacle to democracy.

The envoy, Robert E. White, a career diplomat who served in El Salvador in 1980
and 1981, said senior officers not only ignored repeated American admonishments
but even appeared to encourage assassinations of civilians in the name of
fighting leftist insurgents.

The defendants in this case, both retired generals, were colonels at the time,
and held relevant government positions: Jose Guillermo Garcia was defense
minister and Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova was director of the National Guard.
The suit against them was brought under the Torture Victims Protection Act,
which seeks accountability from commanders whose troops commit atrocities.

"It was our analysis that the gross and consistent pattern of human rights
violations was undermining the attempt to bring democracy to El Salvador because
people had been abused for many decades and were demanding change," said
Ambassador White, now the president of the Center for International Policy, a
Washington research organization. "Unless the military could deliver on that
change, democracy would fail."

At issue in the current case is whether the retired generals knew of the abuses
and could have used their authority to stop them. Mr. White's testimony, which
drew on declassified State Department and Central Intelligence Agency cables,
portrayed the two defendants as commanders in firm control but unresponsive to
American entreaties.

He said that after a Spanish television crew showed him videotape of soldiers
entering a school and shooting several teenagers, he confronted then-Colonel
Garcia, the defense minister, who shrugged it off. Similar complaints about
military involvement in the murder of six opposition politicians went nowhere,
he said.

The retired generals said in depositions taken last year that they did not
recall any American official's warning them about rights abuses by the military.
Nor had their own officer corps informed them, they said.

"I never had knowledge that torture was performed in the armed forces," General
Garcia said. "If it had been that way, there would have been the necessary
measures to control it."

However, Mr. White testified to frequent meetings with the commanders and other
senior officers, in which he urged them to stop killing labor leaders, church
activists, suspected guerrilla sympathizers and young people wanting democratic
change. In one meeting, he wrote afterward in a cable, he confronted the defense
minister about specific officers suspected of abuse.

"Colonel Garcia admitted that the excesses were grave and that he had a good
idea who was responsible," the envoy wrote. "Colonel Garcia made no promise,
implicit or explicit, to put an end to the official violence."

Earlier in his testimony, Ambassador White said the United States, which sent
millions of dollars in military aid to El Salvador, saw military reform as
critical to calming the country. "We wanted to support the military," he said.
"That would offer the best guarantee there would be stability in the country.
But the way to achieve stability is not to wage war on your own people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); ARMIES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
TESTIMONY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); DEPOSITIONS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); MURDER (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); LIBERALISM (75%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%);
ADOLESCENTS (68%) ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  TORTURE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES FOREIGN
SERVICE

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; VIDES CASANOVA, CARLOS EGUENIO (GEN); GARCIA, JOSE
GUILLERMO (GEN); WHITE, ROBERT E

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: EL SALVADOR

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             282 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

ART IN REVIEW;
Zalmai Ahad -- 'The Forgotten Hostages'

BYLINE:  By MARGARETT LOKE

SECTION: Section E; Part 2; Column 6; Leisure/Weekend Desk; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 401 words


Frieda and Roy Furman Gallery
Walter Reade Theater
Lincoln Center
Through June 30

Unlike many photojournalists who went to Afghanistan after the United States
began its campaign against Taliban forces in October, Zalmai Ahad knew the
country on a personal level. He was born in Kabul in 1964, fled the country in
1980 soon after the invasion of Soviet troops, made Switzerland his home,
studied photography and has worked as a freelance photographer since the late
1980's.

These pictures, part of the Human Rights Watch International Film Festival, were
mostly taken last fall and this year. A number are in Mr. Ahad's book "Eclipse"
(Umbrage Editions), which includes his work of the last decade or so.

As he did when he went to impoverished Asian and African countries, Mr. Ahad
brings the sensibility of an exile and a poet to the pictures he took of his
ruined native land. His black-and-white images are sober, unsentimental and
empathetic. Although they are often steeped in deep dark tones, they do not
suggest despair. Rather, Mr. Ahad tends to juxtapose physical devastation with
the human need to defy the odds. He shows, for instance, a gray-bearded man in
traditional attire, a baby in his arms, the majesty of his posture eclipsing the
bristling military hardware and a shelled building behind him.

Many of Mr. Ahad's images work on several levels. An oversize image shows what
seems to be an outdoor brutalist sculpture, all imposing dark pillars and
circles. They are, in fact, remnants of the site of the Afghan national fair in
Kabul. Mr. Ahad, who now lives in New York City, also took a picture of two boys
standing in a shallow river bed. One looks shyly at the camera while his
companion leans over as if he were Narcissus, kissing his reflection in the
water. The wall caption, though, notes that the boys are near a displaced camp
and "drink the same water the animals drink."

In an extraordinary image, taken in 1994 at a land-mine hospital in Peshawar,
Pakistan, a young woman lies on a gurney, her head turned toward a large mirror.
In the mirror is her beautiful unscathed face, the figure of an elderly woman
hovering over her and very likely a similar scene beyond a doorway. Nearby in
the gallery is an oversize, equally commanding portrait taken a few months ago
of a woman shrouded in a dirty and torn burka -- the faceless face of women
under Taliban rule.   MARGARETT LOKE

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FILM (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%); PHOTOJOURNALISM (90%);
PHOTOGRAPHY (90%); TALIBAN (90%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (90%); WOMEN (89%);
SCULPTURE (78%); VISUAL ARTISTS (78%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (77%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (77%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); ARMED FORCES
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); WRITERS (69%) PHOTOGRAPHY;  REVIEWS;  HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

PERSON: LOKE, MARGARETT; AHAD, ZALMAI

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); AFRICA (79%); ASIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             283 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Remember the Cold War?;
How to Rig a Democracy

BYLINE:   By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1295 words


PRESIDENT BUSH'S blueprint for an acceptable Palestinian government -- a vision
he outlined last week as he demanded the replacement of Yasir Arafat as the
Palestinians' leader -- would be the envy of Arabs everywhere. It was a vision
of an open democratic society with clean elections, a parliament that is more
than a rubber stamp and "a vibrant economy where honest enterprise is encouraged
by honest government."

Such a utopia does not exist in the Arab world, where pro-democracy advocates
risk arrest and the kings, sheiks and presidents vacate power only in the event
of death or coup. Given the state of the neighborhood, many Palestinians are
understandably skeptical, to say the least, about the possibility of creating
the full-blown democracy that Mr. Bush demanded as the price of American support
for a Palestinian state.

But the president's blunt ultimatum to the Palestinians raised a tantalizing
question.

What if the United States were as serious about saving the Arabs from corrupt
autocrats and radical Islam as it once was about saving the world from
communism? What if the tools of the cold war -- selective propaganda, open
support for dissidents, covert support for opposition political movements and
sanctions -- were put to use to promote Arab democracy and moderation?

"While the United States cannot forcibly democratize a state, you can use other
ways," said Rohan Gunaratna, a researcher at the Center for the Study of
Terrorism and Political Violence at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.
"You can help them build a democratic economy. You can see that the education
system is reformed, that Islamic charities are held accountable, that financial
institutions are made transparent. You can help create independent media
institutions."

Cold war-style covert operations by the Central Intelligence Agency should not
be ruled out when democratic change cannot be made openly, he said, because the
cost of not insisting on democracy is more Arab frustration with the United
States and more terror.

"Look at Saudi Arabia," said Dr. Gunaratna, author of a new book, "Inside Al
Qaeda" (Columbia University Press). "Why are so many terrorists produced by that
country? Because it's not democratic, it's not representative of the people. The
United States must put maximum pressure on those states to democratize. Now the
U.S. is shielding those countries."

Veterans of cold war operations, however, say the United States should abide by
one rule of thumb in spreading the gospel of democracy: don't set expectations
too high.

"The problem is that we always want them to look like us," said Milton A.
Bearden, a former C.I.A. official who ran the agency's anti-Soviet war in
Afghanistan and has worked extensively in the Middle East. "In all the countries
I've lived in, I never saw one that could afford American democracy. We're going
to have to get a whole lot smarter than to just say, 'Get a copy of the
Federalist papers and the Constitution and you're going to be okay.' "

"We're not challenged here by nation-states trying to grab pieces of real
estate," Mr. Bearden added. "We have moved across that cusp of history and we're
looking across the fault lines of civilizations. We have to take whatever good
things we took from the last conflict, both overt and covert, and bring them to
this conflict."

OTHER analysts warn that the goal of democracy for the Middle East requires far
more subtlety than was needed when the United States was trying to check Soviet
influence. America's interest in having strong stable governments in Egypt and
Jordan, the only two Arab states at peace with Israel, has long outweighed
concerns about repression there. And economic interests, chiefly oil, have long
trumped American discomfort with human rights abuses in Saudi Arabia.

While the United States clandestinely backed anticommunist parties in Western
Europe after World War II -- its operations during Italy's 1948 elections are
the best-known example -- it may be far riskier to meddle in the Middle East's
volatile mix of religion and politics.

Moderate Arabs still blame the United States for the emergence of Islamic
fundamentalism as a political force in the 1970's, when they say American agents
cultivated religious student movements on Arab campuses as counterweights to
leftist groups. Similarly, Osama bin Laden and other senior Qaeda leaders honed
their radical views and picked up weapons training while fighting on the
American side in Afghanistan in the 80's.

In the Internet and satellite television age, moderates say, Americans should
play to their strengths, not by imposing prescriptions for Arabs but by simply
helping pro-democracy advocates express themselves.

"We have the will and the conviction ourselves to support democratization," said
Mohamed Charfi, a Tunisian human rights activist who has been condemned by both
Islamic fundamentalists and Tunisia's secular government during his long career
as an advocate for democracy.

"If the United States intervenes to change religious instruction in these
countries, for example, everyone would object," he added. "But if the United
States stepped in to push democratization, no one would object. It is the most
defensible position for you."

There is a cold war model for such an approach, one that grew out of the 1975
Helsinki conference at which the Soviet Union agreed to abide by a list of human
rights standards. The Soviet dissidents who organized themselves to monitor
their government's compliance, followed by similarly courageous dissidents in
Eastern Europe, ultimately formed the core of civil society in those countries.
Western countries vigorously and openly defended them.

"You have plenty of great minds, enough N.G.O.'s and civil society people in the
Middle East," said Mustapha Tlili, director of a project promoting dialogue
between the West and the Islamic world for the World Policy Institute at New
School University in New York. "But they are being suppressed or kept powerless
or even put in jail if they criticize the head of state or any aspect of
political life."

If they can be protected, they could lead the drive for democratization, Dr.
Tlili added. "The United States," he said, "could stand up to this and say,
'Look, we are serious about freedom of expression, tolerance and so on, and if
you don't respect that, there are consequences.' That's exactly what the U.S.
did with the Soviet Union."

The cold war analogy has its limits. American policy, particularly in supporting
Israel, is damned by Arabs of all political stripes. Obvious American support
for people who want to modernize Islam and create open societies could taint
them as American, and by extension Israeli, puppets. Moreover, opposition forces
in most Arab countries are rooted either in Islamic fundamentalism or left-wing
movements, and are often anti-American on principle.

Proponents of a forceful American democratization strategy, however, say
conditions at the start of the battle with communism were just as daunting.

AFTER World War II, Americans were operating in a Germany that had been
devastated by American bombs and a Japan that was culturally foreign to the
West. In Western Europe, opposition to the fascists had been led by Communists,
who had links to the Soviet Union and opposed the formation of NATO.

"Gradually, as we became more familiar with the political situation, we learned
to identify groups we could work with," said Walter Russell Mead, a senior
fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. "The European left evolved. It
ceased to be monolithically anti-U.S. or anti-NATO. On the American side, we got
more sophisticated in our approach about who we could work with. I don't see why
something like that could not take place in the Arab world."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 7, 2002



CORRECTION: A time line last Sunday about the Bush administration's diplomatic
efforts in the Middle East misstated the chronology of two events, both of which
occurred in March 2002. The Passover suicide bombing in Netanya, an Israeli
resort town, took place on March 27. Israeli raids that killed at least 40
Palestinians occurred on March 8 -- before, not after the Netanya attack. The
time line also misstated the number of Israelis killed in the Netanya bombing.
It was 29, not 22.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A boy waves a Palestinian flag in the Gaza Strip near a poster
of Yasir Arafat. (Reuters)(pg. 1); In 1949, French Communists, like these
rejecting fights for "American billionaires," were a big political force. (The
New York Times)(pg. 4) Chart: "Bush Diplomacy In the Middle East"The Bush
administration's policy toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has fluctuated
between a hands-off position and a more active stance. Starting OutDrawing a
sharp distinction from the Clinton approach, the Bush administration placed
responsibility for pursuing future negotiations with the Israelis and
Palestinians themselves. FEB. 8, 2001 "We shouldn't think of American
involvement for the sake of American involvement." National Security Adviser,
Condoleezza Rice On a trip devoted mostly to shaping Iraq sanctions, Secretary
of State Colin L. Powell met with Israelis and Palestinians. MARCH 19, 2001 "The
United States stands ready to assist, not insist." Colin Powell Ariel Sharon
became Israeli prime minister. EngagementAmerican diplomats attempted to build
on a report by the Mitchell commission, which had been appointed in the Clinton
era. MAY 21, 2001 "The United States is not putting forward a peace plan today."
Colin Powell A commission led by former Senator George J. Mitchell called for a
Palestinian crackdown on terrorism and an Israeli freeze on settlements in order
for peace talks to resume. Powell endorsed the Mitchell report. Powell promoted
the resumption of talks but did not put forward a new peace plan. The C.I.A.
director, George J. Tenet, mediated a cease-fire plan with a focus on security,
asking Palestinians to arrest terror suspects and asking Israeli troops to pull
back to positions occupied before the end of Sept. 2000. Backing offU.S.
diplomatic efforts to maintain a cease-fire failed, and the U.S. backed off.
JULY 2001 "We've thrown Tenet at it; we've thrown Powell at it; we're not going
to throw anyone else at it." A senior Bush official President Bush made appeals
to halt the violence, directing most of his criticism at Yasir Arafat, the
Palestinian leader. World Trade Center, Pentagon attacks. The Bush
administration repeatedly called for greater efforts to end Mideast violence.
CoalitionThe administration urged truce talks, hoping to facilitate a coalition
to fight terrorism. OCT. 2001 "Do not try to appease the Arabs at our expense.
We cannot accept this." Ariel Sharon Bombing campaign in Afghanistan began. Bush
referred to a state of Palestine at the U.N., but declined to meet Arafat.
EngagementAs the war against terrorism started, the Bush administration began
its first significant foray into the peace process. NOV. 10, 2001 "We are
working toward the day when two states -- Israel and Palestine -- live
peacefully together." President Bush Powell pledged more involvement, with
high-level envoys seeking a cease-fire. He did not lay out a specific framework
for a settlement. An American envoy, Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, began his mission.
Zinni was recalled. Zinni returned to the Mideast. Zinni left. SidelinesIsrael
seized a ship full of munitions, then moved militarily with support from the
Bush administration. JAN. 24, 2002 "The president understands the reason that
Israel has taken the action that it takes." White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer
The Bush administration expressed support for Israel's confinement of Arafat to
his compound. Bush publicly praised a Saudi peace initiative. EngagementThe
violence careened out of control. Secretary Powell went to the region and
returned home with no indication that either side would budge. APRIL 17, 2002
"Cease-fire is not a relevant term at the moment." Colin Powell As part of a
Mideast tour, Vice President Dick Cheney visited Israel. He did not see Arafat.
Zinni returned to the Mideast. Bush demanded that Israelis withdraw from the
West Bank and that Arafat clamp down on terrorism. Powell arrived in the
Mideast. Powell and Zinni left without a cease-fire or truce. Partial
PlanPresident Bush advocated work toward a Palestinian state, but not without
Palestinian reform. Then he offered a plan that did not include Arafat. JUNE 24,
2002 "Peace requires a new and different Palestinian leadership so that a
Palestinian state can be born." President Bush The Bush administration committed
itself to join in a peace conference, then later declared the time was not
right. While in the Mideast, Tenet began promoting an overhaul of Palestinian
security. Bush announced that Arafat must be replaced before the U.S. would
support a Palestinian state. Chart: "Violence In The Region" APRIL 2001 Israeli
troops raided a Gaza refugee camp, the largest, deepest incursion of the
intifada at that point. JUNE 2001 A suicide bombing killed at least 17 outside a
crowded beachside club in Tel Aviv. JULY 2001 Israelis retained a policy of
singling out and killing suspected militants. AUGUST 2001 A suicide bomber
struck a Jerusalem restaurant. Israel entered a Palestinian-ruled zone for about
two days. OCT. 2001 Israel's minister of tourism, Rehavam Zeevi, was
assassinated by a militant Palestinian group. DEC. 2001 Palestinian terrorist
bombings killed 25 people in 12 hours. MARCH 2002 A suicide bombing on Passover
killed 22 Israelis in Netanya. Israeli forces then killed at least 40
Palestinians in a day of raids. APRIL 2002 Israel continued an invasion of the
West Bank, described as a sweep for militants and weapons. JUNE 2002 After more
suicide bombings, including one next to a bus, the Israelis began to reoccupy
Palestinian land.(Sources: Stephen P. Cohen, Israel Policy Forum; Shibley
Telhami, University of Maryland; David Makovsky, Washington Institute for Near
East Policy)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); TERRORISM (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (79%); POLITICS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
CORRUPTION (75%); COUPS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
AL-QAEDA (72%); RELIGION (72%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (69%); BANKING & FINANCE
(63%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (62%); WRITERS (61%) PALESTINIANS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ISRAEL-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  MIDDLE EAST-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

COMPANY: COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY (59%); UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (63%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (63%)

PERSON: GEORGE J MITCHELL (79%); DICK CHENEY (59%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%)
SACHS, SUSAN; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(99%); MIDDLE EAST (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); SCOTLAND (79%);
IRAQ (79%)

REGION: MIDDLE EAST;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             284 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 3, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CIVIL LIBERTIES;
Jewish Groups Endorse Tough Security Laws

BYLINE:  By LAURIE GOODSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1036 words


Jewish groups long known for their outspoken defense of civil liberties have
been silent on or even supportive of the Bush administration's counterterrorism
legislation, breaking with their allies in the civil liberties movement who have
criticized the new measures as potentially repressive.

But the groups appear to be in step with their constituencies. A recent poll of
American Jews disclosed a high level of support for the kind of surveillance
measures that are anathema to civil libertarians, for example placing cameras in
public places and requiring national identity cards.

"Sept. 11 has forced all but the most doctrinaire on the right and the left to
be open to a recalibration of the balance between security and liberty," said
Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. "Jewish groups are perhaps
more open to this re-examination, since so many of the threats are directed not
only at Israel but at Jews worldwide."

The terrorist attacks on the United States prompted many Americans, no matter
their religious and ethnic backgrounds, to drop their objections to more
intrusive law enforcement in the interest of national security. But the shift
among Jewish organizations is notable because it involves a predominantly
liberal minority that has always prided itself on defending other racial and
religious minorities.

"What you have is a measure of ambivalence that is unusual," said Rabbi Eric H.
Yoffie, president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the alliance of
Reform synagogues. "Organizations and leaders that one normally would expect to
be quite outspoken on civil liberties have been more restrained."

One reason for the reluctance to criticize the legislation, Rabbi Yoffie said,
is that American Jewish leaders are intimately familiar with Israel's effort to
maintain a democracy while fending off attacks from terrorists.

"We have watched Israel struggle with this, in some ways successfully, in some
ways not," he said. "Generally speaking, we think they've done a pretty good
job.

"In Israel, ethnic and religious profiling at airports is a given. Many of us
have been at those airports more times than we can count, and there's something
uncomfortable and distasteful about it, but at the same time we don't oppose it
and we recognize the necessity of it."

Most Jewish groups, like the historically liberal American Jewish Congress, have
taken no stance on the antiterrorism legislation, said Phil Baum, the congress's
national executive director. But the Anti-Defamation League has come out in
favor of it, submitting testimony to Congress and commending the president and
Attorney General John Ashcroft.

"We have been out there," said Abraham H. Foxman, the league's executive
director, "very clearly and very directly supportive of this new legislation and
giving law enforcement more power to be able to act to prevent criminal acts."

Leaders of major Jewish groups said that after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,
they decided not to sign statements circulated by groups like the American Civil
Liberties Union and the National Council of Churches that urged Americans not to
sacrifice civil liberties in the fight against terrorism.

Richard T. Foltin, legislative director and counsel of the American Jewish
Committee, said his group was among those that did not sign the A.C.L.U.
statement.

"It's not that there was anything wrong with that statement per se," Mr. Foltin
said. "It said appropriate things about the need to safeguard civil liberties
and not to scapegoat members of particular groups, and those are all things we
subscribe to. The problem was there was no acknowledgment in that statement of
the national security side."

Critics of the antiterrorism legislation have objected to measures like the use
of military tribunals to try people accused of terrorism, the indefinite
detention of immigrants and permitting law enforcement officials to monitor
conversations between suspects and their lawyers. But other than civil
libertarians, those objecting the loudest have been Muslims and Arab-American
groups. And many Jewish groups are unwilling to ally with them.

Rabbi David Saperstein, director of the Religious Action Center of Reform
Judaism, said, "One complication is the reluctance to join with people who are
critics on the war against terrorism, because amongst those critics are those
who have mixed agendas on Israel."

Mr. Foltin noted that Jewish groups' hard line on prosecuting terrorists had
been evident four years ago in the controversy over the use of secret evidence
to detain people suspected of being terrorists. Most Jewish groups sided with
the Clinton administration in supporting the use of evidence that is never
revealed to the accused, a method used to detain several people of Middle
Eastern background. Muslims and Arab-American groups joined with some civil
liberties groups to oppose secret evidence.

Since then, Mr. Foltin said, there has been lively debate within Jewish groups
about how to balance civil liberties and national security.

"The problem of how you draw that balance is much more difficult when the one
person you allow to go free may go out and commit mass murder," Mr. Foltin said.

A survey of 1,015 American Jews in November and December conducted for the
American Jewish Committee by Market Facts Inc., a research group, found that
clear majorities favored expanding the scope of law enforcement agencies.
Ninety-two percent say they support infiltrating suspicious groups; 70 percent
favor adopting a national identity card system for American citizens; 66 percent
favor expanding camera surveillance on streets and public places; and 55 percent
favor monitoring of Internet chat rooms.

Several Jewish leaders said their groups were still studying the
administration's antiterrorism initiative. Some said they might press for
changes behind the scenes.

But so far, only the liberal Reform movement has publicly raised objections.
Rabbi Yoffie and Rabbi Saperstein sent a letter to Attorney General Ashcroft in
December saying, "We must be vigilant in ensuring that the investigation into
the terrorist attacks does not undermine the very liberties that make this
country worth celebrating and protecting."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "POLL: The Jewish Voice on Civil Liberties"SURVEY BY MARKET
FACTS FOR THE AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE Would you favor or oppose increased
powers of investigation that law enforcement agencies might use when dealing
with terrorism suspects, which would also affect the civil liberties of
Americans? Adoption of a national ID system for all U.S. citizens.FAVOR:
70%OPPOSE: 27 Expanded camera surveillance on streets and public places.FAVOR:
66%OPPOSE: 31 Law enforcement monitoring of Internet discussions in chat rooms
and other forums.FAVOR: 55%OPPOSE: 42 Expanded government monitor 2/3ing of
cellphones and e-mail to intercept communications.FAVOR: 50%OPPOSE: 46 COMPARED
WITH ALL AMERICANS Do you think Americans will have to give up some of their
personal freedoms in order to make the country safe from terrorist attacks?
Jewish AmericansYES: 77%NO: 22 All Americans*YES: 79%NO: 19 Do you approve or
disapprove of the way President Bush is handling the campaign against terrorism?
Jewish AmericansYES: 85%NO: 10 All Americans+YES: 90%NO: 6 Based on nationwide
telephone interviews with 1,015 self-identified Jews conducted Nov. 19 to Dec.
4. Those with no opinion are not shown. *Results from a New York Times/CBS News
survey taken Sept. 20-23.+Results from a New York Times/CBS News survey taken
Dec. 7-10.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (94%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); CHURCH & STATE (89%); RELIGION (89%);
LEGISLATION (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); EXECUTIVES (88%); AIRPORTS (88%);
LIBERALISM (88%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); IDENTITY SECURITY (75%); NATIONAL IDENTITY
CARDS (75%); INTERVIEWS (74%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(72%); HIJACKING (72%); RACE & RACISM (71%); AIRLINES (61%); CRIME PREVENTION
(50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  JEWS;  IDENTIFICATION DEVICES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE (59%); UNION OF AMERICAN HEBREW
CONGREGATIONS (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (68%) GOODSTEIN, LAURIE; BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES); SCHUMER, CHARLES E (SEN); YOFFIE, ERIC H (RABBI)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ISRAEL;  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             285 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE CAPTIVES;
Prison Packed With Taliban Raises Concern

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL with MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1460 words

DATELINE: SHIBARGHAN, Afghanistan, Jan. 2


In the month since the collapse of the Taliban government in Afghanistan, nearly
3,500 former Taliban fighters have been held here in a prison built for 800,
under conditions that are raising alarm among international aid groups.

The prisoners are being interrogated by United States investigators, but their
jailer is Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, Afghanistan's new deputy defense minister
and an ethnic Uzbek warlord whose reputation for brutality has been well
documented over the last 20 years. Neither the Afghan authorities nor the United
States forces here are saying what the prisoners' ultimate fate will be.

The International Committee of the Red Cross, which has visited and registered
prisoners here in Shibarghan, first raised concern about overcrowding and
unsanitary conditions last week, after a prisoner fell sick and died in one of
the cells. Dozens more, the agency said, have fallen ill with dysentery.

One hundred and forty other former Taliban fighters are imprisoned in Kohat,
Pakistan, south of the border city of Peshawar. They, too, are undergoing
interrogation by American officials, and residents there have complained about
what they say is mistreatment of the prisoners.

A local political leader in Kohat has protested the treatment of Al Qaeda
members who were turned over to the Americans. The leader, Javed Ibrahim
Paracha, said the prisoners were handcuffed, shackled and stripped to their
shorts, before being loaded on military planes in the middle of the night.

"People in Kohat are becoming united against the treatment of these mujahedeen,"
Mr. Paracha said in an interview. "We don't know why they are being treated this
way. That's why we are angry."

He also called for an investigation of a gun battle between prisoners and
Pakistani border guards on Dec. 19, which broke out during the transfer of 156
Al Qaeda fighters from the border town of Parachinar to Kohat.

The gunfire erupted after the prisoners overpowered the troops who were guarding
them. Six Al Qaeda fighters and 9 guards were killed, while 41 prisoners escaped
into the nearby hills. The graves of some of the slain prisoners have already
become shrines, visited by crowds of local people.

In Shibarghan, which is in the north near the border with Turkmenistan, an
American commander said that he had not been inside the prison, where detainees
are said to be crammed 50 to a cell, and that he knew nothing about conditions
there.

"We have a mission to process the detainees, and we are doing that as quickly as
we can, while treating them with dignity and respect," said the commander of the
operation, Col. Kevin Wilkerson of the Army's 10th Mountain Division.

Human rights officials say the close involvement of United States forces with
General Dostum and his officials means that the Americans have a responsibility
to ensure good treatment of the prisoners.

"They are being held by the Afghan authorities, and the primary responsibility
is theirs, but it is obvious that the more the U.S. and international community
become involved, there is a responsibility to see the Afghans have the
logistical resources and technical ability to ensure good treatment," said James
Ross, a senior legal adviser at the New York-based Human Rights Watch.

In Afghanistan, the United States Army is embarked on a long mission to register
the prisoners and interrogate those who may be able to provide valuable
information about Osama bin Laden's Qaeda terrorist network. Eighty-five of the
prisoners in Shibarghan had been sent to the American base in Kandahar by
Tuesday, Colonel Wilkerson said, but he could not say what would happen to them
after that. Senior defense officials in Washington have said a new prison camp
is being built at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to hold senior Al
Qaeda and Taliban members.

The Afghan authorities here contend that any delay in releasing or transferring
prisoners from Shibarghan is the result of their efforts to accommodate American
officials in their interrogations.

Usman Khan, the intelligence chief in Shibarghan, said in an interview today
that any decision on custody arrangements would wait until the United States had
finished screening all prisoners and transferring those they wish to detain
further. He said that would take a week more.

"First, we will remove all the foreign prisoners and Al Qaeda people, and then
we will wait for orders on the rest," he said.

General Dostum said last week that he would not free any Taliban prisoners until
he had established whether they had committed crimes.

At the Pakistani prison, people familiar with the intelligence-gathering
operation said interrogators were having some success.

"They have given evidence that Al Qaeda is still active in Pakistan and other
countries," said a Pakistani official. "If their leaders are at large, they
could still be planning something."

Some prisoners claim to have seen Mr. bin Laden and said he seemed to be in good
shape. They said the sighting occurred six days before they were arrested in
mid-December. That would have been shortly after Mr. bin Laden was believed to
have recorded a videotaped message, in which he looked tired and gaunt.

People who have had access to the prisoners say that aside from the rigorous
daily interrogations, they are receiving adequate care. Several are suffering
from frostbite after fleeing across the wintry mountains near Tora Bora, in
eastern Afghanistan. Others are afflicted by various gastrointestinal illnesses.

Still, the inmates have not given the investigators the information they most
want. And so the atmosphere is tense.

"They are not torturing the prisoners," said one person who has been inside the
jail in recent days. "But they are asking tough questions, which is irritating
them."

The concerns about prisoners held by General Dostum follow unconfirmed reports
that anti-Taliban troops killed some of them last month as they were being
transported from the town of Kunduz to the prison at Shibarghan, General
Dostum's hometown. The shipping containers holding the prisoners stopped
overnight at Qala Zeina, the fortified western gates to the city of
Mazar-i-Sharif and, according to some survivors, troops opened fire.

A witness close to General Dostum's inner circle said he had seen three or four
bullet-ridden containers and blood running from them. He blamed ethnic Hazara
soldiers, but soldiers now guarding Qala Zeina said it had been Uzbek troops
belonging to General Dostum.

These accounts, added to previous reports of deaths of prisoners by asphyxiation
in the shipping containers, have continued to follow General Dostum, who took
charge of some 4,000 prisoners when he orchestrated the mass surrender of
Taliban fighters from Kunduz in late November.

Mr. Usman Khan, his intelligence chief, said the reports of killings were
"completely untrue," and he repeated the official count that only 43 prisoners
died of wounds or asphyxiation.

General Dostum has also forcibly returned at least 10 Uzbek prisoners to
neighboring Uzbekistan, Mr. Usman Khan confirmed on Tuesday. That move was taken
apparently without consultation with the interim government in Kabul, after
Uzbekistan's president, Islam Karimov, put pressure on General Dostum and his
officials to turn over the prisoners, who were members of the outlawed Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan. The prisoners, who said they faced almost certain death
on terrorism charges, had said they wanted to claim political asylum in
Afghanistan.

General Dostum said he had turned the men over to United States forces. It is
not clear whether American investigators held or questioned the men before they
were sent back to Uzbekistan.

A spokeswoman for the United Nations high commissioner for refugees, Maki
Shinohara, said that she was unaware of the case of the Uzbeks, but that if
forcible repatriation had occurred without allowing the individuals to request
asylum, then her agency would raise the issue with the Afghan government. The
agency would normally handle requests for political asylum and is already
expecting to have to deal with some requests from among foreign Taliban
prisoners, but it has yet to discuss the issue with the new Afghan government,
she said.

Even though the United States regards the Taliban prisoners as detainees, those
taken into American custody would be afforded the treatment of prisoners of war
under the Geneva Convention, said Capt. Chris Soucie, a judge advocate with the
10th Mountain Division. The Red Cross insists that prisoners taken into custody
by the United States or any of its coalition allies become prisoners of war and
should be treated as such. One of their rights is that a prisoner of war should
not be repatriated against his will while hostilities are still going on.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Taliban fighters bathing in the courtyard of the prison
at Shibarghan in northern Afghanistan. Americans are interrogating prisoners
there. (Alan Chin for The New York Times)(pg. A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (77%); ARMIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (76%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); SHOOTINGS
(74%); BORDER CONTROL (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
ARMED FORCES (70%); AIRLINES (65%) PRISONERS OF WAR;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  TERRORISM;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF
THE RED CROSS (57%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%) ;RED
CROSS; TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: ;GALL, CARLOTTA; LANDLER, MARK; DOSTUM, ABDUL RASHID (GEN)

CITY: SHERGHAN, AFGHANISTAN (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (87%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); TURKMENISTAN
(79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  SHIBARGHAN (AFGHANISTAN);  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON
(DC);  PAKISTAN;  KOHAT (PAKISTAN)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             290 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1119 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-6

Military Chief Says India Is Ready to Fight Pakistan
Gen. S. Padmanabhan said the military was prepared for a large-scale
conventional war with Pakistan and could deliver a devastating nuclear blow if
Pakistan struck first. A senior official said the remarks had not been cleared
by the prime minister.   A1

Palestinians Hold 3
The Palestinian Authority detained three officials accused by Israel of
overseeing the smuggling of arms into the West Bank and Gaza. Yasir Arafat again
denied any knowledge of the smuggling attempt.   A5


The runway of Gaza International Airport -- a potent symbol of Palestinian
aspirations for statehood -- was blocked with piles of broken concrete after
Israeli tanks and bulldozers dug trenches in the tarmac.   A5

Argentine Peso Falters
Freed from its link to the American dollar, the peso dropped sharply on foreign
exchange markets.   A4

World Briefing   A5

NATION CHALLENGED   A7-8

First Flight of Captives Arrives at Guantanamo
Twenty prisoners from the Afghanistan war -- including an Australian -- arrived
at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.   A7

Iran Obtained U.S. Missiles
Iran bought American-built Stinger antiaircraft missiles in Afghanistan in 1994
and passed them to a Lebanese-based terror group, but the missiles proved
defective, American intelligence reports say.   A7

Gauging Actions in Crackdowns
Some reports submitted to the United Nations on what members are doing to combat
terrorism underscored warnings from human rights groups that some governments
could use the campaign to settle scores.   A7

Singapore Plot Detailed
Terror suspects arrested in Singapore last month are linked to Al Qaeda and
planned to bomb Western targets, Singapore said.   A8

Border-Control Proposal
The White House Office of Homeland Security set off a storm in the Bush
administration with a proposal to create an agency to consolidate border
security efforts now spread across the federal government.   A8

Charges Tied to Aviation Radio
An Egyptian student, Abdallah Higazy, 30, who was staying in a hotel room with a
view of the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, was charged with lying to federal
investigators about an aviation radio in the room's safe.   A8

NATIONAL   A9-11

Man Guilty in Fatal Beating At Son's Hockey Practice
A jury in Cambridge, Mass., convicted Thomas Junta, 44, of involuntary
manslaughter in the beating death of Michael Costin after an argument about
rough play at a summer youth hockey practice game. He is expected to receive
three to five years.   A1

Weighing Capital Punishment
The Supreme Court agreed to decide a potentially far-reaching challenge to the
constitutionality of death penalty laws in nine states where judges rather than
juries determine whether a killer is sentenced to death.   A10

Inmate Tells of Bomb Plot
A Florida inmate told the authorities that there was a plot to bomb Gov. Jeb
Bush, but law enforcement officials said none of the inmate's information had
been substantiated.   A9

Antibiotic Sales Prompt Suit
Florida and Washington State have sued the Aprescribe.com online pharmacy and a
Florida physician who prescribed Cipro, a prescription antibiotic that can be
used to treat anthrax, without examining or speaking with the patients.   A9

Bush Recess Appointments
President Bush used a backdoor procedure to appoint two nominees to high-ranking
positions in the State and Labor Departments without Senate approval. Over the
objections of some Senate Democrats, Mr. Bush appointed Otto J. Reich as
assistant secretary of state for Western Hemisphere affairs and Eugene Scalia as
Labor Department solicitor.   A10

Religion Journal   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Ground Zero Tape Becomes Training Tool and Memorial
Firehouses have been showing a 90-minute videotape that captures some of the
most striking images and sounds of the chaos at the World Trade Center on Sept.
11. The tape was made by a French filmmaker who happened to be recording firemen
in Lower Manhattan when the first plane struck the north tower. The filmmaker
says he wants to turn the tape into a documentary and give it to the families of
the dead.   A1

Pataki Health Spending Plan
The governor wants lawmakers on Monday to approve a wide array of new health
care spending, program cuts and taxes that include money for doctors'
malpractice bills, lower payments to pharmacists and a higher cigarette tax.
Parts of the package are already meeting resistance both inside and outside the
State Legislature.   B1

New Jersey Trooper Chief
Governor-elect McGreevey chose Joseph Santiago, 56, who gained a reputation as a
tough, strong-willed leader as director of the Newark Police Department, to lead
the state police.   B1

Neediest Cases   B2

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-20

New Repository for Film Photos
The Museum of Modern Art, rejecting protests from the New York film community,
will move its rich collection of four million still photographs from films -- a
rare record of cinema history -- to a Pennsylvania storage center for an
indefinite period.   B7

SPORTS   D1-7

OBITUARIES   C18

W. A. Criswell
A minister who led the conservative movement now in control of the Southern
Baptists and a former pastor of the First Baptist Church of Dallas, one of the
denomination's first megachurches, he was 92.   C18

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Enron's Calls to Treasury
Enron's president, Greg Whalley, repeatedly called a senior Treasury Department
official, Peter R. Fisher, to seek help last fall in arranging bank loans for
the energy company as it scrambled to avoid collapse.   A1

Concern that the escalating Enron inquiry could ensnare the White House has
rattled some Republicans in Congress, who nonetheless are warning Democrats
against trying to use the case for partisan advantage.   A1

Sweeping Cutbacks at Ford
Ford cut 35,000 workers, closed five plants, including one in Edison, N.J., and
dropped four models, including the Lincoln Continental and the Ford Escort, as
it scaled back North American production by a million cars and trucks a year.
A1

Caution From Greenspan
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said the economy was not yet out
of danger, injecting a powerful voice of caution into a growing consensus on
Wall Street that a recovery was imminent or already under way.   C1

Setback for Microsoft
A federal judge in Baltimore rejected a settlement of more than 100 private
class-action suits against Microsoft involving the contention that the company
had overcharged for Windows, the operating system on 95 percent of all PC's
sold.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Minimizing the Enron taint; nuclear weapons subtraction; the Crown
Heights saga, cont'd.

Column: Bill Keller.

Bridge   B13
TV Listings   B20
Crossword   B17
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); SMUGGLING (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (89%); HOMICIDE (89%); PRISONS (87%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (87%); JURY
TRIALS (85%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%);
BOMBINGS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (76%); AIRPORTS (75%);
AIRPORT RUNWAYS (75%); CURRENCIES (74%); NAVIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SENTENCING (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); CORRECTIONS (72%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (72%); ARRESTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); ANTIAIRCRAFT
WEAPONS (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%);
INVESTIGATIONS (70%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); MANSLAUGHTER (69%); AL-QAEDA
(65%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER (64%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (64%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (60%); YOUTH SPORTS
(60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN
(94%); ISRAEL (94%); SINGAPORE (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (92%); CUBA (90%); EGYPT (79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             291 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE INDIA-PAKISTAN TENSION: ISLAMABAD;
PAKISTAN PLEDGES TO BAR ANY GROUPS LINKED TO TERROR

BYLINE:  By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1579 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 12


Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, pledged tonight that his country
would not be used as a base for terrorism of any kind and announced a broad ban
on militant groups accused of fomenting violence in Indian-held Kashmir, as well
as at home.

"No organization will be allowed to perpetuate terrorism behind the garb of the
Kashmiri cause," General Musharraf said in an hourlong televised address. "We
will take strict action against any Pakistani who is involved in terrorism
inside the country or abroad."

But the speech, delivered as half a million Indian troops stood poised to
attack, gave few specific responses to India's demand for an end to cross-border
terrorism. The demand was issued after an attack on the Indian Parliament on
Dec. 13 by what India says were Kashmiri militants with roots in Pakistan.

General Musharraf also defiantly restated Pakistan's unyielding political
support for the cause of Kashmiri Muslims.

Officials in New Delhi had no immediate public response, saying they would
reserve their comments until Sunday.

In Washington, the Bush administration praised the general's remarks.

In a statement, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said General Musharraf "has
taken a bold and principled stand to set Pakistan squarely against terrorism and
extremism both in and outside of Pakistan," including in Kashmir.

"The United States believes the basis exists for the resolution of tensions
between India and Pakistan through diplomatic and peaceful means," Secretary
Powell said.

The steps announced by General Musharraf, however, appeared unlikely to satisfy
India, which has threatened war unless Pakistani support for guerrilla war and
bombings in Kashmir is ended once and for all.

General Musharraf appeared to be calculating that he was offering enough,
however, to stave off an attack as the two countries await the visit next week
of Secretary Powell. He warned India that Pakistan would respond "with all our
might" to any Indian incursion.

Most of the speech was devoted to an indictment of religious extremism and
intolerance in Pakistan, which has been torn by sectarian violence over the last
decade.

Underscoring the point, more than 200 religious militants were detained today,
in addition to several hundred others detained in the last week.

Tonight General Musharraf, who took power in a bloodless coup in 1999 and soon
began questioning the breakdown of tolerance and law, issued his most sweeping
statement yet on extremism, intolerance and violence in Pakistan, whose founders
had a vision of a more moderate Islamic nation.

He called religious extremists, including militant sects and a growing movement
in support of international jihad, or holy war, a "state within a state" that
must be curbed.

"The day of reckoning has come," he said. "Do we want Pakistan to become a
theocratic state? Or do we want Pakistan to emerge as a dynamic Islamic welfare
state?"

He announced new rules to govern the religious schools, or madrasas, that have
served as crucibles for Islamic militancy and violence in Afghanistan, Kashmir
and elsewhere.

General Musharraf pointedly banned two major groups blamed for violence in
Kashmir and India -- Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Muhammad. Previously, their
leaders had been arrested and accounts frozen after the United States declared
them to be terrorist groups.

But he rejected the Indian demand that Pakistan hand over 20 men accused by
India of responsibility for terrorist acts in Kashmir and elsewhere in India.
"There is no question of handing over any Pakistani," he said. "This will never
be done."

His statement left open the chance that some men on the list with Indian
citizenship could be extradited. "If we are given evidence against these people
we will take action against them under our own laws," he said.

He said the issue of Kashmir -- a cause of wars and rebellion since the
partition of India and Pakistan in 1947 -- must be solved by peaceful means, but
warned India that "Kashmir runs in our blood" and restated Pakistan's intention
to provide "moral and diplomatic support" to the people of Indian-occupied
Kashmir.

General Musharraf switched from Urdu to English to, as he put it, "address the
international community, especially the United States."

"Now you must play an active role in the Kashmir dispute for the sake of lasting
peace in the region, keeping in mind that the people of Kashmir cannot be
suppressed," he said.  "You must ask India to bring an end to state terrorism
and human rights violations. Let human rights organizations, Amnesty
International, the international media and U.N. peacekeepers be allowed to
monitor activities of the Indian occupation forces."

But a senior Bush administration official emphasized that such questions would
have to be negotiated by Pakistan and India, which has resisted direct American
involvement. "That's the kind of stuff they're going to have to end up
negotiating," the official said. "This speech provides the basis to start
talking."

General Musharraf was said to have written the speech himself, and it was taped
in advance. He appeared on screen wearing a distinctively Pakistani
high-collared tunic rather than the military uniform or Western suit he prefers.
As is customary for major speeches here, it was preceded by a mullah's chanted
recitation of the Koran, in this case passages extolling Muslim unity.

Delivered at a moment of extreme tension with India, the speech had to appeal to
diverse groups.

India, as well as the United States and other Western countries, have demanded
that General Musharraf act decisively to curb groups based in Pakistan that are
waging guerrilla war against Indian rule in the mainly Muslim region of Kashmir.

Today, he pledged once again to do so, but offered few new specifics.

But General Musharraf was also treading a delicate line domestically.

He shocked many people and fellow military officers when he withdrew Pakistan's
longstanding support for the Taliban, in neighboring Afghanistan, after the
Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.

With his campaign to end religious extremism at home, he risked offending a
vocal part of the population that is devoted to Islamic causes.

Kashmir is the most emotional and sensitive issue of all.

In the last decade, as an armed insurgency arose in the Indian-controlled part
of Kashmir, Pakistan's military provided aid.

If General Musharraf did not sound more conciliatory toward India tonight, this
reflected his core political predicament: He cannot appear to be caving in to
Indian demands.

"Politically, this is not the right time for him to announce a major change in
Kashmir policy," said Ayesha Siddiqa Agha, a former defense official now at
Quaid-e-Azam University here. "The problem is not the people," she said. "It's
his own constituency, the generals."

Ms. Siddiqa said that General Musharraf was likely to retain domestic support
because he did not come across as jeopardizing Pakistan's basic interests. But
she worried that India would not be satisfied by the lack of specific new
measures to fight terrorism in Kashmir and that a limited war was still
possible.

The crisis has pushed General Musharraf to step up a campaign he started last
year intended to make Pakistan a "tolerant society."

Last June, he Musharraf startled Pakistanis with a speech in which he charged
that religious fanaticism was ruining the dream of Pakistan.

"What about mutual tolerance?" he asked before a gathering of religious leaders.
"It exists nowhere. Instead we are killing each other wearing masks."

"Naturally, the world regards us as terrorists," he said then.

Pakistan's military had also nurtured the Taliban, and over the last decade had
helped sponsor new guerrilla groups operating in Kashmir.

Last year, Mr. Musharraf tried to "de-weaponize" the society by seizing illegal
guns and banned the military wings of two large, militant sectarian groups.

More recently, after deadly terror attacks in Kashmir and New Delhi in October
and December, which India said were the work of two Pakistani-based groups, he
arrested the leaders of these jihad organizations and began shutting them down.
Tonight he announced the formal banning of the organizations, although he
avoided the most difficult issue: how to curb their activities inside the
Pakistani-controlled sector of Kashmir, where they have vowed to regroup.

The more sweeping domestic impact may come from the banning today of the two
sectarian groups, a Sunni group called Sipah-e-Sahaba and its Shiite rival,
Tehrik-e-Jafria. The two have been blamed for hundreds of killings. He also
banned a fifth organization that, he said, had lured thousands of young
Pakistanis to "massacre" in Afghanistan, in defense of the Taliban during
American attacks.

Members of the banned groups reacted with outrage today, with some calling
General Musharraf a puppet of America and the enemy of Islam.

The general also spelled out strict new measures to control extreme religious
activities, requiring the registration of all mosques and banning new mosque
construction without government approval. He restricted the use of mosque
loudspeakers and said no preaching of hatred or violence would be allowed.

He devoted considerable attention to the madrasas, which have proliferated in
the last decade. He said that they played a useful social welfare role, but that
a minority of them offered little but hard-line religious training, producing
semiliterate graduates susceptible to hatred.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pakistanis in an Islamabad shopping district yesterday watched
Gen. Pervez Musharraf's televised address. (Associated Press)(pg. 13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
RELIGION (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%);
BOMBINGS (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); COUPS (72%); ARMED
FORCES (55%) TERRORISM;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-PAKISTAN;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  PAKISTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: LASHKAR E TAYYABA (59%); JAISH-E-MOHAMMED (59%) LASHKAR-E-TAIBA;
JAISH-E-MUHAMMAD

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%) ECKHOLM, ERIK; MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (PRES); POWELL,
COLIN L (SEC)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (94%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (73%)

STATE: KASHMIR (96%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (93%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (96%); ASIA (95%); PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: INDIA;  PAKISTAN;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             292 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE INDIA-PAKISTAN TENSION: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Pakistani Trying to Redefine the Nation

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 12


In the half century since Pakistan was born from the partition of colonial
India, no Pakistani leader has faced a more menacing set of challenges than Gen.
Pervez Musharraf confronted in his speech tonight.

Acting at what many Pakistanis viewed as a turning point in their history, he
confronted the challenges, both foreign and domestic, in ambitious style.

The general spoke under threat of war from India, knowing that many of his
fellow officers in the army high command, not to mention ordinary Pakistanis,
would be watching for any sign that he was capitulating to the nation's
traditional enemy.

He announced new measures to crack down on Islamic militants who have fomented
terrorism in Pakistan and abroad, knowing that the groups he was taking aim at
are entrenched, heavily armed and sworn to kill, if necessary, anybody
obstructing their Islamic holy war.

The general essentially gave himself the task of redefining Pakistan's sense of
itself, after two decades of drift into lawlessness and violence.

Setting forth a vision of Pakistan as an example of a tolerant and progressive
form of Islam, General Musharraf plotted a daring course. What was uncertain was
whether his force of will can overcome Pakistan's powerful centers of resistance
-- represented in the threat of violence from militant groups, and in the
Islamist sympathies in almost every agency of government, including the officer
corps.

Making the task more daunting, General Musharraf faced the challenges
essentially alone. Having forbidden normal functioning by the country's
mainstream political parties in his three years in power, he had no political
establishment to share his decisions with, and no assurance of the army's
continued backing if the road ahead gets rough.

For a military man with a reputation in mess halls for bluntness, the general
struck a balance in his speech, particularly in the remarks addressed to India,
between conciliation and brusque warnings of Pakistan's readiness to defend
itself.

He was unusually direct, too, in the remarks he addressed to the United States,
saying it was America's responsibility to put pressure on India to negotiate a
settlement of the dispute over Kashmir.

Initial reactions showed the depth of the divides he must bridge.

He promised to end the use of Pakistan as a base for terrorism in Kashmir and to
seek a peaceful solution of the dispute with India. But he was immediately
denounced in India for not agreeing to its demand that Pakistan hand over 20 men
said to have taken sanctuary in Pakistan after terrorist attacks in India.

If that implied that India was prepared to continue with its threats of war over
Pakistani-sponsored terrorism in Kashmir, the calculations on the domestic front
seemed equally fraught. Even before his broadcast began, Islamic militant groups
cited in his crackdown, including the two accused by New Delhi in the Dec. 13
attack on India's Parliament, issued statements of defiance.

For all the uncertainties, the general seemed far more assured than the last
time he addressed the country on television. That was a week after the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks in the United States, when pledging support for the war on
terrorism, he seemed anxious, even rattled.

The challenge then was on one front only, from militant Pakistani groups that
backed the Taliban and Al Qaeda. Those groups had worked hand-in-glove with the
country's generals in supporting Islamic militancy, and by implication
terrorism, in Afghanistan.

Few foresaw that the pact between Washington and Islamabad over Afghanistan
would lead directly to a showdown with India over Kashmir.

India placed Pakistan in a vise, by equating Pakistan's support for Islamic
militant groups fighting in Kashmir with its backing for the Taliban, and by
insisting that General Musharraf could not make war on terrorism on Pakistan's
western frontier, in Afghanistan, and support it on its eastern border, in
Kashmir.

The United States sided with India, telling the general that it, too, wanted an
end to terrorism in Kashmir.

For those seeking explanation for the new steeliness in the general's demeanor
tonight, despite the threat of war with India, the answer seemed to lie in the
his assessment of what evolved in Pakistan after he ordered the U-turn in policy
toward the Taliban. "By the grace of God Almighty, our decision was absolutely
correct," he said. "I am happy to say that the vast majority of Pakistanis stood
by this decision."

The words echoed the judgment of the American ambassador, Wendy J. Chamberlin,
who has said the events of Sept. 11 made it possible for General Musharraf to do
what he had wanted to do, but had judged inopportune. That was to begin the task
of uprooting the tentacles that Islamic militancy had wound around Pakistan.

Still, confronting the militant groups over Afghanistan was always going to be a
less risky enterprise than confronting them over Kashmir, an issue that the
general said in tonight's speech "runs in our blood." The fact that he has had
to do so under the pressure of India's largest-ever mobilization against
Pakistan made the politics the more complex.

The Pakistani leader devoted barely two minutes of a 62-minute speech to the
Kashmir issue, and he wrapped his pledge of an end to terrorism in blunt words
for India's leaders. He pledged to seek a peaceful resolution of the Kashmir
dispute, but said India should end its "state terrorism and human rights
violations" in the territory, and allow human rights organizations and United
Nations peacekeepers to monitor Indian troop activities there.

The next days will show whether India's leaders will see enough in General
Musharraf's remarks to step back from war, or take umbrage at his attempt to
turn the terrorism issue back on them.

Among many Pakistanis, there was a sense that General Musharraf, by a fortuitous
combination of the circumstances created by Sept. 11 and his own ingrained
opposition to Islamic militancy, had crossed the river on an issue that has been
tearing Pakistan apart for 25 years.

Najam Sethi, editor of the weekly journal Friday Times, who has been a harsh
critic of General Musharaf in the past for usurping democratic rule, said the
general had now "told the world that Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic
state."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); ARMIES (90%); RELIGION (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); POLITICS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (65%)
TERRORISM;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PAKISTAN;  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (90%) BURNS, JOHN F; MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (PRES)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (78%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (99%); PAKISTAN (97%); ASIA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  INDIA

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             297 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Indonesia: Judges Named For Rights Trials

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 49 words


After many delays, the government appointed 18 judges to oversee various human
rights trials including the trial of 19 people -- some of them generals --
accused of atrocities when East Timor voted for independence in 1999. It was not
clear when the trials would begin.
   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (86%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (93%); ASIA (92%); INDONESIA (90%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR;  INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             301 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: LEGAL ISSUES;
A P.O.W. Tangle: What the Law Says

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


President Bush made two crucial decisions on Jan. 18 relating to the captives
from Afghanistan. He decided that they would not be granted prisoner-of-war
status and that the United States would not abide by the processes outlined in
the Third Geneva Convention.

Critics have questioned both. The administration is standing by the first and
rethinking the second.

All captives of any conflict, regardless of whether the United States abides by
the Geneva rules, must be treated humanely, and President Bush and other top
officials insist that the United States is doing so in this case.

For example, the United States is adhering to requirements that call for feeding
the captives properly, allowing them to practice their religion, allowing them
to send and receive correspondence and providing them with medical care. But
administration officials refuse to classify them officially as prisoners of war
because they contend that doing so would hinder the United States' ability to
stop future terrorist attacks.

For example, under interrogation, prisoners of war do not have to disclose
anything beyond their name, rank, serial number and date of birth. That means
they could not be pressed to provide operational or intelligence details that
might prevent future attacks.

In addition, prisoners of war have to be released at the end of hostilities. But
it is not clear whether prisoners would have to be released at the end of
hostilities in Afghanistan or at the end of the war against global terrorism,
which could go on for years.

Moreover, prisoners of war would be barred from being tried before military
tribunals, as distinct from courts-martial. The administration declared Nov. 13
that it had the option of military tribunals because such tribunals provide for
the death penalty -- one way to prevent certain terrorists from returning to the
street.

For all of those reasons, all of the top officials in the Bush administration
agree that the captives should not be granted prisoner-of-war status.

The trickier question for the administration now is whether it will abide by the
Geneva Convention at all. It could do so and still deny prisoner-of-war status
to the captives, as it did to some in Vietnam, at least initially. In that
conflict, the United States classified North Vietnamese captives as prisoners of
war, but it denied those protections to the Vietcong, although it later reversed
itself and granted the Vietcong that status too.

Some in the administration contend that the United States does not have to abide
by the Geneva Convention in this case. They say that it does not apply to
terrorist organizations because they do not abide by the rules of war, which
outlaw, among other things, the killing of civilians.

The administration could abide by the convention and still deny the captives
prisoner-of-war status. The convention says that if a prisoner's status is in
doubt, he is to be treated as a prisoner of war until his status is determined
by a "competent tribunal," which in Army regulations is a three-member military
panel. That panel could designate the prisoners as "unlawful combatants," which
the administration has already done but by fiat rather than by the Geneva
process.

Legal experts say this is not a settled matter of law.

"This is the first time it's come up just like this," said Detlev Vagts, a
professor of international law at Harvard Law School and a former Air Force
legal officer. "There have been previous cases of illegal combatants who are not
protected. But they weren't exactly terrorists."

He also said that one person's terrorist could be another's hero.

Human Rights Watch argues that it is inconsistent for the United States to
contend that Geneva does not apply because this is an unconventional war. "The
United States government could have pursued terrorist suspects by traditional
law-enforcement means, in which case the Geneva Conventions indeed would not
apply," Kenneth Roth, executive director of the group, wrote in a letter today
to Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser.

"But since the United States government engaged in armed conflict in Afghanistan
-- by bombing and undertaking other military operations -- the Geneva
Conventions clearly do apply to that conflict," he wrote.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "IN BRIEF: The Geneva Convention on P.O.W.'s"Here is a summary
of some main provisions of the Third Geneva Convention and the Additional
Protocols to it, which define the conduct of combatants and the protection of
prisoners of war: DEFINING 'ARMED FORCES' -- The armed forces of a party to a
conflict must be organized and under a command responsible to that party. They
must be subject to an internal system that enforces compliance with the rules of
international law. In particular, combatants must distinguish themselves from
civilians by a uniform or other distinctive sign recognizable at a distance. In
some cases, it may be sufficient for combatants to carry arms openly during an
attack. DEFINING 'PRISONER OF WAR' -- In general, any member of the armed forces
of a party to a conflict is a combatant, and any member captured by the enemy
party is a prisoner of war. The status and treatment of prisoners of war may
also be extended to other categories of people who do not meet the definition of
combatants. QUESTIONING -- Prisoners of war are required to give only their
name, rank, date of birth, serial number or equivalent information. The
detaining power may not subject them to any physical or mental torture, or to
any form of coercion, in order to obtain information. REPATRIATION -- Prisoners
of war must be "released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of
hostilities," i.e., after the cease-fire. Those convicted of or prosecuted for
criminal offenses may be detained until the end of legal proceedings and, if
necessary, until the end of their sentences. LEGAL TREATMENT -- Prisoners of war
are subject to the laws, regulations and orders in force in the armed forces of
the detaining power. They may be tried only by a military court unless the laws
of the detaining power expressly permit civil courts to try a member of the
armed forces for the offense in question. They must have the same right to
appeal as members of the armed forces of the detaining power. (Source:
International Committee of the Red Cross)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (94%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); VIETNAM WAR (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); MILITARY
COURTS (86%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); HIJACKING (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); ARMED FORCES
(64%); RELIGION (54%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  GENEVA
CONVENTIONS;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  MISSING PERSONS

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (94%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
(59%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (59%)

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); VIET NAM (66%)

REGION: ; WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             302 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: TERROR TRAIL;
Hometown of British Prisoners Known for Tranquil Diversity

BYLINE:  By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 28


Two Britons designated by the Foreign Office as detainees of the United States
at Guantanamo Bay have been identified as friends from the same English town,
one known for its harmonious diversity.

"They are totally unrepresentative of the local Muslim community," said the
local member of Parliament, Adrian Bailey of the Labor Party, speaking of the
two men, Shafiq Rasul, 24, and Asif Iqbal, 20, who are suspected of being
members of Osama bin Laden's network, Al Qaeda.

Graduates of the same high school, they lived in Tipton, a town in the West
Midlands with a population of 50,000, 14 percent of whom are of Asian
background.

"In my conversations with the local community leaders, they are as mystified and
puzzled as I am as to why two people from a long-established Muslim community
should be part of Al Qaeda," Mr. Bailey told the Press Association, Britain's
domestic news agency.

The Foreign Office said British officials had visited the two young men and a
third Briton, Feroz Abbasi, 22, of Croydon, a London suburb, who are in custody
at the United States naval base. None of the three, the official said,
complained about the treatment they had received since being apprehended in
Afghanistan and flown to Cuba.

Britain, the principal ally of the United States in the anti-Taliban campaign in
Afghanistan, has defended the American treatment of prisoners in Cuba in the
face of vocal criticism here from human rights groups, members of Parliament and
church leaders.

The disclosure that two of the men were from Tipton marked the second time this
month that an English community with a reputation for ethnictolerance was
identified as a refuge for suspected Islamic radicals. Two Algerians, Brahim
Benmerzouga, 30, and Baghdad Meziane, 37, were charged two weeks ago with
helping to direct and finance Al Qaeda from a base in Leicester. That city,
where more than one-third of the 300,000 residents are drawn from Britain's
ethnic minorities, is expected to become Britain's first with a nonwhite
majority a decade from now.

The three detainees in Cuba appeared to have followed a path into Islamic
militancy that has become a familiar one for Muslims in Britain accused of
supporting terror. Mr. Abbasi, who came here from Uganda with his family when he
was 8, was a computer college freshman who embraced a militant view of Islam
after joining the Finsbury Park mosque in North London.

That mosque was the place of worship of two other men now in custody in the
United States on terror charges -- Richard C. Reid, 28, a Qaeda suspect who is
accused of trying to bring down an American Airlines Paris-to-Miami flight in
December by lighting explosives hidden in his sneakers, and Zacarias Moussaouri,
arrested in September and thought to have been an original part of the Sept. 11
suicide hijacking team.

Both Mr. Rasul and Mr. Iqbal had tastes and habits unremarkable for British
teenagers until they decided to become more focused on their religion. They
subsequently fell under the influence of a hard-line elderly cleric who preached
a doctrine of holy war against the West.

Both men showed disdain for their families for being too assimilated, and
without their families' knowledge they flew to Pakistan in late September to
join the Taliban forces. Two other young Muslims from Tipton, Munir Ali, 21, and
Ruhal Ahmed, 20, left with them, and the Foreign Office said today that Mr.
Ahmed had been found in Kandahar, the former Taliban stronghold, where he was
being held by the United States. A spokeswoman said she had no information about
Mr. Ali.

Habib Rasul, a 30-year-old computer engineer, told reporters at the family home
today that Shafiq, his brother, was more interested in sports and dressing up
than in politics. "It's unbelievable," he said. "He was more into football and
his designer clothes -- Gucci, Armani. It's ridiculous to say he would fight for
the Taliban or Al Qaeda." Habib Rusal said that Mr. Iqbal was also "very
Westernized."

The Rasul family lawyer, Parvez Akthar, said the family was shocked, bewildered
and distraught at the notion that their son was among the detainees at
Guantanamo Bay. "If you can imagine a mother looking at her son gagged, bound
and frog-marched, then you have a pretty good picture of how the family feels,"
he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (89%); HIJACKING (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TALIBAN (77%); ARRESTS
(76%); ETHNICITY (72%); NAVIES (66%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (64%); AIRLINES (62%)
TERRORISM;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  MISSING PERSONS

COMPANY: AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (58%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (75%) HOGE, WARREN; RASUL, SHAFIQ; IQBAL, ASIF

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); LEICESTER, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (96%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN
(90%); ENGLAND (79%); UGANDA (79%)

REGION: GREAT BRITAIN;  TIPTON (ENG);  AFGHANISTAN;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK
CITY

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             304 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Uzbekistan: Policemen Sentenced For Torture

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 82 words


A court in Tashkent sentenced four policemen to 20 years in prison for torturing
two men detained on suspicion of belonging to a banned Islamic group, one of
whom died in custody. In the first such prosecution by the authorities, who are
accused by human rights groups of regularly torturing and mistreating suspected
members of Islamic groups, the officers were convicted of causing premeditated
serious injury, abuse of power and unlawful use of violence during arrest and
questioning.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SENTENCING (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); ARRESTS
(88%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); MISCONDUCT (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (83%)
POLICE;  TORTURE;  ISLAM;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (73%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (92%); UZBEKISTAN (91%)

REGION: UZBEKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             306 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Journalist's Abduction

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 478 words


Daniel Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, remains in captivity in
Pakistan. Mr. Pearl was apparently drawn into a well-laid trap by a shadowy
Pakistani group that has since threatened to kill him if the United States fails
to meet certain demands, most regarding Pakistani prisoners. The Journal, the
United States government and various human rights groups have appealed for his
release. We join in that appeal. Mr. Pearl should be released immediately, for
obvious humanitarian reasons. The kidnappers should realize that his release
would serve their interests as well.

The humanitarian case speaks for itself. Mr. Pearl's life must be spared for his
sake and for that of his family, including his wife, Mariane, who is pregnant
with their first child. The practical case to be made to the abductors is this:
Nobody is going to listen to their demands, much less take them seriously, as
long as they hold Mr. Pearl hostage. If the kidnappers have a legitimate story
to tell, it is not being heard. The only story anyone is paying attention to now
is the kidnapping itself. The abductors are coming across not as a dissident
group with grievances but as thugs whose only weapon is fear.

The kidnappers, who said they might target other American journalists in
Pakistan, also miss a larger point. They should be talking to people like Mr.
Pearl, not abducting them. The press, which exists to tell both sides of every
story, is the only vehicle dissident groups can rely on to publicize their
views. The Journal's managing editor, Paul Steiger, made this point well in a
message to the kidnappers. "You may have a story to tell," he said. "My paper
can cover that story, and Danny can tell that story better than anyone else.
Danny's release is a small price to pay for you to realize this goal."

Mr. Pearl has been based in Bombay as The Journal's South Asia bureau chief. He
had apparently been reporting on the militant Islamic underground at the time of
his disappearance in Karachi on Jan. 23. News accounts have suggested that he
was abducted by a group that lured him with a promise of an interview with a
Muslim cleric.

The kidnappers have sent their threats via e-mail to the Pakistani and United
States governments and various news organizations in addition to The Journal,
including The New York Times. They have made four basic demands: that Pakistanis
detained in Cuba be returned; that Pakistanis detained in the United States be
given access to lawyers; that the United States return to Pakistan a former
Taliban ambassador; and that the United states release F-16 fighter planes
purchased by Pakistan in the 1980's but whose delivery was later held up by
Congress. Washington has rightly called for Mr. Pearl's unconditional release.
The kidnappers are fooling themselves if they think anyone will listen as long
as he is held captive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (92%); JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); HOSTAGE
TAKING (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); NEWS REPORTING
(78%); TALIBAN (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (74%); LAWYERS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); MISSING PERSONS (71%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (64%); RELIGION
(61%) EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;
KIDNAPPING;  HOSTAGES;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (58%)

ORGANIZATION: WALL STREET JOURNAL

PERSON: PEARL, DANIEL

CITY: KARACHI,PAKISTAN (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); PAKISTAN (96%); CUBA (79%); ASIA (79%); SOUTHERN
ASIA (73%)

REGION: PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             309 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America and Anti-Americans

BYLINE:  By Salman Rushdie;  Salman Rushdie is the author of "Fury: A Novel" and
the forthcoming essay collection "Step Across This Line."

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: LONDON


They told us it would be a long, ugly struggle, and so it is. America's war
against terror has entered its second phase, a phase characterized by the storm
over the status and human rights of the prisoners held at Camp X-Ray and by the
frustrating failure of the United States to find Osama bin Laden and Mullah
Omar. Additionally, if America now attacks other countries suspected of
harboring terrorists it will almost certainly do so alone. In spite of the
military successes, America finds itself facing a broader ideological adversary
that may turn out to be as hard to defeat as militant Islam: anti-Americanism,
which is presently becoming more evident everywhere.

The good news is that these post-Taliban days are bad times for Islamist
fanatics. Dead or alive, Osama bin Laden and Mullah Omar look like yesterday's
men, unholy warriors who forced martyrdom on others while running for the hills
themselves. Also, if the persistent rumors are to be believed, the fall of the
terrorist axis in Afghanistan may well have prevented an Islamist coup against
President Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan, led by the more Taliban-like elements in
the armed forces and intelligence services -- people like the terrifying General
Hamid Gul. And President Musharraf, no angel himself, has been pushed into
arresting the leaders of the Kashmiri terrorist groups he used to encourage.

Around the world, the lessons of the American action in Afghanistan are being
learned. Jihad is no longer quite as cool an idea as it was last fall.

States under suspicion of giving succor to terrorism have suddenly been trying
to make nice, even going so far as to round up a few bad guys. Iran has accepted
the legitimacy of the new Afghan government. Even Britain, a state which has
been more tolerant of Islamist fanaticism than most, is beginning to distinguish
between resisting "Islamophobia" and providing a safe haven for some of the
worst people in the world.

America did, in Afghanistan, what had to be done, and did it well. The bad news,
however, is that these successes have not won new friends for the United States
outside Afghanistan. In fact, the effectiveness of the American campaign may
have made some parts of the world hate America more than they did before.
Critics of the Afghan campaign in the West are enraged because they have been
shown to be wrong at every step: no, American forces weren't humiliated the way
the Russians had been; and yes, the air strikes did work; and no, the Northern
Alliance didn't massacre people in Kabul; and yes, the Taliban did crumble away
like the hated tyrants they were, even in their southern strongholds; and no, it
wasn't that difficult to get the militants out of their cave fortresses; and
yes, the various factions succeeded in putting together a new government that
seems to have broad support among the people.

Meanwhile, those elements in the Arab and Muslim world who blame America for
their own feelings of political impotence are feeling more impotent than ever.
As always, anti-American radicalism feeds off widespread anger over the plight
of the Palestinians, and it remains true that nothing would undermine the
fanatics' propaganda more completely than an acceptable settlement in the Middle
East.

However, even if that settlement were arrived at tomorrow, anti-Americanism
would probably not abate. It has become too useful a smokescreen for Muslim
nations' many defects -- their corruption, their incompetence, their oppression
of their citizens, their economic, scientific and cultural stagnation.
America-hating has become a badge of identity, making possible a chest-beating,
flag-burning rhetoric of word and deed that makes men feel good. It contains a
strong streak of hypocrisy, hating most what it desires most, and elements of
self-loathing. ("We hate America because it has made of itself what we cannot
make of ourselves.") What America is accused of -- closed-mindedness,
stereotyping, ignorance -- is also what its accusers would see if they looked
into a mirror.

These days there seem to be as many of these accusers outside the Muslim world
as inside it. Anybody who has visited Britain and Europe, or followed the public
conversation there during the past five months, will have been struck, even
shocked, by the depth of anti-American feeling among large segments of the
population. Western anti-Americanism is an altogether more petulant phenomenon
than its Islamic counterpart and far more personalized. Muslim countries don't
like America's power, its "arrogance," its success; but in the non-American
West, the main objection seems to be to American people. Night after night, I
have found myself listening to Londoners' diatribes against the sheer weirdness
of the American citizenry. The attacks on America are routinely discounted.
("Americans only care about their own dead.") American patriotism, obesity,
emotionality, self-centeredness: these are the crucial issues.

It would be easy for America, in the present climate of hostility, to fail to
respond to constructive criticism, or worse: to start acting like the
overwhelming superpower it is, making decisions and throwing its weight around
without regard for the concerns of what it perceives as an already hostile
world. The treatment of the Camp X-Ray detainees is a worrying sign. Secretary
of State Colin Powell's reported desire to determine whether, under the Geneva
Convention, these persons should be considered prisoners of war was a
statesmanlike response to global pressure -- but Mr. Powell has apparently
failed to persuade President Bush and Donald Rumsfeld.

The Bush administration has come a long way from its treaty-smashing beginnings.
It should not abandon consensus-building now. Great power and great wealth are
perhaps never popular, yet, more than ever, we need the United States to
exercise its power and economic might responsibly. This is not the time to
ignore the rest of the world and decide to go it alone. To do so would be to
risk losing after you've won.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Marshall Arisman)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
WAR ON TERROR (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HIJACKING (78%); MILITARY BASES
(77%); RELIGION (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); NAVIES (73%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (58%) RUSHDIE, SALMAN; RUSHDIE,
SALMAN

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%); LONDON, ENGLAND (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); KASHMIR (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (90%); PAKISTAN (79%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             312 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE MILITARY;
After January Raid, Gen. Franks Promises to Do Better

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


Stung by criticism that American commandos might have mistakenly killed
anti-Taliban troops in a raid last month, the commander of the war in
Afghanistan said today that he had ordered top ground officers to tighten
coordination with Afghan allies to prevent a recurrence.

The commander, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, said that he did not want to prejudge the
investigation into the raid that killed at least 15 Afghans. Still, he said he
had directed Army and Special Operations commanders to ensure that operations
were fully discussed in advance with the interim Afghan government headed by
Hamid Karzai.

"I've asked that everybody be sure that our coordination is O.K.," General
Franks, the head of the military's Central Command, said during a break in
testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee. "Since we're operating
inside Afghanistan, we want to be sure that we coordinate our activities with
their government."

Inside and outside the hearing room, General Franks was careful not to call the
midnight raid a mistake. When the inquiry is completed in two weeks, he said,
"We will adjust as we need to adjust in the event that we determine that
mistakes were made."

But a senior American official said that representatives of Central Intelligence
Agency in the desperately poor country had already paid more than $1,000 to each
of the families of Afghans killed in the raid.

The attack on two compounds in Hazar Qadam, a village in Oruzgan Province north
of Kandahar, took place on Jan. 23 (Jan. 24, local Afghan time). On Wednesday,
American forces released to Afghan authorities 27 people captured in the raid
after determining they were not fighters for the Taliban or Al Qaeda.

General Franks said that at least some of the detainees were criminals. "There
is a bit of intrigue in this," he said.

The general's decision to tighten coordination between American and Afghan
forces reflects the confusing situation United States troops confront in
post-Taliban Afghanistan. American Special Operations troops and commandos from
nine other countries often rely, in part, on intelligence provided by local
villagers.

But villagers in Hazar Qadam have said they suspected that the United States was
misled by false information spread by one of the two factions in town vying for
control of weapons left behind by the Taliban.

In response to questions about civilian casualties, General Franks defended the
military's air campaign in Afghanistan, calling it "the most accurate war ever
fought in this nation's history."

General Franks said 10,000 of the 18,000 bombs, missiles and other ordnance used
in the war were precision-guided munitions. Of those 10,000 munitions, about
half were laser-guided bombs and half were bombs steered to preprogrammed
coordinates by orbiting satellites.

But some Afghan villagers, as well as a small but growing number of military
analysts and human rights experts who have studied reports of civilian
casualties, say that some of the "successful" missions carried out by the United
States may have been ordered up on faulty intelligence and flawed assumptions.

General Franks acknowledged that there had been "noncombatant losses" and that
they were "not something that anyone would be proud of." But he said those cases
were relatively few. Pentagon officials say they do not keep track of civilian
casualties in Afghanistan.

The general also said he did not trust casualty reports from Taliban
sympathizers. "The thing I don't think we'll do is be quick to rush to a
judgment that takes as truth information that may be provided by sources who do
not share the same value of human life that we share in this country," he said.

For example, General Franks said he "remained convinced" that a convoy attacked
by American warplanes in Paktia Province in December carried hostile forces.
Pentagon officials said that two shoulder-launched missiles were fired from the
convoy at American warplanes.

Mr. Karzai has recently complained that the convoy was carrying tribal elders to
Kabul for his taking office. General Franks told reporters today that Mr. Karzai
had complained to him about the Hazar Qadam raid, but not the convoy attack.

An assessment team from Human Rights Watch plans to go to Afghanistan next month
to survey sites of reported civilian casualties.

General Franks declined to say when conditions in Afghanistan would allow the
United States to withdraw its military forces. "We will not reach a military
operational end state in Afghanistan as long as there is credible threat from
puddles or pockets of Al Qaeda or residual hard-core Taliban," he said.

In his first appearance before Congress since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in
New York and Washington, General Franks received a hero's welcome from the
panel.

But one senator, Jim Bunning, a Kentucky Republican, angrily asked why, with a
proposed budget of more than $1 billion a day, the Pentagon could not explain
what happened to hundreds, if not thousands, of Al Qaeda fighters who had
apparently fled Afghanistan.

"Are you telling us that we cannot do a better job in finding out who escaped,
where they escaped to?" Mr. Bunning asked. "I'm not pleased, and I don't think
any Americans are pleased that we haven't done a better job on Al Qaeda."

General Franks conceded that many Qaeda fighters had slipped out of Afghanistan,
perhaps into Pakistan or Iran. But he vowed that the effort to hunt down
terrorists would continue. "We have an awful lot of work to do," he concluded.

Two of the three nations on President Bush's "axis of evil," Iran and Iraq, fall
within General Franks's area of responsibility. Iraq, he said, represents a
strategic threat because "since the end of the gulf war, we have seen no
evidence that Saddam Hussein was willing to undo his weapons-of-mass-destruction
program."

Reports that Iran is providing guns, ammunition and cash to tribal leaders in
western Afghanistan in an attempt to exert political influence are cause for
concern, General Franks said. "We're watching these activities very, very
carefully," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Tommy R. Franks yesterday assessed the war on terrorism for
the Senate Armed Services Committee. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) Map of
Afghanistan highlighting Hazar Qadam: Villagers say U.S. troops were tricked
into raiding Hazar Qadam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); HISTORY (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); DEFENSE & MILITARY
POLICY (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); LASER WEAPONS
(71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); LASERS (69%); SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY (50%)
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (82%) ;TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (72%) SCHMITT, ERIC; FRANKS, TOMMY R (GEN); KARZAI, HAMID

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (97%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             318 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Del Ponte's Words: 'An Almost Medieval Savagery'

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 925 words


Following are excerpts from the opening statements of Carla Del Ponte, chief
prosecutor, and Geoffrey Nice, lead prosecutor, in the trial of Slobodan
Milosevic at The Hague. Mrs. Del Ponte's full statement, as provided by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, is available on the
Web at nytimes .com/world. The tribunal did not provide a transcript of Mr.
Nice's remarks, which were transcribed by The New York Times from a tape
recording of the proceedings.

Mrs. Del Ponte:

Your Honors,

The Chamber will now begin the trial of this man for the wrongs he is said to
have done -- to the people of his own country and to his neighbors. How simple
that statement is to make today; how easily those words pass into the record of
these proceedings; and yet how remarkable it is that I am able to speak them
here. Today, as never before, we see international justice in action.

The events themselves were notorious, and a new term, "ethnic cleansing," came
into common use in our language. Some of the incidents revealed an almost
medieval savagery and a calculated cruelty that went far beyond the bounds of
legitimate warfare. The crime of genocide, crimes against humanity, and the
other crimes within the jurisdiction of this tribunal are not local affairs, and
their prosecution may be beyond the capability of national courts. Crimes of the
magnitude of those in the indictments before the Chamber affect all of us
throughout the world. The law of this tribunal -- international humanitarian law
-- is the concern of people everywhere. These crimes touch every one of us,
wherever we live, because they offend against our deepest principles of human
rights and human dignity. The law is not a mere theory or an abstract concept.
It is a living instrument that must protect our values and regulate civilized
society. And for that we must be able to enforce the law when it is broken. This
tribunal, and this trial in particular, give the most powerful demonstration
that no one is above the law or beyond the reach of international justice.

The accused in this case, as in all cases before this tribunal, is charged as an
individual: he is prosecuted on the basis of his individual criminal
responsibility. No State or organisation is on trial here today: the indictments
do not accuse an entire people of being collectively guilty of the crimes, even
the crime of genocide.  It may be tempting to generalise when dealing with the
conduct of leaders at the highest level, but that is an error that must be
avoided. Collective guilt forms no part of the prosecution case, it is not the
law of this Tribunal, and I make it clear that I reject the very notion.

Your Honours, while I bring the indictments as prosecutor in the international
public interest, I do not mean to ignore the victims of the crimes committed
during the conflicts. I consider it to be part of my function in presenting the
case to allow the voice of the victims to be heard. No court can experience the
events as the victims themselves did, and no court can be expected to do so.
Many victims cannot come before you because they did not survive.

The witnesses must find in themselves the individual courage to give their
accounts in public. I will seek to match their strength by obtaining for them
all appropriate measures of protection available under the tribunal's rules.
Organizations and governments must also find the institutional resolve to place
before the chamber information sometimes sensitive information in their
possession. In this regard the trial will test the cooperation of all states,
not simply the states of the former Yugoslavia, some of which in the past have
obstructed the work of this tribunal and its prosecutor. Peoples throughout the
world following these proceedings will be watching to see the extent to which
their own leaders are committed to achieving the aims of international justice
in this forum.

The trial which commences today will evoke the tragic fate of the thousands of
Milosevic's Croatian, Bosnian and Albanian victims. To read about the sufferings
endured by these countless victims and survivors is unbearable. Yet the accused
Milosevic has also had other victims. And now your honors, i am thinking about
the Serbs, those Serbian refugees from Croatia, Bosnia, Kosovo, abused by
Milosevic, whose fears were fed and amplified and manipulated to serve
Milosevic's criminal plans. Many paid with their lives, most lost their homes
and their future. These men and women must rightly be counted among Milosevic's
victims.

Mr. Nice:

 Was Milosevic a kindly leader or simply a man with the sharpest appreciation of
how to retain control through manipulation? This trial is about the climb of
this accused to power without accountability, responsibility or morality.
Milosevic, a man who saw the law as an instrument of rule rather than a control
over rulers, a clever and ambitious man, a complex man who would leave no traces
or indeed destroyed the traces of his control. Not a racist in the sense of
someone determined to live only with fellow Serbs. Not an idealist, but someone
concerned more, if not exclusively, with the maintenance of personal power.

In Croatia and Bosnia he was involved in wars he could afford to win -- but
didn't. Kosovo was something he could never afford to lose -- but he did.

This trial starts with a blank sheet of paper and writes on it only that which
can be contributed by evidence.

It will show a clear example of how state machinery may be used to pursue
criminal objectives.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carla Del Ponte, chief prosecutor at the war crimes tribunal,
and Geoffrey Nice, below, the deputy prosecutor. The two presented the case
against Slobodan Milosevic. (Pool photos by I.C.T.Y.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); TRANSCRIPTS (76%); LAW OF WAR (71%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (58%)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; DEL PONTE, CARLA; NICE, GEOFFREY

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             319 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ruling Likely to End Sharon's War-Crimes Case

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 357 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 14


The World Court sounded the death knell today for a Belgian attempt to try Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel for war crimes, ruling in a similar case that
serving ministers were protected from prosecution.

Jan Devadder, legal adviser to the Belgian Foreign Ministry, said decision by
the International Court of Justice, based in The Hague, would most likely result
in Belgium's dropping its case against Mr. Sharon.

"The Sharon case, in my opinion, is closed," Mr. Devadder told Reuters, after
the ruling by the United Nations' highest judicial body.

The court of justice, also known as the World Court, ruled that Belgium had no
right to issue an arrest warrant on charges of rights abuses for a former
Congolese minister because he was immune from prosecution. The Congo case is
similar to the Sharon lawsuit.

The court "concluded that there existed no exception under international law to
the rule establishing immunity from criminal process before foreign national
courts," said the president of the court, Gilbert Guillaume.

The ruling is likely to have a bearing on a backlog of cases in which
high-profile politicians are accused of war crimes and rights abuses, including
Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and Fidel Castro of Cuba.

Israel welcomed the ruling in the case, brought by a group of Palestinians who
accused Mr. Sharon of responsibility for the 1982 massacre of hundreds of
Palestinians in Lebanese refugee camps while he was Israeli defense minister.

"From the outset, the Israeli position was that the legal proceedings against
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in Belgium should be halted forthwith," said a
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Yaffa Ben-Ari.

The case that decided the issue today involved a dispute between Congo and
Belgium, which used its rights laws to issue an arrest warrant for former
Foreign Minister Aboulaye Yerodia Ndombasi on charges of crimes against
humanity.

Mr. Yerodia was accused of inciting hatred against ethnic Tutsi in August 1998
in speeches in which he referred to "vermin" and "extermination." As many as a
million Tutsi and moderate Hutu were massacred in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (95%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); IMMUNITY (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); VERDICTS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); CRIMINAL
DEFENSES (58%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (57%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (WORLD COURT) (THE HAGUE)

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (50%) SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGIUM (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (93%); LEBANON (92%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  CONGO;  LEBANON;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             321 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: War Crimes;
At the Hague, It's a Leader on Trial, Not a People

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1375 words


SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC, the former Yugoslav leader on trial for war crimes in the
Balkans, turned on his international prosecutors Thursday and heaped scorn on
them for "accusing a whole nation" -- the Serbs -- of atrocity and murder.

But that is not the issue in his indictment. Nor is it what this landmark trial
is about.

Much has been made of the fact that this is the first trial of a head of state
for war crimes. But Mr. Milosevic is not in the dock as a symbol of a nation or
its ideology. He is not even on trial before the world because he was president
of the former Yugoslavia during a decade when Serbs were attacking, killing,
raping and evicting first Bosnian Muslims and Croats, then Kosovar Albanians.

He is on trial as an individual, accused of personally fomenting or ordering
those war crimes.

For half a century, since the Nuremberg trials of Nazis and the Tokyo war crimes
cases against Japan, international law had moved slowly but surely in search of
a new standard of personal accountability for the leaders, as well as the foot
soldiers, who are directly responsible for criminal behavior in time of
conflict.

In recent years, the process has taken off with unexpected speed, not only in
two international criminal tribunals, for the Balkans and Rwanda, but also in
courts planned to settle accounts for Sierra Leone's brutal civil war and maybe
one day for Cambodia's Khmer Rouge. And in the next year or two a permanent
International Criminal Court is expected to be setting up operations to deal
with all cases like these.

The trend is toward both the globalization of justice and the narrowing of
culpability. An emerging body of international law is constructing an ever more
solid base for impartial trials in a world arena by a multinational panel of
justices. In this new field of law, the Milosevic trial will have established
major precedents.

Only eight years ago, the late Telford Taylor, who had been an American
prosecutor at the Nuremberg international tribunal, said in an interview that he
was pessimistic that courtroom justice would ever come to the Balkans. He argued
that the laws of war are largely enforced -- or not -- by people in power and
that governments were usually left with the responsibility of punishing their
own war criminals. The record was not stellar, he said, citing among others the
case of Lt. William Calley, who was given a life sentence for the My Lai
massacre in Vietnam, but then paroled. "The laws of war unfortunately do not
have any police, any judges. Nothing is given that says, 'Look, if you do that,
someone is going to hit you in the head.' "

That courtroom in The Hague has the judges now, and they are establishing
exactly what can bring down punishment on an errant head.

This is, of course, a time quite different from that of Nuremberg, where the
basic accusation against individuals was complicity in the overarching guilt of
a totalitarian system that had started a global war.

Today, in an age of nasty civil wars, trials that focus on individual guilt can
have the side effect of revealing how often such conflicts are not, as
advertised, fought out of old ethnic, linguistic, cultural or religious hatreds,
but because a political leader has deliberately inflamed such tensions for
political gain. The phenomenon is not confined to the Balkans, but has been seen
in Rwanda's Hutu-Tutsi genocide and in Sri Lanka, where a post-independence
leader looking for a political platform stirred up Sinhala-Tamil animosity,
leading to civil war.

The trend toward universal jurisdiction is not welcome news everywhere, however,
particularly in the United States. The Clinton and Bush administrations have
broken with most of America's allies in opting out of the International Criminal
Court, out of concern that any act of war could lead to indictments of American
leaders. A few years ago, for example, an effort was made by some human rights
organizations to charge the United States with war crimes in the bombing of
Belgrade to drive Serb troops out of Kosovo. And while the Balkans tribunal did
not agree that these actions were indictable, it is not inconceivable that
similar allegations could grow out of American military action in Afghanistan or
Vietnam.

"I do not find it surprising that the Americans are concerned, since they are
now technologically unilateral," said Ruth Wedgwood, an expert in international
law at the Council on Foreign Relations and the Yale Law School. "It's because
the technology is so advanced that no one else can be interoperable with us any
more, that we're concerned about a lack of sympathy, even among our NATO
allies."

But, she said, the kind of accusations the Americans worry about -- based on
distinction between military and civilian targets, for example -- differ from
the bulk of crimes tried at The Hague, which "are based on rules of war that are
bright-line rules: Don't slaughter P.O.W.'s, don't ravish women, don't put
P.O.W.'s in the front line to de-mine no man's land." And that, she said, means
that it should be easier to convict a Milosevic than to prosecute the kinds of
charges that might be aimed at an American.

DESPITE the American objections, Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights
Watch in New York, said there has been a huge change in the willingness of
officials to seek prosecution in the last five years, not only in international
tribunals, but also in national courts like Belgium's, where cases can now be
brought against foreigners for events that took place in other countries.
Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, narrowly escaped extradition from
Britain to Spain, where a judge had brought charges against him, and campaigns
are being conducted to try Hissan Habre, the former Chadian leader, and Alberto
Fujimori of Peru, now in exile in Japan.

There have been obstacles, however. Last week, also in The Hague, the World
Court, which hears cases between nations, granted the Democratic Republic of the
Congo immunity from prosecution of its former foreign minister, Abdoulaye
Yerodia Ndombasi, in a Belgian court, on grounds that serving ministers were
protected from prosecution. The decision is thought likely to derail a more
prominent case also being brought in Belgium, in which Ariel Sharon, the current
Israeli prime minister, is accused of accountability in the 1982 massacre of
Palestinians at the Sabra and Chatila refugee camps in Lebanon. The killings
were carried out by Lebanese Christian allies of invading Israeli forces.

In addition, the Cambodian government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has rebuffed
United Nations demands that its own criminal tribunal meet international
standards.

Still, advocates of international jurisdiction and international norms remain
confident that the trend is in their favor. Mr. Brody, for example, noted that
less than two years ago there were still calls to give Mr. Milosevic immunity
against prosecution for the Balkan wars in order to remove him from Serbian
politics.

"Norms and expectations have changed," he said. "Now every transition is
accompanied by a debate over accountability."

Will Mr. Milosevic get a fair trial? No one denies that the indictments against
him came at a very opportune time for the United States and NATO in their war
against the Serbs in Kosovo, or that Serbia was threatened with a refusal of
crucial rebuilding aid if it did not cooperate with the tribunal. Supporters of
the Serbs and Mr. Milosevic have called that unacceptable political pressure.

BUT Ms. Wedgwood, who is a visiting professor at Johns Hopkins University this
year, said that the critical factor was whether the Balkans tribunal, without
any investigative service of its own, could muster the necessary evidence. "One
test of the trial," she said, "is to what degree we can present proof of actual
direct involvement versus how much it will revolve around theories of command
responsibility. For credibility in the region, it's important that there be more
specific evidence because the command responsibility theory is often just seen
as criminalized negligence -- failure to control."

In other words, the big question is whether it can be proved that this one
individual "knew exactly what was happening in Kosovo and endorsed it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A woman in Kosovo whose husband's body was thought to be among
64 found in a mass grave in 1999. (Tyler Hicks for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); LAW OF WAR (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); VIETNAM WAR (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); PAROLE (78%);
HOMICIDE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); NEWS BRIEFS
(74%); GLOBALIZATION (73%); SENTENCING (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%);
CIVIL WAR (73%); MURDER (58%); RELIGION (54%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); TOKYO, JAPAN (70%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); RWANDA (79%); ALBANIA
(79%); JAPAN (79%); CROATIA (79%); CAMBODIA (79%); VIET NAM (74%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             322 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE DETAINEES;
Though Not Linked to Terrorism, Many Detainees Cannot Go Home

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER DREW with JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1679 words


The Justice Department has blocked the departures of 87 foreign detainees who
had been ordered deported or had agreed to go home, while investigators comb
through information pouring in from overseas to ensure that they have no ties to
terrorism, law enforcement officials say.

Most of the detainees are Arabs or Muslims, and many have spent more than 100
days in jail waiting to leave the country, with no end to detention in sight.
Nearly all were jailed after being picked up on visa violations at traffic stops
or because of neighbors' suspicions.

Officials said available evidence suggested they had played no role in the Sept.
11 attacks or Osama bin Laden's Qaeda network, and the immigration cases against
some of them were resolved as long as four months ago.

They have nonetheless been held in an unusual legal limbo while investigators
check their backgrounds and new evidence about Al Qaeda and other terrorist
groups emerging from Afghanistan and other countries.

In the past, visa violators who had no other charges against them were usually
deported or allowed to leave voluntarily 60 to 90 days after their immigration
cases were closed, lawyers said. But these detainees are being treated
differently.

American officials acknowledged a great reluctance to release people who could
be involved with terrorism and said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was
working hard to complete the checks.

"We have to be very careful about the people we let go," said a senior Justice
Department official, who spoke on condition of not being identified by name.

Civil liberties advocates agreed that the government needed to be careful but
said the delays were stretching the normal legal timetables. The government,
they said, was in the dubious position of holding people indefinitely without
charging them with a crime.

"It's gotten to where we're really in uncharted waters," said Lee Gelernt, a
senior lawyer for the Immigrants' Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties
Union. "The government has effectively reversed the presumption of innocence.
They are holding people for months once their immigration cases are concluded
while they look to see if there is a reason to bring other charges."

Immigration lawyers say the new policy, created by Attorney General John
Ashcroft shortly after Sept. 11, has led to a collision between the traditional
rights afforded foreigners and the need for heightened security. Many of the
detainees do not have lawyers, but some who do have begun to file lawsuits in
federal court demanding their release.

In response, the Justice Department official said: "There is some justification
in their position that we can't hold the detainees forever. But we feel we do
have some leeway."

Law enforcement officials said that some detainees were still being scrutinized
but that many others had been released recently or were simply awaiting
completion of travel arrangements or new passport documents. More than 700
people were held on immigration charges after Sept. 11. Officials said on Friday
that they were still holding 327 people, including the 87 already under
departure orders.

Interviews with defense lawyers suggest that the clearance process has delayed
the release of many of the detainees held in New York and New Jersey. A close
look at some cases shows that the inquiries have created murky standoffs in
which the F.B.I. cannot prove that the detainees are dangerous and the detainees
cannot allay the F.B.I.'s suspicions.

For instance, Ahmed Alenany, a cabdriver in Brooklyn, was caught in the
post-Sept. 11 dragnet when it was found that he had overstayed his visa. He said
he told an immigration judge in October that he did not need a lawyer and just
wanted to get home to his wife and two children in Cairo as soon as possible.

When the judge suggested that deportation would be the fastest route, he said,
he agreed to be deported.

In a recent interview at the Middlesex County Jail in New Jersey, Mr. Alenany,
50, who was trained as a doctor, said he had divided his time between New York
and Egypt in the last five years.

He said he came to New York seeking specialized medical training, but he had
little money and ended up driving a cab. He was arrested on Sept. 21 after a
police officer in Brooklyn questioned why he had stopped in a no-parking zone
and found that his visa had expired.

It is not hard to see why investigators were suspicious. Mr. Alenany said he had
taped a photograph of the White House in the back window of his cab. He had also
fastened a picture of the World Trade Center to his glove box, with a piece of
black tape slanting across an upper corner.

He said he told F.B.I. agents that he had lived for nine years in Saudi Arabia,
where he also drove a cab before getting a job as a doctor. Mr. Alenany also
volunteered that around 1990, he dropped off a disabled man at the home of a
wealthy benefactor, who gave the passenger $50. He said he later heard that the
benefactor was Osama bin Laden.

But in the interview in jail, Mr. Alenany said all these events were more
innocent than they might have sounded to the F.B.I.

He said he placed the photographs in his cab to show his sympathy for America's
suffering and the black mark across the top of the World Trade Center photograph
was a common Egyptian symbol of mourning. He also said he had never seen or met
Mr. bin Laden and was not even sure the house he went to as a cabdriver was Mr.
bin Laden's.

"I told that story voluntarily, but I feel that I put myself in a very critical
position," Mr. Alenany said, adding that he was in despair over losing his dream
of living in America.

"When I was 6 years of age, I was starving," he said. "And I smelled a beautiful
smell. And when I asked what it was, someone said it was cheese from America, a
far, faraway land. From this time on I felt love for America."

But, he added: "Now I'm in very bad shape, sir. Sometimes I feel it's hopeless,
that I will stay in this jail all my life."

Mr. Alenany said that law enforcement officials took him into custody on Sept.
21 and searched his $300-a-month room in Brooklyn the next day. He received his
deportation order at a court hearing on Oct. 16. That means today is his 151st
day in custody and the 125th since the deportation order.

After his room was searched, Mr. Alenany said, he did not hear from the F.B.I.
again until Jan. 17, when agents visited him in jail. He said they told him that
American intelligence agencies had information about, or had intercepted, a
phone call in which he made anti-American comments. He said they did not say
what he had said or tell him when the conversation had taken place. He said he
denied making such statements.

In one other meeting, on Jan. 29, investigators sought his help, Mr. Alenany
said. They asked him about immigration violations, unrelated to terrorism,
involving other people he knew, he said.

Justice Department and immigration officials declined to comment on Mr.
Alenany's case. But defense lawyers said that the effort to gather investigative
leads could further delay the release of some detainees.

Mahmoud Allam, Egypt's consul general in New York, said his government had tried
to help Mr. Alenany and other detained Egyptians.

"This is a common case -- people who get decisions for deportation from a court,
and then they are not implemented," Mr. Allam said. Egyptian officials endorsed
efforts by the United States to tighten security, he said, but, referring to the
difficulty of some detainees in getting out of jail, he added, "It reminds you
of the famous Kafka story of 'The Trial.' "

Bhanu Goldsmith, a New Jersey lawyer, said she represented a detainee from
Mauritania who agreed to leave in early November, prompting an immigration
service lawyer to predict that the man would be home by Thanksgiving. But, Ms.
Goldsmith said, she recently heard that the man was still in jail, awaiting
F.B.I. clearance.

Officials at the immigration agency, which is part of the Justice Department,
said they were ordered to move more slowly with those detained after Sept. 11
than with other visa violators.

Referring to the F.B.I. reviews, Andrea Quarantilla, the immigration service's
district director in Newark, said, "There is certainly an extra step in the
process."

Lawyers for the detainees say visa violators who agree to leave usually must
leave in 60 days but can sometimes take as many as 120 days.

Federal law provides that deportations should take place within 90 days of a
deportation order. But the Supreme Court has ruled that the immigration service
can extend that to 180 days if other countries refuse to accept a deportee.

Civil rights lawyers said deportation laws were enacted to deal with cases in
which the government was trying to make people leave. "But now we have the
opposite situation, where the alien is ready to comply and leave but the
government doesn't want to let him go," said Bryan Lonegan, a lawyer at the
Legal Aid Society in New York.

The only recourse for detainees held longer, lawyers say, is to file writs of
mandamus in the federal courts to try to force the immigration service to send
them home, or to file writs of habeas corpus to seek release.

Aslan Soobzokov, a lawyer in Paterson, N.J., said he recently filed habeas
corpus petitions for three people detained after Sept. 11 and the government
quickly sent two of them back to their native country, Turkey.

Regis Fernandez, a lawyer in Newark, said that shortly after he filed a writ of
mandamus on behalf of a 21-year-old Australian of Arab descent, the immigration
service notified him on Friday that the man had suddenly been cleared to leave.

Justice Department officials said they recognized that such petitions could
become the next battleground involving the detainees.

"I'm not saying that in this large universe of people we haven't made some
mistakes and held some people longer than we wanted to," the senior Justice
Department official said. But the F.B.I. was pushing to complete the background
checks, he said, and had "no interest in detaining people who are not a threat
to us."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ahmed Alenany agreed to deportation for overstaying his visa,
hoping to get home quickly to his family in Cairo. Today is his 151st day in
custody. (Richard Perry/The New York Times)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); PASSPORTS
& VISAS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); HIJACKING
(77%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); SUITS & CLAIMS (76%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(76%); REFUGEES (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%);
RELIGION (57%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  VISAS;  DEPORTATION;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON
BUILDING;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (92%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (82%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); RICK PERRY (50%) BIN LADEN, OSAMA; DREW,
CHRISTOPHER; MILLER, JUDITH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); EGYPT (73%)

REGION: ; NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             323 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China, the Uncertain Ally

BYLINE:  By Ross Terrill;  Ross Terrill, author of "Mao" and the forthcoming
"The New Chinese Empire," is research associate at Harvard University's Fairbank
Center for East Asian Research and a visiting professor at the University of
Texas at Austin.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


Early in his administration, President Bush boldly confronted China on the
issues of Taiwan, missile defense, and the collision between a Chinese fighter
and an American reconnaissance plane last April. Yet he has been able to win
China's cooperation in the war on terrorism. Is this a fluke due to Sept. 11, or
are we finally entering a new relationship with Beijing?

Thirty years ago this week, Richard Nixon took a risk and went to Beijing. He
wanted to get two things from the trip: leverage against the Soviet Union and a
way out of Vietnam. He got both.

For months before the 1972 summit, China stuck to a single issue -- its desire
that the United States break diplomatic and military links with Taiwan -- while
Nixon sought agreement for an "overall structure of peace" in East Asia.
Stunningly, Mao Zedong said to Nixon when they met: "This issue Taiwan is not an
important one. The issue of the international situation is an important one."
Beijing accepted a continuing American relationship with Taiwan because of alarm
at Soviet pressure on its own northern border. One lesson Nixon learned is that
the Chinese Communists are quite capable of compromise when their rhetoric can't
change reality.

After the breakup of the Soviet Union, the American relation to China had to
change. Yet no fresh roles were defined, and dialogue has often been irritable.
Some expect the antiterrorism war to give the two nations common cause. But will
China remain in step with Mr. Bush for long?

Since the end of the cold war, Beijing has been able to set much of the United
States-China agenda. In deference to China, the Clinton administration tended to
emphasize the limits of the American relationship to Taiwan and to portray
Beijing's "reunification" with Taiwan as an accepted goal. Meanwhile China was
able to rack up annual trade surpluses with the United States of $50 billion and
more as Beijing's official media denounced the American government as
"Hitlerite." Two summits between Jiang Zemin and President Bill Clinton in 1997
and 1998 gave Beijing the equal treatment it craves.

After Sept. 11, Beijing, usually bristling with nationalism aimed at American
hegemonism, seemed to become a lamb in the fold of antiterrorism. Beijing saw an
opportunity to win sympathy for its undemocratic policies against Muslims in
Xinjiang, Buddhists in Tibet, and ethnic minorities in other frontier zones.

The Taliban regime trained militant Muslims from Xinjiang whose aim is to
restore the independent state of East Turkestan. China's various efforts (some
through Pakistan) to prevent Afghan influence on its Muslim populations came to
nothing. By the time of the September attacks, China had good reason to wish the
Taliban overthrown.

On his way home from China in 1972, Nixon said, "That was the week that changed
the world." That was an exaggeration. To say Sept. 11 changed the nature of
Sino-American relations would also be an exaggeration.

Most Americans see the war against terrorism as a fight against broad forces
opposed to freedom. Beijing sees the war as a defense of the unity and security
of authoritarian China. There is a fine line between antiterrorism and imperial
authority.

Nixon, eager to use one Communist state against another, told Mao 30 years ago:
"What is important is not a nation's internal political philosophy" but rather
"its policy toward the rest of the world and toward us." Yet today in United
States-China relations, domestic values are important. Nixon and Henry Kissinger
accepted the nondemocratic nature of Communist China as a given. That position
is not tenable now, with Taiwan a democracy and Communism gone from Europe.

Even as we cooperate with Beijing, the stratagems of the Chinese state
periodically remind us of its undemocratic nature. On the eve of Secretary of
State Colin Powell's trip to Beijing last July, two imprisoned scholars with
American ties were convicted of spying (we call it research) and deported. The
gesture, easy to make when circumstances require it, had no impact on the fate
of thousands of other political prisoners held in Chinese jails. Yet General
Powell's interview on Beijing television was eviscerated to omit his words on
Taiwan and human rights, breaching an agreement with the American embassy that
his remarks be relayed in full. This deliberate silencing of American criticism
provided more benefit to Beijing than the release of two political prisoners
provided to America.

General Powell himself seems less than troubled by these ploys. When I asked him
about the condition of United States-China relations two months after his trip,
he said, "I had an excellent trip to Beijing. Very encouraging indeed."

In the foreign policy world, there is a school that is afraid that President
Bush may go too far in displeasing Beijing. This is an unnecessary fear. There
is no way the United States can fully please the Chinese government. Beijing's
ire at hegemonists (that's us) is a theology. We are needed as an adversary to
shore up the legitimacy of the Communist party-state.

Mr. Bush's firm position to defend Taiwan and his commitment to missile defense
have not reduced the modest but worthwhile areas of cooperation between the two
nations. And despite the Communist Party's opportunistic use of anti-American
rhetoric, its leaders know that no long-term economic or security interest is
served by confronting the United States. For all its fiery words, China, a
lesser power, respects the strength of a superpower.

The next China drama will unfold not in foreign relations but at home, as the
Internet and life in the World Trade Organization reveal the illogic of market
Leninism. Traveling one road in economics and a different one in politics makes
for neither a smooth ride nor a settled destination. How that schizophrenia is
resolved will determine China's world role.

China's biggest problem is not America or terrorism, but China. Until the
Chinese political system changes, let Beijing come to us, bearing perhaps a
constructive idea or two.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Jordin Isip)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%);
RELIGION (84%); SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (78%); COLD WAR (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); TERRORISM (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); HIJACKING (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); AIRLINES (72%); BUDDHISTS &
BUDDHISM (68%); ETHNIC GROUPS (64%); GOODS & SERVICES TRADE BALANCE (62%);
ETHNICITY (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CHINA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  EDITORIALS;  TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  MISSING
PERSONS

PERSON: RICHARD NIXON (79%); BILL CLINTON (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) ;TERRILL,
JAMES L

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); NORTHWEST CHINA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%);
XINJIANG, CHINA (73%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); TAIWAN (96%); EASTERN ASIA (79%);
ASIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); TIBET (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             324 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Give Colombians Data to Help Fight Rebels

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22


The Bush administration plans to provide military intelligence to the Colombian
government for its campaign against Marxist rebels and is rushing spare parts to
the country's armed forces, officials said today.

Administration lawyers were assembling legal arguments to justify the
intelligence-sharing without running afoul of laws limiting American involvement
in Colombia to fighting the narcotics trade, not guerrillas.

"There are ways that we can support the government of Colombia in this matter
very specifically within the current law," said Richard Boucher, the State
Department spokesman.

The action comes two days after President Andres Pastrana abandoned a three-year
effort to reach a peace accord with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,
or FARC, as rebels intensified their attacks. Colombian forces continued to
sweep into a demilitarized zone that Mr. Pastrana had ceded to rebel control in
1998.

The State Department announced the new help after Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell, who was traveling in China, spoke by telephone with Mr. Pastrana.

Secretary Powell praised Mr. Pastrana for showing "enormous patience over a long
period of time" in trying negotiate a deal with the FARC.

"He finally felt he could go no further and he had a responsibility to the
people of Colombia to protect them," Secretary Powell added. "We understand the
decision he made. We support him."

The Colombian government has been clamoring for months for the United States to
provide information about rebel movements from such sources as telephone
intercepts, aerial surveillance and satellite photos.

Luis Alberto Moreno, Colombia's ambassador to Washington, voiced satisfaction at
the administration's move. The Pastrana government is also seeking to win
permission from the United States to use American-provided combat helicopters
and other equipment in the counter-insurgency struggle, he said.

"We have been requesting this for some time," Mr. Moreno said. "This was at the
heart of providing more security for Colombians."

The United States has provided Colombia with military aid and training under a
$1.3 billion package called Plan Colombia. In its new budget, the administration
is seeking more than $500 million more for Colombia.

Troubled by the prospect of being drawn into a 38-year war that shows no sign of
abating, Congress has restricted the use of the American aid to the
counter-narcotics fight and a directive signed by President Clinton in 2000 bars
the use of American intelligence to combat rebels.

Secretary Powell has repeatedly said that the United States has no intention of
getting involved in combat. Some lawmakers, moreover, express doubts about
aiding a military with a poor human rights record and alliances to right-wing
paramilitary forces.

Administration officials insist that the line between counter-insurgency and
counter-narcotics is blurred, since the 16,000-member FARC derives much of its
income from trafficking in drugs.

A senior administration official today said lawyers are studying how to
circumvent the Clinton restriction and provide intelligence to help Colombian
troops rout the FARC from the former demilitarized zone, which covers 16,200
square miles.

"What Pastrana would like is more information in the former zone," the official
said. "Right now we give him information that is strictly limited to
counter-narcotics."

The lawyers may be aided by directives on intelligence-sharing issued by
President Bush in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, officials said. The United
States designated the FARC a terrorist organization in 1997.

International perceptions of the FARC are hardening, which may provide the
administration with backing for a more aggressive counter-insurgency role. After
Latin American and European diplomats helped salvage peace talks last month, the
rebels unleashed 117 attacks, exploding four car bombs, destroying 33 energy
towers and, most spectacularly this week, hijacking a plane and kidnapping a
prominent senator, according to the Colombian government.

Cesar Gaviria, a former Colombian president who is secretary general of the
34-nation Organization of American States, said the rebels have proved
themselves to be "terrorists." He urged governments in Europe and Latin America
to abandon notions of the FARC as a legitimate political movement and sever all
ties.

"There are a lot of countries that have given them sanctuary, support and good
treatment," Mr. Gaviria said in an interview. "I think it's going to stop."

Josep Pique, the foreign minister of Spain, whose country holds the rotating
presidency of the European Union, said the E.U. should stiffen its policies
toward armed groups. Mr. Pique also expressed firm backing for Plan Colombia,
which many European governments had criticized for relying too heavily on a
military solution.

The senior administration official, who asked not to be named, acknowledged that
international opinion has still not coalesced on the best way to deal with the
FARC. But from Britain to Mexico, he said, the authorities increasingly favor a
stronger stance.

"I think 9-11 has really crystallized in Europeans' thinking the danger of the
FARC," the official said. People have abandoned the notion that the rebels are
"misguided agrarian reformers," he said. "They're narcoterrorists."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); LAWYERS (89%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); NARCOTERRORISM (89%); DRUG POLICY (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (89%); SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%);
MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (71%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (71%); WIRETAPPING (67%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (64%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (55%); HELICOPTERS (50%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (58%) MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); COLOMBIA (99%); CHINA (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 27, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Belgium: Extending Law To Chad

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 84 words


Belgian investigators left for Chad to inquire into allegations of atrocities
against the former dictator, Hissene Habre, who ruled from 1982 to 1990.

The team plans to interview witnesses and victims and visit sites where hundreds
of Chadians were reportedly tortured by Mr. Habre's forces. Victims are suing
him under a sweeping Belgian law that allows crimes against humanity to be
prosecuted there, regardless of where they were committed. Mr Habre lives in
exile in Senegal.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WITNESSES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%); SUITS & CLAIMS (83%) TORTURE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; HABRE, HISSENE

COUNTRY: BELGIUM (94%); EUROPE (74%); SENEGAL (73%)

REGION: CHAD;  BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             329 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Tries Legislator For Praising Hezbollah

BYLINE:  By JOEL GREENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 27


An Israeli Arab lawmaker went on trial today on charges of voicing support for a
terrorist organization, the first time a member of the Israeli Parliament has
been prosecuted for remarks made in office.

The trial of the legislator, Azmi Bishara, leader of the pan-Arabist Balad
Party, focused attention on the civil rights and loyalties of Israel's million
Arab citizens, as well as on the limits of free speech in Israel.

Greeted outside the Nazareth Magistrate's Court by chanting supporters waving
Palestinian flags, Mr. Bishara said the trial was a rightist attempt to
discredit Israeli Arab political views.

"The trial is clearly a political trial," Mr. Bishara told reporters as the
hearings began before a three-judge panel. The proceedings were attended by
several members of the European Parliament and representatives of human rights
groups.

The case has aggravated a sense of grievance among many Israeli Arabs, who have
long complained of official discrimination in budgets, land allocation,
education and other government services, and whose communities have high levels
of poverty and unemployment. Alienation has deepened since October 2000, when
the police killed 13 people during violent protests in Israeli Arab communities
sympathetic to the Palestinian uprising.

According to an indictment submitted by Attorney General Elyakim Rubinstein, Mr.
Bishara, 45, praised the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah in two speeches and
urged that its tactics be adopted by the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. He will face up to one year in jail if he is convicted.

Hezbollah waged a guerrilla war against Israeli forces in southern Lebanon
before they withdrew in May 2000; its campaign was widely seen in the Arab world
as a model of successful resistance to occupation. Israel and the United States
regard Hezbollah, which is backed by Syria and Iran, as a terrorist
organization.

Mr. Bishara's lawyer, Hassan Jabarin, asked the court to dismiss the indictment,
arguing that it was a politically motivated attempt to delegitimize his client's
views. He asserted that the remarks in question did not amount to a criminal
offense and fell within the limits of free speech.

According to the indictment, Mr. Bishara praised Hezbollah and encouraged
violence in speeches at the Israeli Arab town of Umm al-Fahm in August 2000 and
at a memorial gathering in Syria for President Hafez al-Assad last June.

At the gathering in Syria, Mr. Bishara said that "the option of resistance"
could only be maintained by "widening this domain again, so that people can
struggle and resist." Among the Arab dignitaries in the audience were Sheik
Hassan Nasrallah, leader of Hezbollah, and heads of militant Palestinian groups
based in Damascus.

Mr. Bishara asserts that he was talking about resistance to Israeli occupation
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, not encouraging aggression toward Israel
proper, and that "resistance" in any case did not necessarily mean violence,
which he says he opposes.

Mr. Jabarin said that in prosecuting Mr. Bishara -- who advocates turning Israel
from a Jewish state into "a state of all its citizens" -- the Israeli political
establishment was trying to discredit his opinions.

"Because Azmi Bishara challenges the Zionist ideology," Mr. Jabarin said, "this
was the way to criminalize him and remove him from the public debate. The trial
is not about the indictment, but about what he symbolizes regarding the status
of Arab citizens in Israel."

In a separate trial, Mr. Bishara has been charged with organizing family visits
by Israeli Arabs to relatives in Syria, with which Israel is technically at war.
The Israeli Legislature voted in November to strip him of his parliamentary
immunity, clearing the way for his prosecution on both counts.

Before the trial began today, Mr. Bishara promised to use the courtroom as a
forum for his ideas. "They can't try me for my political positions without the
trial becoming a platform for the question of whether resistance to occupation
is a legitimate right or not," he said.

Arguments will also be heard about "why an Arab member of Parliament is being
tried for what he says, and whether we can be Israeli patriots at all, and
whether I am loyal to the rights of my Palestinian people to self-determination.

"I think they will regret every minute."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); HEZBOLLAH (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(91%); TERRORISM (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); MAGISTRATES (78%);
LAWYERS (78%); POLITICS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (76%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (74%); JUDGES (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); JAIL SENTENCING
(70%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (67%); RIOTS (66%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;
PALESTINIANS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (56%) HEZBOLLAH

PERSON: HASSAN NASRALLAH (56%) GREENBERG, JOEL; BISHARA, AZMI

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); SYRIA (93%);
LEBANON (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  GAZA STRIP

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             330 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Experts Dispute Bush Aide's Criticism of War Crimes Panels

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 1


Secretary General Kofi Annan and international law experts rose to a strong
defense of United Nations war crimes tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda today
in response to a broadside attack on them on Thursday by the Bush
administration's ambassador for war crimes.

In testimony to Congress, the American war crimes ambassador, Pierre-Richard
Prosper, cast doubt on the integrity of the tribunals. "The professionalism of
some personnel has been called into question, with allegations of mismanagement
and abuse," he said.

Mr. Prosper said the administration wanted both tribunals to focus on winding up
their work by 2007-2008.

Justice Richard Goldstone of South Africa's Constitutional Court, who was the
first chief prosecutor for the tribunals, said today that talking about a
timetable in these terms was equivalent to holding a sword of Damocles over the
heads of these judicial panels.

"It is premature, in my view, to start placing a limit on the lives of the
tribunals," he said in an interview by e-mail from South Africa. "They are
functioning as well as could be expected and they must be allowed to complete
their work."

Justice Goldstone also said that only a Security Council resolution -- subject
to the veto of any of the five permanent members -- could bring an end to the
tribunals' work.

In Strasbourg, France, the 43-nation Council of Europe condemned what it called
unacceptable American pressure and attempts to interfere with international
justice.

The tribunals have always been ad hoc, and judges and prosecutors have been
studying plans for phasing out their work for more than a year. The Security
Council created the tribunal for the Balkans in 1993 after atrocities in Bosnia
began to be widely reported. The Rwanda court was established in 1995, a year
after a campaign of genocide that left hundreds of thousands dead.

What surprised international lawyers and rights groups was the timing of the
Bush administration's remarks, just as the trial of Slobodan Milosevic, the
mastermind of Serbian campaigns in the Balkans, has begun in The Hague.

Richard Dicker, director of the international justice program at Human Rights
Watch in New York, called the remarks a "smear campaign," adding, "For Pierre
Prosper to make his comments at a time when the court has begun the most
important international criminal trial since Nuremberg -- and when the accused,
Slobodan Milosevic, is calling into question the legitimacy of the tribunal --
that is totally incomprehensible."

Today a spokeswoman for Mr. Annan, who was returning from a trip to Europe, hit
back at Mr. Prosper's comments, which were made in Washington at a hearing held
by the House International Relations Committee.

"We reject any allegations of corruption and mismanagement," the spokeswoman,
Marie Okabe, said, adding that the United Nations needed specifics from Mr.
Prosper.

Legal experts say that while it was widely known that there have been management
problems at the Rwanda tribunal, which is based in Arusha, Tanzania, the only
serious questions that had been raised about the Balkan tribunal concerned some
defense lawyers' decisions to split their fees with the families of those they
were defending, which lawyers here consider professionally unethical but
unrelated to the management of the court.

Mr. Prosper told the House committee that the administration still wanted to see
"those who bear the greatest responsibility" for war crimes to stand trial at
the tribunals. Among those he included Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader
whom international troops tried and failed to capture on Thursday, and Ratko
Mladic, the Bosnia Serb military chief.

But he added that lower-level war criminals should be tried in national courts.

Legal experts who have followed these tribunals, and urged the creation of
similar ones for Cambodia, East Timor and Sierra Leone, say that flies in the
face of conditions on the ground.

"This is willfully ignoring the realities that led to the creation of these two
tribunals in the first place," Mr. Dicker said. "That is the absence of an
independent and impartial judiciary in these countries that could conduct
credible trials."

In Rwanda, for instance, said Alison des Forges, an expert on the Rwandan
judicial system who teaches at the University of California at Berkeley, this
step would mean throwing trials into the hands of an untested new system of
community courts known as gacaca.

"Gacaca represents a very courageous but completely untried experiment in
popular justice," she said. "We have no idea how it is going to work. There have
been no trials under this system as yet. They have selected 260,000 judges, most
of whom have no training, no education beyond primary school."

In his testimony, Mr. Prosper also renewed the administration's rejection of the
International Criminal Court, which is nearing the ratification by 60 countries
needed for it to begin functioning. That court, in essence a permanent war
crimes tribunal, is intended to make ad hoc tribunals unnecessary.

The Pentagon has been deeply opposed to it, saying that American soldiers and
officials abroad would be subject to prosecution in any number of places, often
for political or ideological reasons, and that this would hamstring American
action.

Some diplomats here say that since the American-led war on terrorism is
expanding from Afghanistan to the Philippines, Georgia and Yemen, the fears of
the American military must be even more acute.

At the International Peace Academy, a research organization with close ties to
the United Nations, David Malone, a Canadian diplomat who is the organization's
president, said that since Sept. 11 the United States had received considerable
sympathy from many developing nations and seemed to be reaching out more to Arab
leaders.

But, he added, at the same time Washington seems to be distancing itself from
some of its closest allies on a range of issues, including how to deal with
Iraq, and in rejecting international courts, which all European nations and most
NATO members support.

Diplomats say they are perplexed that the United States appears not to accept
that terrorism needs to be fought with a maximum of international cooperation,
as Secretary General Annan has said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERVIEWS (79%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAWYERS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); JUDGES
(69%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);
COUNCIL OF EUROPE (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); ALSACE, FRANCE (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (93%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); SERBIA
(79%); FRANCE (74%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             332 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Apprehension Grows as Colombia Rebels Step Up Pace and Intensity of Their
Attacks

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1556 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, March 3


Peace talks between the government and Marxist rebels collapsed just 11 days
ago, and it took no time at all for Colombia to plunge into a new, ominous phase
of the long-running conflict. Almost immediately after the talks ended, the
rebels launched a coordinated series of attacks aimed at spreading misery across
this vast country while demonstrating the government's inability to stop them.

In attacks that have raised concern in Washington and that analysts say may
foreshadow what a wider war could look like, the guerrillas have bombed
electrical towers, bridges and municipal waterworks while mining highways and
stepping up roadblocks.

These kinds of attacks are not new in Colombia's 38-year-old conflict, but the
rebels have dramatically stepped up the pace of the aggression and their
selection of targets appears increasingly audacious. They have bombed two
aqueducts, as well as the infrastructure at the reservoir that provides water to
this sprawling capital, causing little damage but heightening alarm.

Since the talks ended, more than 110 municipalities in 5 of the country's 32
provinces, representing 10 percent of the country's urban centers, have been
left in total darkness or forced to ration electricity because of rebel
bombings. Meanwhile, the sabotage of transmission towers has cut phone service
in 76 cities and towns across six provinces.

"We should be prepared for the possibility that we will suffer bigger terrorist
strikes," President Andres Pastrana told the nation in a televised address last
week.

The rebel aggression began hours after Mr. Pastrana broke off negotiations with
the rebels on Feb. 20, ending a three-year peace effort. It has prompted the
government to declare a large region of south and central Colombia a war zone in
which the army has new authority to bring order.

In six provinces, nearly one-third of the country, the military can impose
curfews, regulate the hours of operations for businesses, register civilians and
prohibit weapons and drinking. The government is also offering rewards of up to
$430,000 for information leading to the arrest of rebel leaders.

The deteriorating situation is being closely watched in Washington, where some
lawmakers and Pentagon officials are pushing for a lifting of restrictions to
allow American counterinsurgency aid to this country's army. Among other things,
that would allow the Colombians to use helicopters given to them by the United
States to attack rebels. Right now, such helicopters and other American hardware
are restricted to use in securing and destroying coca fields, the source of
cocaine.

The Bush administration has decided, for now, to limit American involvement
mostly to the war on drugs, which undercuts the rebels' main source of
financing.

Many, if not most, American lawmakers have opposed counterinsurgency aid because
of the Colombian army's poor human rights record, but the increasing aggression
and brutality on the part of a rebel group that Washington considers a terrorist
organization could sway lawmakers, some officials on Capitol Hill say.

"Some say it's not Al Qaeda, but these guys are trafficking up and down the
Pacific coast," said a senior Republican Congressional aide who works on issues
related to Colombia. "Those people who are following Colombia know that we have
to make a change of policy."

So far, the Bush administration has agreed to provide some intelligence
information to the Colombian government while smoothing the way to provide
replacement parts for helicopters used in counterdrug operations. But analysts
like Col. Joseph R. Nunez, a professor at the United States Army War College who
has written about this conflict, said those moves were not enough.

"You have these forces wreaking havoc and they're going to have to be
addressed," Colonel Nunez said. "If we wait too long, we're going to regret it."

The new wave of violence began after Mr. Pastrana, in a nationally televised
address, angrily broke off talks with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
after four of its rebels hijacked an airliner and kidnapped a senior senator who
had been on board.

The Colombian Air Force then began bombing a large region in southern Colombia
that Mr. Pastrana had ceded to the rebels in 1998 as a venue for peace talks.
Elite army forces soon entered as the rebel group, known by its Spanish acronym,
FARC, withdrew from the main urban areas into the jungle while offering little
resistance.

But within hours after the army offensive began, rebel units in the remote south
struck back, focusing on infrastructure in a strategy that appeared aimed at
isolating and confounding Colombia's 40 million people.

"The idea is they are going to open various fronts to have a presence throughout
the country," said an official from a humanitarian organization whose group has
talked to the rebels. "I think they can paralyze much of the commerce and
transit in the country."

Colombian Army intelligence has shown that the rebels are particularly intent on
sowing misery among the middle and upper classes in the cities while avoiding
large-scale confrontations with a more capable army.

"We have to hit with everything we have, so that everything falls: bridges,
towers, the dam," a high-ranking guerrilla chief known as Romana, said in a
radio transmission intercepted by the military and published in Bogota's leading
newspaper, El Tiempo. "We have to deliver an urban blow, so the oligarchy feels
the war."

Outside this city of seven million, which has rarely felt much of a rebel
presence, guerrillas last week blew up a bridge and skirmished with troops in
three communities, one of them, Fomeque, just an hour's drive away.

"We were panicked, frightened that they would take the town," Javier Rios,
Fomeque's mayor, said on Friday, sitting in an office overlooking the charming
mountain town where soldiers repelled the rebels. "To me, it looks like the
rebels want to blockade the capital, then block the food supplies and the
water."

The stepped-up violence is alarming because while negotiations were going on,
the rebels are believed to have obtained sophisticated arms, added funds and
recruited hundreds of fighters to a 17,000-member force.

"They really and truly are not afraid of war," said a Western diplomat who has
talked to rebel commanders. "They expected there would be war. They feel they
can benefit from war. They don't believe the army can significantly hurt them."

Former rebels interviewed this week said that within the organization, guerrilla
leaders and subordinates spoke openly of how the group never intended for the
peace process to end in an accord.

Rather, the plan had been to use the talks to stall, while strengthening forces
until violence reached the point where the government would break off talks, the
former rebels said. Then the rebel group would launch a wave of attacks against
the nation's infrastructure, in yet another stage in the group's relentless
effort to topple the government.

"The thinking has always been to take power," said Wilmer Gomez, 27, who
deserted three months ago from a southern region where the rebels hold sway.
"This is what you are seeing now, blowing up bridges, kidnapping high government
functionaries, dynamiting towers, aqueducts, oil pipelines."

Another rebel, Luis Enrique Gaitan, who operated with a guerrilla unit outside
Bogota, said the final goal had always been "to go into the biggest cities and
block roads so there is not commerce, nothing, so the government feels
pressured."

Military officials said the army is prepared to protect vital infrastructure
while driving the rebels out of their former safe haven, which is twice the size
of New Jersey. And virtually all military analysts agree that the rebels are not
strong enough to take power.

But the same analysts said the army, while having improved training and
mobility, is not strong or large enough to protect all crucial targets or launch
a knockout blow.

Already, the rebels have shown that their hit-and-run tactics are hard to stop.
Last week rebels killed a senator, Martha Catalina Daniels, and two companions,
the police said today. Ms. Daniels had been shot execution-style and was
tortured before her death, they said. On Feb. 23, the group kidnapped an
internationally known presidential candidate, Ingrid Betancourt, adding her to
five congressmen already being held as hostages. The kidnapping shocked
politicians, particularly those vying for congressional seats in March 10
legislative elections.

"I had to suspend campaigning and instead send out my aides, who take videos
that voters can see," said Senator Jaime Dussan, who is running for re-election.
"I feel terror, because if they can pull you off an airplane, then they can get
you anywhere."

The effect of the violence, though, has been hardest on residents of southern
and eastern Colombia, where the rebels have mined roads, rigged abandoned buses
with explosives and relentlessly attacked electrical towers and generators.

In some cities, the lack of road access has caused commerce to grind to a halt.
Shops have been shuttered because there is no electricity and food supplies have
dwindled, forcing the government to airlift provisions into at least one
provincial capital, Florencia.

"Right now," said Alvaro Pacheco, the mayor of Florencia, "we all feel like we
are hostages."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Martha Catalina Daniels, a senator, was assassinated by rebels.
Her body was found yesterday. (Agence France-Presse); In Florencia, rebel
attacks on electrical towers cut power and left restaurant patrons eating by
candlelight. (Associated Press); Colombian troops patrolled a dam near Bogota
yesterday, part of stepped-up security after new rebel attacks. (Zoe Selsky for
The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ARMIES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); TERRORISM (77%); CITY LIFE (75%); CITIES (75%); NARCOTERRORISM (69%); US
PRESIDENTS (69%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (66%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(65%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%); COCAINE (63%); CURFEW (62%); HELICOPTERS
(60%); DRUG POLICY (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); TELEPHONE SERVICES (51%); ARRESTS
(50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (59%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (90%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             334 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1147 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

Mideast Casualties Mount As Anger Fuels Attacks
Israel attacked Palestinian targets in Gaza and the West Bank. In all, at least
17 Palestinians were killed, after a weekend in which 22 Israelis were slain in
Palestinian attacks. Many of the dead from both sides were children and
civilians. Early today, a gunman fired into a Tel Aviv nightspot, killing 3
Israelis and wounding 30 before he was shot, the police said.   A1

In Washington, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt promoted the idea of a
face-to-face meeting in his country between Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Irael
and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat.   A14


Report on Rights Abuses
Many of the Bush administration's strategic allies in the war on terror abused
human rights in their own countries last year, according to a report by the
State Department.   A14

A Drug's Northern Route
Lax regulation of chemicals and a long, porous border have made Canada the
primary supply route for trafficking in methamphetamine, a stimulant best known
in the United States as "speed," American and Canadian law enforcement officials
said.   A7

Argentina Adds Export Tax
The government, still reeling from an economic crisis and resulting social
unrest, said it was imposing a special tax on all exports to keep popular social
programs functioning.   A3

World Briefing   A15

NATION CHALLENGED   A8-11

7 G.I.'s Killed in Battle In Afghan Mountains
At least seven American soldiers were killed in eastern Afghanistan in some of
the fiercest fighting of the five-month Afghanistan war, American officials
said. The deaths, which involved troop-carrying helicopters, came as American
ground forces took the lead in a large-scale combat operation for the first
time.   A1

President Bush expressed sadness at the deaths of American soldiers in
Afghanistan but said he was more focused than ever in hunting down Al Qaeda
fighters.   A8

Payments to 9/11 Families
The Bush administration is close to making changes in the Victims Compensation
Fund that may result in scores of families receiving hundreds of thousands of
dollars more than the original rules allowed.   A1

Ridge Will Refuse to Testify
White House officials said the director of homeland security, Tom Ridge, would
refuse to testify before a Senate committee about President Bush's call for $38
billion in domestic security programs because he is a presidential adviser, not
a cabinet member.   A8

Airport Security Alert
Terminals at Los Angeles International were evacuated for the seventh time in
seven days after an inert, replica grenade was found in a passenger's baggage.
A10

Delay in New Bag Screening
The Transportation Department said it would not meet a Dec. 31 deadline that
Congress set for screening all airline checked baggage with costly
explosive-detection systems.   A10

In the Dark About Bomb Threat
Several top New York officials said the Bush administration should have told
them about an unconfirmed intelligence report in October that said terrorists
planned to smuggle a nuclear weapon into New York City. A White House
spokeswoman said administration policy was to share credible information about
threats.   A11

NATIONAL   A16-20

Parishioners Are Asked To Decide Priests' Fate
Maine's Roman Catholic diocese has asked parish councils at two churches to vote
on whether they want to keep priests who confessed publicly that they had
engaged in sexual misconduct. One reason for not removing the priests outright
is a shortage of priests.   A1

The archbishop of Los Angeles is quietly removing Roman Catholic priests
involved in sex abuse cases.   A20

Impasse Over New Voter Rules
The Senate set aside legislation to overhaul the nation's election procedures
while efforts are made to thrash out a compromise.   A18

New Name for an Old Process
The Senate Agriculture Committee chairman, Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa,
inserted a provision in a bill changing the labeling of irradiated hamburger to
pasteurized beef.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

New Jersey Court Tightens Rules on Vehicle Searches
The New Jersey Supreme Court imposed limits on the consensual auto searches at
the heart of the furor over racial profiling by state troopers. The court said
that before asking a driver's permission to search, an officer must have
"reasonable and articulable suspicion" of criminal activity.   B1

Deadly Brooklyn Fire
Four people died in an apartment fire, but a neighbor said the toll would have
been greater if not for the warning spread by a badly burned 6-year-old boy,
Shamar Greene, who lost his mother and two siblings. He was hospitalized in
critical condition.   B1

Rebuke Over Child Policy
A federal judge excoriated New York City officials for what he said was a
routine practice of removing children from battered mothers by claiming that the
mothers were "engaging in domestic violence."   B3

SPORTS   D1-8

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Faulty Recall Puts 400 at Risk
A defective medical device, used by doctors at Johns Hopkins hospital who said
they did not know it had been recalled, may have exposed more than 400 patients
to bacteria that can cause a dangerous lung infection.   A1

Claim of Small-Scale Fusion
Scientists will say in the journal Science on Friday that they achieved nuclear
fusion in a tabletop experiment. Others expressed skepticism.   A20

Health & Fitness   D6

FASHION   B7

LIVING ARTS   E1-8

OBITUARIES   C14-15

Marvin E. Frankel
An outspoken litigator, judge and legal scholar whose views helped to establish
sentencing guidelines for the federal courts, he was 81.   C15

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Court Takes Wireless Case
The Supreme Court agreed to consider the government's argument that it had the
right to seize valuable wireless communications licenses from a bankrupt
company, Nextwave Telecom, and auction them to the largest communications
carriers. The companies agreed to pay $16 billion for the licenses, but Nextwave
sued the F.C.C. to block the deal.   C1

Koppel Responds to ABC
Ted Koppel, in a carefully worded, diplomatic response to ABC's efforts to
replace his news program, "Nightline," with a show starring David Letterman,
said he hoped the program would not lose its time slot, but hinted that if it
did, it might find another home, and not necessarily at ABC.   C1

Optimism Pushes Stocks Up
Stocks rallied powerfully for the second consecutive session amid signs that the
economy was recovering more quickly and strongly than investors expected. The
Dow gained 217.96 points, or 2.1 percent, to 10,586.82, its highest level in
almost seven months. The S.& P. 500 rose 22.06 points, or 2 percent, to
1,153.84, and the Nasdaq soared 56.58 points, or 3.1 percent, to 1,859.32.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Unfinished war in Afghanistan; playing politics with trade; for a
new obstruction trial.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); FAMILY (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); BAGGAGE HANDLING (84%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (84%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); EXPORT TRADE (79%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); MOUNTAINS (78%);
BOMBINGS (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (76%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); WAR ON
TERROR (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); TAXES &
TAXATION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (73%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (73%);
AIRLINES (73%); EXPLOSIVES (72%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); AL-QAEDA (69%); CHEMICALS
REGULATION & POLICY (68%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (68%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (68%); METHAMPHETAMINE (67%); AVIATION SECURITY (64%); AIRPORTS
(64%); HELICOPTERS (63%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); HOSNI MUBARAK (55%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL
(94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CANADA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EGYPT (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             335 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan Says Terrorism's Roots Are Broader Than Poverty

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 6


Secretary General Kofi Annan told an audience of foreign policy experts today
that terrorism was not necessarily linked to poverty but rose from a broader mix
of problems caused by bad government, opportunistic politicians and militant
leaders who exploit grievances.

"The poor have enough burdens without being considered likely terrorists simply
because they are poor," he said.

Speaking at the center for preventive action at the Council on Foreign
Relations, Mr. Annan also said the world's failure over a decade to act on
warning signs in Afghanistan, battered by political, economic and natural
disasters, resulted in the catastrophe of Sept. 11.

"There is a clear, if complicated, trail from the absence of engagement with
Afghanistan in the 1990's to the creation of a terrorist haven there to the
attacks on the World Trade Center," he said.

After Soviet troops were forced to withdraw from Afghanistan in 1989 and a
fractious coalition of holy warriors took power in 1992, the United States and
other Western nations turned their backs as the country tore itself apart with
infighting, leading to the victory of the Taliban in 1995-1996. Then the
American government refused to deal with that movement or allow it to take the
country's United Nations seat, against the advice of some experts here.

Except for the work of relief officials from the United Nations and private
organizations, Afghanistan was totally isolated and became Al Qaeda's base.

In answering questions after his speech, Mr. Annan emphasized the urgent need to
create a secure environment not just in Kabul, the Afghan capital, but in other
areas as well. He said that his sense was that governments would agree to renew
the mandate of the international force in Afghanistan, but that placing forces
outside the capital was "much more problematic." Calls to train an Afghan force
to maintain security were fine, he said, but added, "What do you do in the
meantime?"

In the Security Council, Afghanistan got scant attention as members led by the
United States and Russia delivered ultimatums to the Taliban, but took no other
action. Now, the Council is trying to be more assertive, and Mr. Annan gave
support to this trend in his speech.

He said the United Nations as a whole was determined to look ahead, focusing on
deterring violence rather than waiting to react to it. He drew attention to
visits by members of the Security Council to troubled areas like Eritrea and
Ethiopia and West Africa. In recent weeks, the Council has been briefed on the
political standoff in Madagascar and the possible renewal of civil war in
Liberia.

Moving into new and not always welcome territory, Mr. Annan said he would be
referring to the Security Council "information from the U.N. system on cases of
serious human rights violations and on potential conflict situations arising
from ethnic, religious and territorial disputes, poverty and lack of
development."

He said preventing terrorism and violent conflict involved "addressing those
grievances which terrorists find useful to exploit for their own ends."

"Where massive and systematic political, economic and social inequalities are
found, and where no legitimate means of addressing them exists," Mr. Annan said,
"an environment is created in which peaceful solutions all too often lose out
against extreme and violent alternatives."

The secretary general acknowledged that most countries did not want to hear from
outsiders about potentially serious problems within their borders.

He learned that two years ago when he suggested that claims of sovereignty were
no excuse for mistreating citizens and getting away with it.

Today, Mr. Annan said the way around this resistance was not to talk of the
world's "duty to intervene" but rather of a country's "responsibility to
protect" all people within its borders.

Mr. Annan said that within the power of his own office, he was committed to
promoting third-party mediation in areas of potential conflict as well as to
using his own personal diplomacy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary General Kofi Annan spoke about terrorism's causes.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (90%); POLITICS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY
(90%); TALIBAN (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); TRENDS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); RELIGION (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(71%); NATURAL DISASTERS (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); ECONOMIC NEWS (60%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AND TRENDS

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); AL-QAEDA
(82%) ;UNITED NATIONS; COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);
ERITREA (79%); AFRICA (79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%); LIBERIA
(79%); MADAGASCAR (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN;  RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             336 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE BALKANS;
Details of a Terrorist Plot Still Cloaked in Confusion

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 483 words

DATELINE: SKOPJE, Macedonia, March 6


A murky front in the war on terrorism has opened in this tense Balkan nation, as
security forces last weekend killed seven foreigners they said were planning
attacks on embassies and arrested another four men for a similar plot last
month.

The four arrested men -- two Jordanians and two Bosnians -- were handed over for
deportation to American authorities, said a senior Macedonian government
official. The official said he believed that they were taken to the naval base
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

In an interview today, Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski said the Jordanians and
Bosnians were arrested three weeks ago, after three months of surveillance, near
the United States Embassy. A later search of their apartment uncovered a
document showing that they planned to kill the interior minister and Macedonia's
prime minister and attack Western embassies, he said. A computer floppy disk, he
said, contained about 10,000 pages of data related to Islamic holy wars.

Lesley High, a spokesman for the American Embassy here, declined to comment,
beyond confirming that "we are in cooperation with the Macedonian government."

The fate of the four arrested men is but one uncertainty. Information is so
scant that even diplomats whose embassies were purported to be in danger claim
to to know nothing about any planned attacks.

This much is known: early last Saturday, special police forces shot dead seven
men in a vineyard just north of the capital, Skopje.

Mr. Boskovski announced that the dead men were Pakistanis planning to attack the
American, British and German Embassies. He said later that the men had also
fought in the war in Afghanistan, but he offered no definitive evidence. Foreign
diplomats saw some of the bodies and said the dead men did not appear to be from
Macedonia.

Today, in an interview, Mr. Boskovski said one of the men had written the word
"Pakistan" on a piece of paper, apparently practicing Latin script. He also said
without further detail that one man had foreign addresses and telephone numbers.

Mr. Boskovski said police seized heavy weapons and also found 15 new uniforms
from the National Liberation Army, the main group of ethnic Albanian guerrillas
who fought the government last year until NATO peacekeepers arrived.

This weekend, Mr. Boskovski said the uniforms cemented a link he and other
hardliners have long said existed between foreign Islamic militants and the
guerrillas, thus putting the government, often criticized for excesses against
Albanians, squarely on the side of fighting terrorism.

But even in his own government, Mr. Boskovski's account has been met with
skepticism. He is considered one of the most divisive politicians in Macedonia.

Human rights groups, military monitors and foreign diplomats have said that they
were not seeing as significant an influx of foreign Islamic fighters to
Macedonia as happened in Bosnia and Kosovo in the 1990's.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ljube Boskovski, the interior minister, right, with seized
weapons. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (93%); TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); RELIGION (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
DEPORTATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); SHOOTINGS (73%); NAVIES
(73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (61%); POLICE FORCES (56%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES FOREIGN SERVICE;
DEPORTATION

PERSON: FISHER, IAN

CITY: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (93%); NEW YORK, NY,
USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (95%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); ALBANIA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); CUBA (88%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); GERMANY (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA (79%); SOUTHEASTERN
EUROPE (73%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC);
SKOPJE (MACEDONIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             338 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Victims' Shrine Made of Skulls Is Dismantled By Cambodia

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 435 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 10


Skull by human skull, Cambodian officials today dismantled a memorial to the
atrocities committed by the former Khmer Rouge government.

Before the work got under way, Buddhist monks prayed for the souls of the 300
people who were among the victims of the former Communist government. The
remains were part of a map of Cambodia made of skulls and displayed publicly
since 1979 as a testament to the Khmer Rouge's brutality. Museum officials said
the skulls were decaying.

The map, held together by wire, was taken apart after the Buddhist ceremony, and
the human remains were placed in a wooden case enclosed by glass.

Hundreds of thousands of Cambodian and foreign visitors to the Tuol Sleng
Genocide Museum had viewed the grisly, 129-square-foot wall installation of
skulls and bones.

About 1.7 million people died from 1975 to 1979 under the Khmer Rouge. Many died
of disease, starvation and overwork; others were executed. The Khmer Rouge
leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998, but many of his top aides live freely in Cambodia
after reaching deals with the government of Prime Minister Hun Sen.

The museum is at a Phnom Penh high school that the Khmer Rouge used as a prison
and torture center. The site was preserved by the Vietnamese Army, which deposed
the Khmer Rouge and occupied Cambodia for 10 years, until 1989.

"It left a strong and powerful impression on me," said a Mexican tourist,
Rosalia Contreras, a 36-year-old dental researcher, after viewing the map of
skulls.

"I can't understand why people do this to each other," she said, tears running
down her cheeks.

Chey Sopheara, director of the museum, said the natural decay of the skulls made
it clear it was time to dismantle the map.

Youk Chhang, director of the Documentation Center of Cambodia, which has been
gathering evidence of Khmer Rouge atrocities, said he supported the removal of
the skulls.

"Cambodians and foreigners should be educated about the tragic past but
publicity like this is not necessary," he said. "Scientific explanation does
more to help people understand."

The empty place on the wall will be replaced by a large, color map of Cambodia,
identifying many of the Khmer Rouge's mass graves and prisons. A photograph of
the skull map will also be displayed.

The removal of the icon of atrocities follows years of debate inside Cambodia
over the appropriateness of displaying the remains of Khmer Rouge victims in
memorials around the country.

King Norodom Sihanouk has said the remains should be cremated according to
Buddhist tradition. Mr. Hun Sen has said the memories of past evils must be
preserved to educate future generations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (90%); BUDDHISTS &
BUDDHISM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); TORTURE
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TRAVEL  HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (74%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (73%); CORRECTIONS (71%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(69%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  MONUMENTS AND
MEMORIALS

ORGANIZATION: KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (97%)

REGION: CAMBODIA;  PHNOM PENH (CAMBODIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Uzbekistan: Leader To Meet Bush

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 85 words


President Islam Karimov is to meet President Bush today in Washington to discuss
the new ties the two countries have forged during the American-led war on
terrorism. The autocratic leader, a former Communist Party boss, emerged as an
important United States ally when he allowed Americantroops to use an Uzbek
military base for operations in neighboring Afghanistan. A State Department
report on human rights issued last week said Uzbekistan is an "authoritarian"
state with a "very poor" human rights record.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); HIJACKING (87%); POLITICAL PARTIES (84%)
US-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-UZBEKISTAN;  TERRORISM;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); KARIMOV, ISLAM (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: UZBEKISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             343 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Sentences After Genocide

BYLINE:  By Marc Lacey (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 78 words


Rwandan courts had sentenced 660 people to death for crimes related to the 1994
genocide as of the end of last year, the Rwandan League for the Promotion and
Defense of Human Rights said.

Another 1,795 had been sentenced to life in prison, and 2,566 people were
acquitted. The group said 115,000 people were in jail awaiting trial on charges
of involvement in killing hundreds of thousands of members of the Tutsi ethnic
group as well as some Hutus.   Marc Lacey (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (88%); ACQUITTAL (86%); ETHNICITY (51%); ETHNIC GROUPS (51%) CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  TUTSI TRIBE;  HUTU TRIBE

PERSON: LACEY, MARC

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); AFRICA (74%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             344 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PRISONERS;
Marooned Taliban Count Out Grim Hours in an Afghan Jail

BYLINE:  By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1133 words

DATELINE: SHIBARGHAN, Afghanistan, March 10


On most days, lunchtime at the Jowzjan Jail opens with a macabre display of the
sick and dying Taliban prisoners, carried from their cells and laid in the dirt
for a few moments of fresh air and sun.

Splayed in silence atop baby blue blankets, the men appear dead. But then a limb
moves or a groan rises, and the guards understand that this prisoner or that is
well enough to be hauled back inside when lunchtime is done.

"Every 15 days or so, one of them dies," said Gen. Jura Beg, the warden. "We
don't have enough food for them anymore. We don't have medicine."

So unfolds the fate of the 3,000 Taliban prisoners brought here after the
American-backed campaign against them. Most were captured in Kunduz, where
thousands of Taliban and Al Qaeda soldiers threatened to fight to the death but
surrendered instead.

At the time, there was talk of handing the men over to the United Nations. There
were promises, by Afghans with little experience in the matter, that the
prisoners would be treated handsomely.

Today, nearly four months later, most such talk has died away. With the war
still smoldering and Afghanistan led by a fledging government, few people of
consequence appear to have time for the prisoners now. The Americans were here
in the beginning, photographing and tagging the inmates, trying to select the
worst ones. They took about 100 to Guantanamo, the American base in Cuba, Afghan
officials here said. The Uzbek government took at least 10 of its citizens. The
warden, in a traditional act of mercy, freed about 250, most of them either very
old or very sick, before the Muslim Id al-Adha holiday last month.

The remaining prisoners, all of them Afghan or Pakistani, appear to have been
largely forgotten.

"Everyone thinks: maybe today, maybe tomorrow," said Makhsood Khan, a
26-year-old Pakistani captured at Kunduz. "We count the days."

Standing outside his cell the other day, Mr. Khan reeked of the narrow cell he
shares with about 50 of his unbathed brethren, who pressed their faces against
the barred door to listen in silence.

Mr. Khan, like so many of those captured with the Taliban, portrayed himself as
a largely innocent man, tumbled about by historical currents he could neither
resist nor comprehend.

Shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Khan said, he was enlisted by his
cousin, Nasir Ahmed, a journalist for a militant newspaper called "Islamic
Attack," to join him on a trip to Afghanistan. His cousin needed a photographer.

Mr. Khan, an illiterate auto mechanic from Islamabad, Pakistan, said he had seen
in his cousin's invitation a way to fulfill his duty to be a good Muslim.

"I was a photographer for the jihad," Mr. Khan explained. "Jihad has many
aspects: fighting, newspapers and taking photographs."

Mr. Khan, and the roughly 800 Pakistanis imprisoned here, face an especially
uncertain future. As foreigners who took part in a civil war, they will have to
depend not just on the persistence of their own government to get them out but
also on the mercy of the victors to let them go. Some Afghan officials have
talked of putting the men on trial in Afghanistan, or of turning them over to
Pakistan, once the Taliban's chief patron.

General Beg, the warden and a friend of Abdul Rashid Dostum, the Uzbek warlord
who controls the prison, said no decision has been made about the prisoners'
fate.

"No one from the government has visited here," he said

From his office overlooking the prison yard, General Beg sighed like a man who
had long ago given up. He has 3,000 men in 40 cells, in a prison designed to
hold about 800. He has had to reduce food rations for the prisoners, he said,
because of government cutbacks. Lacking medicine, the handful of doctors
available here are able to do little more than provide comfort for those who
have fallen ill.

The drinking water, the general said, comes out of a nearby stream. "It is full
of garbage," he said.

A tour of the prison grounds seems to confirm General Beg's bleak assessment.

Each cell is dark, narrow and deep, holding dozens of men, many of whom can be
seen lying on dirty mattresses or huddled in blankets in a corner. The light is
wan, and the corridors are open to the elements. Guards pour water from pitchers
into mouths agape on the other side of the bars. The heads of many of the men
are bare, shaved to discourage the lice that have run rampant through the
crowded cells.

"Some people sleep, some read the Holy Koran, some people pick lice off their
body," Mr. Khan said.

In January, a team from Physicians for Human Rights, which is based in Boston,
found an epidemic of dysentery and jaundice, the latter indicative, the group
said, of hepatitis A. The group said the conditions at Jowzjan were in "grave
violation of international standards for the treatment of prisoners" and called
on the United States to ensure that conditions improve.

Exactly how many prisoners have died here seems a mystery. General Beg estimated
that "six or seven" had died within the prison walls, most of them from diseases
they had brought into the jail. Physicians for Human Rights quoted the warden as
saying in January that "many, many prisoners had already died," mainly from
dysentery, some from pneumonia. The prisoners themselves whispered to a visitor
that one spate of food poisoning alone had felled six of their comrades last
month.

The food, when it finally came, was delivered in large communal bowls to feed as
many as 20 men at a time. There were no plates and no forks. The usual fare is a
thick stewy dish of rice and carrots called shola. The men sneered at the
concoction through the bars, but lunged at it with their dirty hands when they
were finally given the chance.

As the men fought over bits of rice, the guards disappeared inside for the
cleaning of the cells. Moments later, they re-emerged with a wheelbarrow full of
human waste and newly shaved hair. Just outside the cell, 12 men lay on the
ground at odd angles, wrapped in blue blankets.

After a time, the guards rolled up two of them and carried them away.

An Afghan prisoner, Enayatullah, looked on. He figured that it was the food,
once again, that had taken down his comrades -- that and the overcrowding, he
said. The cell in which he and his sick comrades were confined was ordinarily
packed so tightly, he said, that he was often unable to stretch his legs.

"There is not enough room for everyone to sleep at once," he said.

Mr. Enayatullah, a Taliban soldier captured at Kunduz who uses only one name,
said he was trying to be patient in his wait to go home to his village in
southern Afghanistan. But as the days grew longer, he said, more and more
prisoners were beginning to realize that they may be in for tougher times yet.

"The summer is what we are worried about," he said. "Can you imagine how hot the
cell will be in the summer?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: About 3,000 Taliban and Qaeda prisoners have been at Jowzjan
Jail, in Shibarghan, since they surrendered four months ago during the
American-backed campaign in Kunduz. A Taliban prisoner enters his cell. (Maxim
Marmur/Associated Press, for The New York Times)(pg. A19)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PHOTOGRAPHY
SERVICES (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); PRISONS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); EID AL-ADHA
(68%); ARMED FORCES (68%); NAVIES (66%); RELIGION (63%); VISUAL ARTISTS (62%);
WRITERS (60%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); UNITED NATIONS (55%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: FILKINS, DEXTER

CITY: SHERGHAN, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
(79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (92%); UZBEKISTAN
(92%); CUBA (86%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  KUNDUZ (AFGHANISTAN);
SHIBARGHAN (AFGHANISTAN);  UZBEKISTAN;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             345 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Russian Defector Says Army Killed Civilians in Chechnya

BYLINE:   By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1104 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 16


A Russian Army officer who fled the battlefield as Moscow sent military forces
into Chechnya in 1999 says that young fascist cadets in his elite airborne unit
encouraged soldiers to execute civilians during the assault.

The officer, Capt. Andrei Samorodov, a communications specialist in Russia's
21st Airborne Brigade, deserted his posting in November 1999 and moved his wife
and two children into a village in the Russian countryside. Later he made his
way to Mexico, took a bus to the United States border, forded the Rio Grande
near Laredo, Tex., and turned himself in to surprised Border Patrol officers.

"I love Russia and I have been in love with the Russian Army since childhood,"
Mr. Samorodov said in a recent interview in San Antonio, where he now makes a
living as an electrician and a fencing instructor while he studies English three
days a week. "But I was faced with a choice: I could either leave or die."

Mr. Samorodov said he had confronted unruly recruits from neo-fascist groups in
his unit. He tore swastikas off the uniforms of some cadets, he said, and
reported to his commanding officer their illegal efforts to incite troopers to
murder civilians. But those efforts were rebuffed, and he was threatened with
death, he said.

In one instance, Mr. Samorodov said, he came upon a roadside execution of
Chechen civilians. He stopped to intervene and was arrested by another officer
who was presiding over the killing, he said in the interview. He was sent back
to his unit under guard, beaten and threatened further. Unidentified men showed
up outside his home in Stavropol, a southern regional capital near Chechnya, and
killed the family dog in front of his 13-year-old son, Yevgeny, he said.

The allegations represent a significant confirmation from within the ranks of
the armed forces that civilians were singled out by soldiers who were driven by
ethnic hatred or ultranationalist ideologues to kill Chechen civilians. This was
at a time Russian commanders were stating openly that any Chechen male between
the ages of 15 and 60 was considered a rebel.

In late 1999, a number of human rights organizations expressed their alarm that
Russian forces entering Chechnya were executing civilians during the campaign to
suppress the rebellion there, including the areas where Captain Samorodov's
brigade was fighting.

Mr. Samorodov, now 40, himself betrays an ethnic bias against Chechens as
chronically rebellious and prone to banditry, but he said he regarded the murder
of civilians as a crime and said he was disturbed by the breakdown in discipline
and support for the armed forces.

The greatest threat to discipline in the ranks, he said, arose from the
neo-fascist party Russian National Unity. Founded in 1990 by Aleksandr
Barkashov, the party was banned in Moscow for its openly fascist and
anti-Semitic views, but cadets from the party flooded into the ranks of military
units around Chechnya and some splintered factions still thrive in southern
Russia.

A Kremlin spokesman, Aleksandr Machevsky, said he had no knowledge of this rare
case of post-cold-war defection, but he questioned the officer's motives. "Why
didn't he do the right thing and go to the prosecutors?" Mr. Machevsky asked.
"Maybe he just wanted to go to the United States."

After spending six months in an immigration detention center, where he gave
United States intelligence officers a detailed briefing on the current state of
Russian battlefield communications and cryptography, Mr. Samorodov was granted
political asylum in the United States on May 12, 2000. At his hearing, however,
a government lawyer argued that he might have simply been a deserter from the
Russian Army.

Mr. Samorodov's defection emerged last fall when a San Antonio newspaper made an
appeal to its readers to pay the air fare to bring the former officer's wife and
children to the United States. They arrived three months ago from Stavropol
under the same grant of asylum.

John Blatz, an immigration lawyer in San Antonio for the Refugee Aid Project,
which took up Mr. Samordov's case, said a critical factor in persuading Judge
Susan Castro to grant asylum had been the numerous news reports that he and Mr.
Samorodov were able to compile from the Internet. They showed that Russian
National Unity had organized a training camp in Stavropol for "Russian Knights,"
made up of teenagers gathered from the poverty-stricken region and indoctrinated
in ultranationalist ideology.

About 400 of these Russian Knights joined Captain Samorodov's 21st Airborne
Brigade and its sister 101st Brigade of Interior Ministry forces in 1999. That
was when the Russian Army was unleashing its assault on Chechnya to end the rule
of rebel forces who had invaded the neighboring territory of Dagestan and who
were being blamed for terrorist bombings in other parts of Russia.

"Andrei had serious problems" with the cadets from the Russian Knights that
entered his unit, Mr. Blatz said, referring to his client. "He abhorred what he
saw as the rise of fascism."

The party leader in Stavropol at the time, Andrei Dudinov, has denied that the
party is fascist. But in speeches he is known for drawing comparisons between
post-Soviet Russia and Germany in the 1930's and likes to say that Hitler's
"Mein Kampf" is a "must" read "for any intelligent man," especially the passage,
"He who controls the streets controls the politics."

Reached by telephone in Stavropol, he denied any knowledge that the cadets he
trained had been involved in inciting atrocities against civilians.

"I know many people in the 21st division and there could not have been such an
occurrence," he said. As for Mr. Samorodov, he added, "he is just pulling you by
the nose."

Mr. Samorodov, who is now engaged in the daily struggle of working to support
his family in the tiny clapboard house filled with donated furniture from the
fencing students and their parents who support him, winces when he thinks about
what his commanders might be saying about him back in Russia.

"My father has not spoken to me since I left," he said. "There is always the
question of the honor of the uniform." He said he still felt that he had somehow
violated that honor, and he expressed a strong reluctance to speak at length
about his wartime experiences in Chechnya. He also professes a disdain for
Russia's political leaders because of their failure to support the armed forces
in the wake of the Soviet collapse.

"We fought for Russia," he said, "not for Moscow."

Nonetheless, faced as he was with the influx of soldiers who were determined to
commit war crimes against Chechens, he said "that is what caused me to run."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 27, 2002



CORRECTION: An article on March 17 reported the account of a Russian Army
officer who said that he fled the battlefield as Moscow sent military forces
into Chechnya in 1999 and that young fascist cadets in his elite airborne unit
encouraged soldiers to execute civilians during the assault. The officer, Andrei
Samorodov, told The Times that he had felt so threatened by the young fascists
that he was forced to flee Russia, arriving in Mexico and then, in November
1999, crossing illegally into the United States, where he turned himself in to
border patrol officers.

Two days after the Times article appeared, the Russian newspaper Izvestia
described Mr. Samorodov as an impostor. At that time, neither Mr. Samorodov nor
his lawyer in the United States responded to queries from The Times about the
Izvestia report. The Times should have tried to contact the Russian commander
who was quoted in Izvestia, but it did not.

Almost a month later, in mid-April, a Kremlin official who had been quoted in
the Times article approached the newspaper's bureau in Moscow and produced
documents suggesting that Mr. Samorodov was dismissed from the Army in 1993 and
did not fight in Chechnya in 1999. A researcher for The Times visited Mr.
Samorodov's hometown, where he confirmed the Kremlin official's account. A
detailed article appears today, on this page.

Mr. Samorodov still refuses to comment to The Times.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andrei Samorodov says threats forced him to flee Russia after
confronting fascist army cadets. He is now a fencing coach in San Antonio. (J.
Michael Short/San Antonio Express-News)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (92%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(85%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CHILDREN (76%); BORDER CONTROL (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); DOGS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); ARRESTS (64%); MURDER (51%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: TYLER, PATRICK E; SAMORODOV, ANDREI

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); SAN ANTONIO, TX, USA (93%); LAREDO, TX,
USA (79%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             347 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 20, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Father Knows Worst

BYLINE:  By MAUREEN DOWD;  E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Here's a nice story about a priest:

Once, in grade school, I was late, and afraid to go in and face the wrath of
Sister Hiltruda.

The charming Father Montgomery found me crying in the schoolyard and offered to
bring me in.

As I entered the classroom, holding his hand, I smiled triumphantly at a
glowering Sister Hiltruda. She would not be able to utter a cross word to me, or
raise a ruler.

She and I both knew we were serfs in a feudal society where men made the rules
and set the tone.

As a Catholic and the daughter of a cop in Washington, I grew up caught in a
triple play of patriarchal cultures.

The church was run by men. The nation's capital was run by men. The law was run
by men.

Gradually, grudgingly, Congress, the White House and the police began to allow
women into power. But the church hierarchy stubbornly persisted in its allergy
to modernity, remaining a men's club, shrouded in hoary mists and incense.

A monsoon of sickening stories lately illustrates how twisted societies become
when women are either never seen, dismissed as second-class citizens or occluded
by testosterone: the church subsidizing pedophilia; the Afghan warlords'
resumption of pedophilia; the Taliban obliteration of women; the brotherhood of
Al Qaeda and Mohamed Atta's mysogynistic funeral instructions; the implosion of
the macho Enron Ponzi scheme; the repression of women, even American
servicewomen, by our allies the Saudis.

In Saudi Arabia Saturday, Dick Cheney did not press on human rights and
democracy, as he might have in China or North Korea. We want oil and we want
Saddam.

At the same time, Saudi newspapers broke custom to criticize the religious
police for letting 15 little girls die in a school blaze in Mecca.  The police
-- the Commission for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice -- stopped
men who tried to rescue the girls or open the school gates, telling them "it is
sinful to approach" the girls because they weren't wearing head scarves and
abayas, the traditional robes, and there could be no exposure of "females to
male strangers."

So even as our vice president was wooing Crown Prince Abdullah to visit
President Bush's ranch in Crawford, the Saudi police were operating on the
philosophy "Better a dead girl than a bareheaded girl."

Societies built on special privileges -- the all-male Saudi rulers, Catholic
priesthood and Taliban, and the boys' club running Enron -- become far too
invested in preserving those privileges. They will never do the kind of
soul-baring and housecleaning that might raise questions about the kind of
secret society that creates that kind of privilege.

The church says priests must be male because Jesus' apostles were male. So
should women have stayed out of U.S. government because the founding fathers
were male?

Celibacy is not church doctrine but a tradition from the Middle Ages. By that
logic, hospitals would still be using leeches.

It may be a news flash to the Vatican, but it's been clear for years that the
church is in a time warp, arrested in its psychosexual development. The vow of
celibacy became a magnet for men trying to flee carnal impulses they found
troubling. In some cases this meant homosexuality, in others pedophilia.

The last happy, hetero, celibate parish was run by Barry Fitzgerald and Bing
Crosby. (Or was it?)

We all knew boys who were pounced on in the rectory by priests. On a road trip
to the beach, my brother and his friends had to play "pink belly" with a priest
-- pulling down their pants and slapping their stomachs until they turned pink.

While teaching us not to lie or cheat, the church simply covered up its own
sins, recycling abusive priests and putting parish after parish of children at
risk, paying off victims and demanding their silence, refusing to admit that
sexually assaulting children was a destructive crime and not merely a moment of
moral weakness.

The church was hoist on its own ritual. The age of confession moved from the
little box to the TV box, and victims began to feel free to unearth their buried
pain.

We have turned a light on these cloistered, arrogant fraternities and they can
no longer justify themselves. Their indulgences, conducted in secret, have hurt
the welfare of their most vulnerable charges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MEN (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(90%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (90%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (87%); CHILD ABUSE
(71%); AL-QAEDA (70%); HIJACKING (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); POLICE
FORCES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); PONZI SCHEMES (50%) SEX CRIMES;  PRIESTS;
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  MEN

COMPANY: ENRON CREDITORS RECOVERY CORP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH; ENRON CORP; AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP)

INDUSTRY: SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (52%); DICK CHENEY (52%) DOWD, MAUREEN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); AFGHANISTAN (90%); CHINA
(79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (73%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             349 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Free the Hatemongers!

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  Paul Krugman is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: SANA, Yemen


At a roadside stand I picked up some cassette tapes of speeches by radical
Muslim leaders.

"We are asking for those who are killing us to be killed -- Jews," thunders one.

Another declares: "Muslims must not follow the Christians and Jews. Anyone who
follows them becomes one of them, and God says he will not accept anyone but
Muslims."

Then there's a tape of radical songs, including: "I'll make jihad against the
pigs" -- meaning Jews.

So what should be done about the militant Islamists who spew this kind of hate
speech? That is, I think, one of the crucial questions for the Arab world -- and
for countries like ours that both despise the militants and cherish liberty.

For now, under American pressure, many Muslim countries are forcibly cracking
down on radical fundamentalists. Unfortunately, the result is less freedom and
democracy -- and in some cases, more credibility for the Islamists, who come to
be seen as authentic voices of opposition to cruel and corrupt regimes.

"Arab regimes are using the excuse of fighting terrorism to further limit the
small margin of democracy in these countries," a Yemeni warned me, prudently
asking that his name not be used.

The uncomfortable truth is that we have weakened terrorism, but also weakened
democracy.

Even Americans who normally care about human rights are unlikely to be squeamish
about the suppression of Islamic hatemongers. Muslim militants are not just
offensive in their speech but also destabilizing for their societies. But I
still find it both ignoble and ineffective for the United States to acquiesce in
their suppression, unless they directly incite violence.

Egypt has been torturing Islamic fundamentalists for decades. Same with Algeria.
Yet the only place where fundamentalists seem to be clearly losing popularity is
Iran, where they alienated ordinary people by ruling them.

So on balance I think it's unwise to avert our eyes as our pals in Uzbekistan,
Egypt and other countries imprison and torture fundamentalists. Rather, we
should allow Islamists (though not terrorists) to compete in the democratic
arena and club them there (with democratic clubs, I hasten to add, in case some
Arab police chief is reading this).

Will this work any better than force? I don't know. Plenty of people I asked
scoffed.

"These are not groups you can defeat by the democratic process," said Ali
al-Baher, president of the Housing Bank in Yemen, adding that if fundamentalists
won an election they would never permit another.

Dr. Ahmed Ateeq, a Western-educated physician, compared the Arab world today to
Germany in the early 1930's, when Hitler used the ballot box to take power. "The
situation is similar," he said. "A simple concept in difficult times of weak
leadership, technological change, previous defeats -- it was a perfect time for
a nut like Hitler." And for radical Islamic nuts in the Arab world today.

There is weight in these arguments. But the Arab world has been in decline for
six centuries because of a stultifying intellectual conformism, an insufficient
clash of ideas, and so it seems particularly regrettable that our war on terror
should lead to more repression.

One example here in Yemen is illuminating.

As a semi-democratic country, Yemen permits an Islamist party called Islah.
Making the usual demagogic appeals, Islah vaulted to become the second-biggest
party and was permitted to take power in the 1990's as part of a coalition
government. It took the ministry of education and other key portfolios.

But in the end, allowing Islamists a measure of power proved the best way to
inoculate voters against them. The public became irritated by Islah's campaigns
against liquor, by its efforts to bolster Islamic education at the expense of
science, by its inefficiency and corruption. In the next elections, it was
ejected from office.

Churchill had it right: Democracy is the worst form of government, except for
all the rest. I say this with some nervousness, but I'll still say it: We should
not allow the war on terror to erode the freedom even of those Islamists whom we
despise.

E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); RELIGION (92%); TERRORISM (90%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); TORTURE (88%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HIJACKING (75%); CORRUPTION
(67%); POLICE FORCES (60%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

COMPANY: HOUSING BANK (51%)

INDUSTRY: SIC6159 MISC. BUSINESS CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (51%)

PERSON: KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); YEMEN (94%); EGYPT (93%); UZBEKISTAN (92%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); GERMANY (66%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UZBEKISTAN;  EGYPT;  YEMEN

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             352 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trafficking in Humans

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 121 words


To the Editor:

The recent rescue of 11 infants in Islamabad ("Pakistani Gang Said to Kidnap
Children to Be Sold Abroad," news article, March 17) is yet another example of
the global trade in human beings.

During the cold war, the human rights community mobilized on behalf of prisoners
of conscience. Today, our challenge is to mobilize on behalf of prisoners of
commerce.

Grass-roots pressure led to the opening of the State Department's office on
human trafficking. That office, and Americans of all backgrounds, must demand
that governments recognize the trade in human beings as an epidemic on par with
the drug trade.

CHRISTINE O'BRIEN
Boston, March 18, 2002

The writer is an analyst for the American Anti-Slavery Group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); COLD
WAR (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%);
GLOBALIZATION (71%); SLAVERY (70%) KIDNAPPING;  CHILDREN AND YOUTH

PERSON: O'BRIEN, CHRISTINE

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (91%); UNITED STATES (70%)

REGION: ISLAMABAD (PAKISTAN);  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             360 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 8, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CIVILIANS;
Shattered Afghan Families Demand U.S. Compensation

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 7


Victims of the bombing in Afghanistan handed in petitions from 400 families to
the American Embassy here today, part of a growing movement to demand
compensation from the United States for the loss of their families and homes.

Dozens of families traveled to Kabul, the capital, from all over the country to
tell harrowing stories of whole families lost and of children maimed in the
bombing. An 8-year-old girl named Amina, who lost 16 relatives in the bombing,
her entire family except her father, handed the heavy folder of petitions to
Michael Metrinko, who heads the embassy's political and consular sections.

The petitioners represent just some of possibly thousands of civilians who
suffered in the campaign against the Taliban leadership and Osama bin Laden and
his network, Al Qaeda, that began exactly six months ago today. Global Exchange,
a human rights organization based in San Francisco that is supporting the
victims in their claims, estimates that about 2,000 families may have suffered
losses in the bombing.

About 300 people are thought to have died in the bombing around the northern
city of Kunduz, and 300 more in five villages in eastern Afghanistan,
journalists who have investigated the areas say.

"It is the responsibility of the U.S. government to do a survey and to help the
innocent victims impacted by the air campaign," said Marla Ruzicka of Global
Exchange, who helped organize the petitions.

But the petitioners got only a short meeting in the street with Mr. Metrinko and
no promise of assistance. "I am telling them that we are trying, we hope we can
help," he said. "But I cannot make a commitment."

Afghans have been handing in petitions since January, he said, and the embassy
had asked Washington what answer should be given to them. "The embassy has
recommended that a positive response be given," he said, but added that neither
the Defense Department nor the State Department had replied yet.

Mr. Metrinko expressed his own frustrations at the Washington bureaucracy. "You
cannot imagine how difficult it is to listen to stories like this and not to be
able to give an answer," he said.

Emotions veered from weariness to anger among the petitioners gathered outside
the embassy.

Juma Khan, Amina's father, a cobbler who borrowed money to travel from their
home town, Khanabad, to deliver the petitions, said he was worried that it had
been in vain. "He said he would try to help, but I don't know when," he said of
Mr. Metrinko.

It was a cold day in November when American planes bombed Khanabad and hit Mr.
Khan's house. "We were all sitting inside, 18 of us, when suddenly a bomb hit,"
he said crouching against a wall with his daughter. "Just two of us are left."

"The house completely collapsed, and two beams landed on my shoulders." he said.
"But fortunately, I survived."

Amina, who had been in another room, wriggled out from the rubble unhurt and ran
for help. Neighbors dug Mr. Khan out. Then they dug deeper and found his wife,
Bibi Gul, his seven other children, his mother, and his brother and wife and
their five children. They were all dead.

The house was hit in an intense battle as American warplanes pursued Taliban
forces toward their last stronghold in the town of Kunduz. But Mr. Khan said the
Taliban had withdrawn two days before. "They destroyed our house and killed our
children," he said of the American forces. "They should help us."

They live with relatives now, and his daughter often wakes at night, crying, he
said. Amina, a clear-eyed, calm girl, said the same of her father. "He has
mental problems," she said. "He wakes up at night."

Every petitioner had a similar sad story. Rabia and Ghulam Hazrat lost four
children, ages 7 to 14, when a missile exploded in their courtyard on the
outskirts of Kabul. They live near a military base used by the Taliban, but the
neighborhood was showered with cluster bombs and other explosives, Ms. Hazrat
said.

"There was no warning," she said. "I was in the kitchen making dough when I
heard a huge explosion. I came out and saw a big cloud of dust and saw my
children lying on the ground. Two of them were dead and two died later in
hospital."

Abdul Rashid, 9, blinded by shrapnel in a similar air raid, arrived with his
father, Dad Muhammad, 45, a farmer still hobbling on a crutch from his injuries.
"I just remember the airplane," Abdul Rashid said. "We wanted to water the
animals, and suddenly my eyes were injured and I lost my sight." He could see a
bit from his left eye for a few days before darkness closed in, he said. Now he
can only see bright lights from a car or electric light, he said.

"The doctor told us that maybe they can treat him abroad, but they can do
nothing in Afghanistan," his father said. "We just ask the U.S. government that
they help us." His house had been demolished in the raid, he added.

There was anger, too. Hajji Ghulam Hussein, a Pashtun from the eastern province
of Paktia, where the battle against Taliban and Al Qaeda forces continues, was
scathing about the American diplomat. "I told him that our country has been
suffering for 24 years and that we need an experienced physician, not a man who
cannot do much," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Juma Khan and his daughter, Amina, said they lost 16 relatives
in an American raid on Khanabad last fall. (Chang W. Lee/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PETITIONS
(90%); FAMILY (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (79%); IMMIGRATION (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); REFUGEES (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); WRITERS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(68%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (67%); MISSING PERSONS (66%); AIRLINES (60%) UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP);
GLOBAL EXCHANGE (ORGN)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%) GALL, CARLOTTA

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (97%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             362 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Mideast, Days of Anguish

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 127 words


To the Editor:

Re "Life Under Siege," by Allegra Pacheco (Op-Ed, April 10):

As a parent, I was disturbed to read of the account of the death of a
Palestinian baby because an ambulance could not get through Israeli checkpoints.

But it must be pointed out that when certain factions in the Palestinian
territories use ambulances to transport explosives and weapons, Israel is forced
to take extreme measures in its security.

While I regret the loss of life on both sides, especially among the civilian
populations, I believe that Israel has an obligation to protect the rights and
needs of its citizens first, especially against the human rights violations
caused by suicide bombers and terrorist attacks.

(Rabbi) MICHAEL STANGER
Mamaroneck, N.Y., April 10, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY VEHICLES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORT
(69%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (69%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%) TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS;
AMBULANCES;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

PERSON: STANGER, MICHAEL (RABBI)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%); MIDDLE EAST (91%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             364 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 12, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Countries That Ratified New Criminal Court

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 11


Following is a list of countries that have ratified the new International
Criminal Court, the tribunal that will prosecute individuals for war crimes,
genocide and other gross human right violations. A minimum of 60 ratifications
are needed, and today the total reached 66.

The countries are:

Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Britain, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, the Congo Republic, Dominica, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon and Germany.

Also Ghana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Macedonia, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mongolia, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Trinidad and
Tobago, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); GENOCIDE (88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

COUNTRY: ANTIGUA & BARBUDA (94%); CROATIA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
BOTSWANA (90%); BELGIUM (90%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); SPAIN (79%); MAURITIUS (79%);
SLOVENIA (79%); SLOVAKIA (79%); TRINIDAD & TOBAGO (79%); NAURU (79%); MARSHALL
ISLANDS (79%); SAN MARINO (79%); GABON (79%); MALI (79%); NIGERIA (79%);
TAJIKISTAN (79%); ICELAND (79%); GHANA (79%); BULGARIA (79%); SENEGAL (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); LESOTHO (79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF
(79%); NIGER (79%); LIECHTENSTEIN (70%); AUSTRIA (70%); ANDORRA (70%); ESTONIA
(68%); NETHERLANDS (55%); GERMANY (53%); FRANCE (53%); ITALY (52%)

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             366 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRISONERS;
Rumsfeld Supports Detaining Inmate With U.S. Citizenship

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld contended today that the United States
government's continued detention of an American-born prisoner who was captured
in Afghanistan was justified, even though he had not been charged or given
access to a lawyer.

Mr. Rumsfeld dismissed questions about the status of the prisoner, Yasser Esam
Hamdi, as a "distraction," while civil liberties lawyers said Mr. Hamdi's
detention was extremely unusual in the United States.

Mr. Hamdi, who apparently has dual citizenship with the United States and Saudi
Arabia, was transferred from Afghanistan to the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, on Feb. 11. Two months later, the government determined that he probably
had been born in the United States and flew him to a military base in Norfolk,
Va., where he has been held in a brig while his case remains in legal limbo.

Mr. Rumsfeld said that government lawyers were still discussing what to do with
Mr. Hamdi and that the case had not yet reached his desk. But he dismissed the
idea that Mr. Hamdi had been held too long.

The United States "has every right" to hold Mr. Hamdi so that he would not "go
right back out and engage in battle on behalf of the Al Qaeda or the Taliban, as
the case may be in this instance," Mr. Rumsfeld said.

"The idea that he's being held indefinitely -- as though he's now in his fifth
year -- of course is just silliness," Mr. Rumsfeld added. "We've had him a
relatively short period of time."

Justice Department officials said they were still determining Mr. Hamdi's
status. They are not sure whether he ever renounced his American citizenship,
officially or unofficially, or what legal consequences an unofficial
renunciation of citizenship would have.

Officials also said it was not clear if Mr. Hamdi was asserting any legal rights
as an American. "They're dealing with what it means to be a citizen," one
official said.

Mr. Rumsfeld suggested that Mr. Hamdi was among those prisoners taken in
Afghanistan who might know about future attacks.

"We're deeply concerned about getting intelligence from these folks," he said.
"They were captured on the battlefield. We want to try to prevent further
attacks. And it makes all the sense in the world to be doing exactly as we are
doing."

Human rights lawyers and civil libertarians say that holding an American in the
United States without charging him could be illegal.

"I don't know any law, international or domestic, that allows you to hold people
without charges, without bringing them before some kind of court, without any
access to lawyers, said Michael Ratner, president of the Center for
Constitutional Rights, based in New York. "You cannot have the executive branch
jail people arbitrarily."

Mr. Ratner said that the Pentagon had not made clear under what authority it was
holding Mr. Hamdi.

Mr. Ratner said his group was seeking access to Mr. Hamdi to offer him
representation. He said that if Mr. Hamdi was denied access, he would probably
take legal action to try to force the government to explain why it was holding
him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CITIZENSHIP (91%); LAWYERS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); POWS &
MIAS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TERRORISM (70%); HIJACKING (70%); AL-QAEDA (65%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
TERRORISM;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC); SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; HAMDI, YASSER ESAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (88%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             368 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pushing Equality From Outside the Fraternity

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 17


France may call itself the cradle of human rights, but Christiane Taubira thinks
it still has far to go. To nudge it along, Ms. Taubira, a pugnacious economist
from French Guiana, is running in France's presidential elections on Sunday, not
because she harbors any illusion of winning, but rather to draw attention to
discrimination against women, blacks, gays and regional minorities.

Whether French society and its ruling political elite are paying attention is
not certain. But Ms. Taubira, France's first nonwhite presidential candidate, is
giving some voters of African and Arab descent a new sense of connection with
this year's campaign.

"I'm fighting for my ideas, so I don't mind killing myself," she said, arriving
jet-lagged and with back pains from campaigning in French Guiana and the French
Caribbean islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe. "I don't care if my polls are
low, because this is a great chance to say things that must be said. Who else is
reminding people that for equal work, French women are paid 27 percent less than
men? Nobody, not one of the other 15 candidates."

With President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin likely to be the
opponents in the runoff election on May 5, just as they were seven years ago,
the sense of deja vu has encouraged an unusually large number of lesser-known
candidates to emerge this year. So along with perennial also-rans like
Jean-Marie Le Pen of the extreme rightist National Front have come several who,
like Ms. Taubira, are stepping into national politics for the first time.

Ms. Taubira is injecting verve into a mostly bland campaign landscape,
improvising her fluent and fiery speeches without ever referring to notes. She
is spontaneous -- too spontaneous for a politician, in the eyes of some. She
will say things like, "Fortunately I have strong inhibitions, if not I'd be
wringing some people's necks like chickens."

Yet, Ms. Taubira, 50, the divorced mother of four teenagers, is not a newcomer
to politics. She has been a member of Parliament for French Guiana since 1993,
and has also been involved in other battles, like campaigns against land mines
and for more rights for the handicapped and a law giving political parity to men
and women. She was the author of a law adopted last year that declared the slave
trade and all forms of slavery to be crimes against humanity.

Opinion polls indicate that she may get 2 percent of the vote, although that
number may climb as she receives more television exposure and continues her
travels in search of votes from French citizens from other cultures. "No, I
never heard of her," said Khaled Benshimol, 25, whose parents came from Morocco
and who said he was still undecided about his vote.

But at a rally in Paris this week, Sabine Nanteau, who arrived from West Africa
in 1968, said she would definitely vote for Ms. Taubira, "because she is black
and because she is a woman." Ms. Nanteau, a teacher, continued: "I think many
blacks will go for her. We Africans, even with university degrees, often can't
get jobs because of our skin color."

But as the candidate for the small Radical Party of the Left, Ms. Taubira is
reaching beyond minorities. Having grown up in a poor family of nine children,
she seems to thrive in groups, evidently loves campaigning and seems at ease in
a variety of settings. This week she visited a factory in Normandy where workers
were about to be laid off. With a passionate discourse she also offered her
solidarity to villagers nearby who were fighting a project to turn a quiet
forest into an industrial waste site. The local mayor said she was the only
candidate who had shown any interest in their forest.

With so many marginal candidates like herself in the campaign, she was asked, is
she getting her messages across? "I believe so, because other candidates have
already picked up some of my ideas," she said. Offering an example, she said
that although she had proposed lowering the voting age to 17 from 18, the Jospin
campaign had now adopted the idea.

As the mother of black teenagers, she said, she is keenly aware of the needs of
young people, especially those who grow up in urban public housing projects. The
government has to get back in there, she argued, and provide more public
services, more education, more scholarships, more small loans to spread equal
opportunity.

"There is too much hysteria about security everywhere, too much talk about
repression," she said. "We have to stop declaring war on poor young people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christiane Taubira, a candidate in France's presidential
election. (Maisonneuve/Sipa)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); POLITICS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); WOMEN (78%); SLAVERY (78%);
DISCRIMINATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (77%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(77%); POLLS & SURVEYS (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(69%); LANDMINES (69%); DISABLED PERSONS (50%) ELECTIONS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  ELECTION ISSUES;  DISCRIMINATION;  WOMEN;  BLACKS;  HOMOSEXUALITY

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (74%); JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (57%) SIMONS, MARLISE; TAUBIRA,
CHRISTIANE; CHIRAC, JACQUES (PRES); JOSPIN, LIONEL (PRIME MIN)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (89%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (97%); FRENCH GUIANA (94%); MOROCCO (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS
(79%); MARTINIQUE (79%); GUADELOUPE (79%)

REGION: FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             370 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: RAMALLAH;
Palestinians Say They Are Too Angry to Celebrate the Israeli Withdrawal

BYLINE:  By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: RAMALLAH, West Bank, April 21


Instead of taking to the streets in celebration after Israeli tanks withdrew
today from much of this city, Palestinians took to the streets seething.

Around Manara Square, the commercial heart of Ramallah, which is the seat of the
Palestinian Authority and the West Bank's wealthiest city, people took turns
venting bile after 23 days of occupation.

One policeman said the withdrawal was partial, a sham and a transparent effort
by Israel to ease international pressure. An engineer said the operation only
increased Palestinian support for their leader, Yasir Arafat, who remains
surrounded by Israeli forces here. An accountant, Abedramo Alkulli, called for
continued suicide bombings. "We must have more in order for Sharon to understand
his operation was a failure," Mr. Alkulli said, referring to Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon.

The return to normal life seemed tentative. Traffic returned in spurts to
streets that are usually choked with vehicles. Pedestrians dotted sidewalks that
are usually jammed. Just a few stores opened in a business district that
typically hummed.

"You can see it," Khader Rantisi, a worker for a Palestinian human rights group,
said as he looked at the dribble of traffic making its way around Manara Square.
"People are in shock."

They were also angry. Israeli officials said they were hunting for wanted
terrorists and collecting documents that linked the Palestinian Authority to
attacks on Israeli civilians. Soldiers have ransacked every government ministry
here, taking pivotal documents, like papers that Israeli officials contend show
Mr. Arafat's support for attacks, and not so pivotal ones, like the information
stripped from the hard drives of computers in the Ministry of Education.

But Palestinians see the goal of the operation as humiliation. Aymen Alkhatib,
an engineer at the Palestinian Petroleum Corporation, whose offices he said were
also ransacked, saw the incursion as a blunt message. The message of the Israeli
leaders, he said, was: " 'You as a people have to accept what we give you. If
you start to feel strong, I will show you there is no one stronger than us. I
will stomp on you.' "

Storeowners in the commercial district complained that Israeli soldiers trashed
and looted their shops. Two of four statue lions in a monument in the center of
the square had graffiti in Hebrew or Stars of David spray-painted on them.

Palestinians predicted a continuation of the cycle of retaliation and
retribution of the last 18 months.

"There is a wound that we managed to cure," said Wael Abdullah, a 30-year-old
policeman. "But unfortunately it was opened again."

He and other Palestinians complained that the Israeli forces that still surround
Mr. Arafat's compound divide the city in two. Military blockades outside
Ramallah prevent people living in outlying villages from entering the city,
stifling the economy. Residents said a military blockade of the West Bank
prevented Palestinians from traveling to Gaza.

"The problem will remain eternal," said Mr. Abdullah, who is from Gaza. "Any
partial solution will not work."

Of a half dozen people interviewed today, only one said he favored more suicide
bombings, but all predicted that more would occur. They said there was growing
anger among Palestinians toward the United States, because they believed that it
turned a blind eye to Israeli tactics that they said would be condemned if used
by Iraq, for example.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Traffic returned in spurts yesterday to Manara Square, Ramallah,
which is usually choked with vehicles. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
PRIME MINISTERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); BOMBINGS (74%);
VANDALISM (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); EDUCATION
DEPARTMENTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); OIL &
GAS INDUSTRY (50%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (50%) PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

PERSON: ROHDE, DAVID

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  RAMALLAH (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             372 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Resumes U.S. Military Talks, Pleasing the Pentagon

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 24


The government sat down today for military talks with the United States, in the
first formal get-together since Washington reacted to the Indonesian Army's
rights abuses in East Timor nearly three years ago by cutting military ties.

The talks began just after the Bush administration sent Congress plans for
training and equipping a domestic peacekeeping force to help Indonesia quell
sectarian violence. Officials are also asking Congress for money to help the
Indonesians create their own counterterrorism unit.

The administration is divided on how to proceed in Indonesia, which is viewed as
an incubator of terrorism, with a government that has so far failed to hold
accountable those responsible for the killing of civilians in East Timor.

The Pentagon's desire to resume military relations appears to have bolstered
hopes within the Indonesian forces that the administration will find ways to
skirt a law written by Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, that bans
American military training and financial assistance in Indonesia until there is
evidence of military reform.

"We hope that the military cooperation between Indonesia and the United States
will finally reawaken," said Adm. Widodo Adisutjipto, the head of the armed
forces, before the session began today.

As Indonesia faces an increasing breakdown in law and order, and separatist
movements persist in two major provinces, Aceh and Irian Jaya, the Pentagon is
not alone in seeking ways to work with the Indonesian military. Japan and
Singapore, two of Washington's strongest allies in Asia, are urging the Bush
administration to work with the army, historically the institution that has kept
the sprawling archipelago together.

The administration's team, which includes officials from the State Department as
well as the Pentagon, is headed by Peter Brookes, deputy assistant secretary of
defense. Before his arrival, the United States Embassy here said in a statement
that the talks should "not be seen as a full resumption of full military
relations."

Even so, a former Indonesian defense minister, Juwono Sudharsono, said in an
interview today that there was a "long-term expectation" in the Indonesian
military that the Leahy amendment would be lifted to allow a "certain degree of
military assistance."

Mr. Sudharsono said that 70 percent of the Indonesian military's equipment had
originally come from the United States and that because of the Leahy ban, less
than half of that hardware remained operational. The country's fleet of F-16
fighter jets suffers from a lack of access to spare parts, American officials
said.

But Mr. Sudharsono also said that while the Indonesian government might finally
win the lifting of restrictions on assistance, it was important that the East
Timor rights trials move ahead with more credibility. "Are the recent trials
credible enough for Congress to lift the bans?" he asked, then answered his own
question: not so far.

The current talks, which are to last two days, will not deal with the specific
proposals for the peacekeeping operation and the counterterrorism unit,
officials said. Even in Washington, an administration official said, the
government has yet to spell out which military agencies of Indonesia would be
involved in the peacekeeping force -- or in the civilian counterterror unit. The
latter would appear to offer the United States a way to share intelligence with
the Indonesians.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%);
ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);
MILITARY TRAINING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); PEACEKEEPING (76%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (68%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  TERRORISM;  FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: PATRICK LEAHY (58%) PERLEZ, JANE; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); LEAHY, PATRICK
J (SEN)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); SINGAPORE
(79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  EAST TIMOR

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             373 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Soldier Fabricated Chechnya Story, Russian Officials Say

BYLINE:  By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, April 26


Andrei Samorodov, a former Russian Army officer who said last month that he had
fled the battlefield in Chechnya in 1999 to escape pressure from fascist cadets
to execute civilians during Russia's assault, was not serving in the army at
that time, according to Russian officials and acquaintances of his.

Mr. Samorodov apparently fabricated his case for political asylum in the United
States, which was granted in May 2000, six months after he arrived from Mexico
and turned himself in to border patrol officers. He has since been living in San
Antonio.

Russian officials in the administration of President Vladimir V. Putin said they
were preparing documentation that they might present to a United States
immigration court in San Antonio showing that Mr. Samorodov could not have
witnessed human rights abuses by Russian troops during either of the Russian
military campaigns in Chechnya.

On March 17 The New York Times published an account of Mr. Samorodov's flight
from Russia based on interviews conducted with him in San Antonio, where he
asserted that in 1999 he resisted unruly neo-fascist recruits in the 21st
Airborne Brigade who incited troops to kill civilians.

He also said he tried to intervene in one roadside execution and was beaten and
threatened for his interventions at that time.

The Times requested that the Russian government, through the office of Sergei
Yastrzhembsky, an aide to Mr. Putin for Chechen military affairs, provide
information on Mr. Samorodov's military status and comment on Mr. Samorodov's
alleged defection.

No information was initially provided.

On March 19, the Russian newspaper Izvestia quoted Nikolai Gostev, second in
command of Russian airborne troops, as saying that Mr. Samorodov had been a
battalion communications commander with the 21st Airborne Brigade in his
hometown of Stavropol, in southern Russia, and was dismissed on Nov. 30, 1993,
because of army personnel cutbacks.

Mr. Gostev also said that the 21st Airborne Brigade itself had been disbanded
long ago.

Col. Aleksandr Medvedev, the commander of the 247th Airborne-Assault regiment
that absorbed the 21st Airborne Brigade, later told local journalists in Mr.
Samorodov's hometown of Stavropol that Mr. Samorodov joined the 21st Airborne in
June 1993 and was discharged on Dec. 6, 1993, and therefore did not serve in
either of the Russian military campaigns in Chechnya.

Since Mr. Samorodov's account was challenged, he has declined to comment or
return phone calls and e-mail messages.

His lawyer, John Blatz, an immigration lawyer for the Refugee Aid Project in San
Antonio, said by telephone today that he was troubled by the information
suggesting that Mr. Samorodov had fabricated his account.

But Mr. Samorodov has insisted that his version is true, and has shown Mr. Blatz
what he says is his military identification document dated 1996, the lawyer
said.

Some five weeks after The Times first sought comment from the Kremlin on Mr.
Samorodov, an aide who deals with the press on matters relating to Chechnya,
Aleksandr Machevsky, told The Times this month that Mr. Samorodov was an
impostor who had left the army in 1993 and had not served there in 1999 or at
any other time.

He attributed the delay in replying to The Times's original query to the time
needed to retrieve Mr. Samorodov's records.

Mr. Machevsky produced copies of those handwritten records, but declined to give
them to a Times reporter.

Mr. Machevsky said that, as far as he knew, American court and law enforcement
officials did not seek Mr. Samorodov's military records or ask Russian officials
to confirm his army service before the United States granted him asylum.

In Mr. Samorodov's hometown, Stavropol, Grigory N. Bushenyov, manager of the
Southern-Russian Food Company, said in an interview this month, "I know that
Andrei Samorodov left the army before the first Chechen campaign in 1993.
Correspondingly, he did not take part in either the first or the second Chechen
campaigns."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); LAWYERS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); REFUGEES (78%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); WRITERS (73%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (63%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ASYLUM (POLITICAL);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  HOAXES

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%) TYLER, PATRICK E; SAMORODOV, ANDREI

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: RUSSIA;  CHECHNYA (RUSSIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1119 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

U.S. Announces Gathering To Seek Middle East Peace
The Bush administration will join Europe, Russia and the United Nations in
convening an international conference on Middle East peace and economic
reconstruction this summer. Details have not been worked out, but foreign
ministers and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, not heads of state, will
participate. President Bush repeated his commitment to creation of a Palestinian
state but warned that it could not be built "on a foundation of terror and
corruption."   A1

The House and Senate expressed strongly worded support for Israel in its recent
military operations.   A10


The Israeli government said Palestinian leaders under Israeli interrogation had
implicated Yasir Arafat in the financing of terror attacks. But the statement
from Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's office neither provided a link between Mr.
Arafat and any particular attack nor produced new documents to back its
assertions.   A1

An American-based human rights group said Palestinian claims of hundreds of
civilian deaths in Jenin were exaggerated, but its inquiry did find evidence of
Israeli abuses and it urged further investigation.   A11

Palestinian negotiators offered a compromise to end the monthlong Church of the
Nativity standoff.   A11

French Rightist on the Stump
Jean-Marie Le Pen continued efforts to refashion his image from an immigrant
basher to a people's champion in his last public meeting before the presidential
runoff on Sunday.   A12

New U.S. Embassy in Berlin
Germany and the United States signed an agreement to build an American Embassy
on the site of the one that stood until World War II.   A8

Serb Ex-Official Surrenders
Nikola Sainovic, once a top aide to former President Slobodan Milosevic of
Yugoslavia, surrendered to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague.   A4

Chavez Rebounds After Ouster
President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela said in an interview that his self-proclaimed
peaceful revolution would continue, with the goal of reforming an oil-dependent
economy and funneling money into social programs.   A3

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A14-20

Poll Finds U.S. Catholics Support Zero Tolerance
American Roman Catholics say priests who sexually abuse children and teenagers
should be barred from participating in parish life, and any accusations of abuse
should be investigated by local law enforcement rather than the church, a New
York Times/CBS News Poll found. Seventy percent said Catholic lay people should
be involved in decisions about cases of abuse by priests.   A1

The Rev. Paul R. Shanley, accused of molesting 26 boys while serving in the
Boston area, was arrested in San Diego and charged with three counts of child
rape in Massachusetts.   A18

The Vatican is cracking down on priests it regards as too free in granting group
absolution to sinners.   A18

Child Care in Florida
The disappearance of a 5-year-old girl in state custody is an extreme example of
an overburdened agency struggling to keep up with an increasing number of
vulnerable children, officials and child advocates said.   A19

Democrats and Welfare
A dozen Democratic senators, including Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York,
proposed toughening work requirements for people who receive welfare benefits.
A16

Pushing to Arm Pilots
Four senators said airlines and the government should let pilots carry guns, and
a Boeing safety expert told a House panel that his company's planes could
sustain bullet holes.   A20

Identity Theft Arrests
Federal officials charged several people with using false credentials to cover
up a murder, to sell homes belonging to the elderly and to exercise 176,000
stock options belonging to an unknowing company executive.   A20

Bosses Were Last to Know
Interior Secretary Gale A. Norton and the E.P.A. chief, Christie Whitman, said
they were caught by surprise when Ms. Whitman's agency issued a letter
supporting a snowmobile ban in Yellowstone National Park.   A14

Farm Bill Advancing
The House approved the compromise farm bill, 280 to 141, and President Bush said
he would sign it into law once it cleared the Senate.   A19

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Lawyer Argues Ex-Officer Was Drunk but Not Culpable
Joseph Gray's lawyer, delivering his closing statement, said his client, who was
off duty at the time his van ran down three people in Brooklyn last year, was
guilty of drunken driving but not manslaughter because the victims had darted
into his path. Jurors began their deliberations.   B1

Ruling on Upstate Casino
A Mohawk casino near Hogansburg is operating under an invalid agreement with New
York, a state appeals court panel ruled in a decision that could call into
question the legality of any casinos in the state, though it did not address the
broader issue of whether casino gambling is allowable.   B1

WEEKEND   E1-34; E35-48

EDUCATION

Tensions Build Over Contract
The New York City teachers' union president accused Mayor Bloomberg of delaying
a contract deal despite the apparent infusion of state funds, and she warned
that teachers could strike next month.   B1

College Loan Change Dropped
The White House, facing Congressional opposition, dropped a proposal that would
have raised the cost of federally backed college loans.   A19

ESCAPES   F1-16

SPORTS   D1-8

Nets Advance in Playoffs
The Nets beat Indiana, 120-109, to move into the second round of the N.B.A.
playoffs against Charlotte.   D1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

One Answer for Two Questions
Scientists say the hole in the southern polar ozone layer may help explain both
global warming and Antarctic cooling.   A16

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12, 14

Scrutiny for Kmart Ex-Officials
Kmart is investigating a group of former executives who presided over the ailing
retailer in the months before it filed for bankruptcy protection, and severance
payments promised to those executives are being postponed until the inquiry is
complete, a lawyer for the company said.   C1

Dell's Costly Options Bet
Dell Computer spent $3 billion in its last fiscal year buying back 69 million
shares at an average price of about $43 a share, though the average market price
was about $25 a share. Dell had to do so because of complicated options deals.
C1

Cable Company Revising Books
Adelphia Communications said it was restating its financial statements for the
last three years to include more than $1 billion in loans that the embattled
cable company had guaranteed to entities controlled by the family of its
chairman, John Rigas.   C5

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   C13

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Now that Yasir Arafat is free; children who live in dread; a worthy
hate-crimes bill; the Hubble achievement.

Columns: Nicholas D. Kristof, Paul Krugman.

Crossword   E44
TV Listings   E33
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); RELIGION (89%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (89%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%);
CHILD ABUSE (87%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (84%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%);
IMMIGRATION (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%);
INTERVIEWS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); TERRORISM (75%); CORRUPTION (75%);
CHILD CUSTODY & SUPPORT (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (72%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); WORLD WAR II (70%); POLLS & SURVEYS (69%); ARRESTS (67%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (63%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (58%); JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (50%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (68%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL
(94%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(79%); GERMANY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             380 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: CONGRESS;
House and Senate Support Israel in Strong Resolutions

BYLINE:  By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


The House and Senate voted overwhelmingly today in rapid succession to express
strongly worded support for Israel in its recent military operations, largely
brushing aside last-minute attempts by the Bush administration to soften
language criticizing the Palestinians.

The two Congressional resolutions were nonbinding, but they put the legislative
branch of government on record as backing the military actions of Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon of Israel, even as President Bush has called on Israel to end its
"occupation" of Palestinian towns.

The Senate voted 94 to 2 in favor of its resolution, which also calls on the
Palestinian Authority to act against terrorism, as Mr. Bush has also done. The
House voted 352 to 21 for a tougher-worded measure stating concern that the
actions of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, "are not those of a viable
partner for peace." Twenty-nine House members voted present as a protest that
the resolution was too tilted toward Israel.

Even after appeals to delay the resolutions, members of Congress both parties
rushed to assert their solidarity with Israel, which has strong support from two
influential political constituencies, Jewish Democrats and Christian
conservatives.

Their actions served to complicate the already delicate diplomacy that Mr. Bush
is trying to conduct to end the violence and restart negotiations.

In emotional debate, House members and Senate members, from the left and from
the right, repeatedly branded Mr. Arafat a "terrorist" and a "despot." A
minority of lawmakers expressed reservations about the policies of Mr. Sharon.

The Israeli prime minister arrives in Washington next week for talks with Mr.
Bush. Administration officials have tried to urge him to withdraw his forces
from the West Bank and moderate military actions against the Palestinians.

The Congressional votes in effect endorsed Israel's recent military campaign,
aspects of which have drawn strong criticism from human rights groups. The
resolutions may make it more difficult now for Mr. Bush to counsel Mr. Sharon to
exercise restraint.

King Abdullah of Jordan is also scheduled to visit Washington next week for
talks. The White House has been trying to enlist moderate Arab support for its
diplomatic efforts, which include talks with Mr. Arafat.

A minority of lawmakers called the measures dangerously tilted toward Israel.
"This resolution blindly supports Israel's action against the Palestinians and
wholly denies the generations of suffering of the Palestinian people," said
Representative David E. Bonior, a Michigan Democrat, whose state has a
significant Arab population.

Senators Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, and Robert C. Byrd,
Democrat of West Virginia, were the only senators who voted against the
resolution. Mr. Hollings suggested that many senators were after campaign
contributions.

The supporters of the House resolution included a number of Republican leaders
and conservatives who showed little patience for calls for a middle ground in
the region, betraying growing tensions between Mr. Bush and his conservative
base.

On the eve of the vote, the House majority leader, Dick Armey of Texas, endorsed
a position flatly at odds with the precepts of the Oslo peace process. "I'm
content to have Israel grab the entire West Bank, he said in an appearance on
MSNBC's "Hardball with Chris Matthews." He added under questioning, "I happen to
believe that the Palestinians should leave." Hours later he tried to soften his
remarks, saying he simply meant that Palestinians who supported terrorism should
be exiled.

Democrats were equally impassioned. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut
Democrat who is considered a possible challenger to Mr. Bush in 2004, read aloud
Mr. Bush's own uncompromising statement in the days after Sept. 11 in which he
said nations would have to choose between standing with the United States or
with terrorists.

"The intention of this statement is really to embody and express those last
words that I quoted from President Bush," said Mr. Lieberman, the sponsor of the
Senate measure along with Gordon H. Smith, an Oregon Republican.

The House and Senate resolutions both said the United State and Israel were in a
"common struggle against terrorism" and both expressed solidarity with Israel
"as it takes necessary steps to provide security to its people by dismantling
the terrorist infrastructure in the Palestinian areas." The White House tried
and failed, according to Congressional aides, to have that clause removed.

The House, in talks with the White House, added a provision calling for "action
to alleviate the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (93%); TERRORISM (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;
TERRORISM

PERSON: ROBERT BYRD (58%) MITCHELL, ALISON; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); SHARON, ARIEL
(PRIME MIN); ARAFAT, YASIR

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); ISRAEL
(95%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); JORDAN (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             382 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends: Executive Decisions;
A Penchant for Secrecy

BYLINE:  By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A FEDERAL judge's decision last week that the Justice Department's detention of
a Jordanian student was a misuse of the material witness statute served as a
reminder that nearly eight months after Sept. 11, the balance between individual
liberty and national security remains highly unstable.

It was never in doubt that the terrorist attacks would alter the balance between
these two values. American history is filled with examples of how domestic and
foreign threats, perceived or -- as today -- real, provoked shifts in power away
from the rights of the individual and toward the promise of safety and order.

Even against that background, the Bush administration's pursuit of the domestic
war on terrorism into uncharted and ambiguous legal territory is striking. Many
of its choices reveal the same instinct for secrecy and penchant for unilateral
executive-branch action that the administration has displayed on political
fields of battle unrelated to terrorism.

In fact, long after judges have ruled on challenges to the prolonged detentions,
closed immigration hearings and other policies that Attorney General John
Ashcroft is defending in courts around the country, the legacy of this chapter
of the perennial effort to calibrate the balance between liberty and security
may lie in whatever verdict the political as well as the legal system renders on
the value of transparency in government.

Secrecy is at the heart of an escalating battle over the identities of hundreds
of detainees, mostly Muslim men from Arab and Asian countries, being held for
the federal government in New Jersey county jails. Responding to a suit by the
American Civil Liberties Union, a state court applied New Jersey's right-to-know
law and ordered the names made public. The secret detentions were "odious to a
democratic society," ruled Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of Superior Court.

The Justice Department not only appealed, but last month issued a regulation
that bars state and local governments from making the names public. The order,
which did not involve Congress, injected complex questions of federal
pre-emption and separation of powers into the mix. Ronald K. Chen, associate
dean of Rutgers School of Law-Newark, who is handling the case for the A.C.L.U.,
said that by issuing the new regulation, the administration was "using the
continued latitude the public is willing to give in order to push back the
frontiers of what the government can keep secret."

The sense that the administration is using the war on terrorism to accomplish
long-held policy goals is not limited to liberals. "They are taking language off
the shelf that's been ready to go into any vehicle," said Roger Pilon, vice
president for legal affairs at the Cato Institute, the libertarian research
group. He was particularly critical of a provision the administration inserted
into the U.S.A. Patriot Act that enhanced the government's ability to seize
assets through forfeiture.

The Cato Institute has been critical of forfeiture for years, but Mr. Pilon had
a broader criticism: "Government grows each time there's a crisis," he said,
"and this is an executive branch that thinks it's a law unto itself. Your guard
has to be up."

ONE surprising development was the recent indictment of a criminal defense
lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, charged with providing material aid for her client, an
Egyptian sheik, now serving a life sentence for an earlier plot to destroy the
World Trade Center and other New York landmarks. Whatever the merits of the
unusual charges, the Justice Department's decision to turn its prosecutorial
attention to the defense bar fit with a view widely held in some Republican
circles that lawyers are the problem, whether defending tort plaintiffs, poor
people or terrorists.

In 1996, for example, Congress barred Legal Services Corporation lawyers from
making specific arguments on behalf of welfare recipients, restrictions the
Supreme Court overturned last year as violating the First Amendment. In going
after the pugnacious Ms. Stewart, who has also represented Weather Underground
radicals, Mafia defendants and other unpopular clients, the department picked a
target unlikely to evoke widespread sympathy. She denies the charges.

The indictment left many lawyers troubled but uncertain how to respond in the
absence of much explanation. "I really hope they've got some evidence,"
Professor Chen said. "Otherwise it's a very dangerous precedent for the
adversarial process."

More troubling to some is a Justice Department policy issued last fall that
authorizes monitoring of conversations between defense lawyers and their
imprisoned but not necessarily convicted clients. The fact that lawyers will be
notified, and privileged information about defense strategy will supposedly not
be forwarded to prosecutors, has not allayed concerns of the Association of the
Bar of the City of New York, among others. Its committee on professional
responsibility issued a critical statement last month, saying, "even in the war
on terrorism, the basic principles on which our system of justice is balanced
ought not to be tampered with."

Robert J. Anello, the chairman of the bar association committee, said the major
flaw was that the attorney general, rather than a magistrate or judge, will
select the lawyers to be monitored. A garden-variety search warrant requires
judicial approval, Mr. Anello said. "Getting a search warrant is not terribly
difficult," he said, adding that if the attorney general has enough information
to decide to eavesdrop on a specific lawyer, "that should be enough to convince
a magistrate."

ANY attorney general needs the layer of neutrality a judge provides, Mr. Anello
said. "You need to check someone's predisposition," he said. "Ashcroft's is to
root out crime at all costs, but like all well-intentioned people, he needs to
be checked."

Ronald D. Rotunda, a law professor at the University of Illinois and a former
consultant to Kenneth W. Starr's independent counsel investigation, said that
while it was "fair to raise questions," the administration's critics were too
quick to assume the worst. "What amazes me is how careful the government has
been," he said, adding that there were plausible legal arguments for the
monitoring program.

However, Professor Rotunda said the administration had hurt itself by not making
its case publicly. "I've heard better arguments than they're giving," he said.
"I hope they give better explanations in the future."

When criticism has been impossible to ignore, as happened with the executive
order creating military tribunals to try suspected terrorists, the
administration's response has been to tack slightly and recharacterize the
criticism's target as a work in progress rather than a final product. The
Pentagon turned down requests from legal groups to circulate the regulations for
public comment before issuing them in late March, four months after the
bare-bones executive order had raised many questions about how the tribunals
would work.

The regulations addressed some of the questions but left many critics
unsatisfied. Any military tribunal established by executive order rather than by
legislation is "flatly unconstitutional," Prof. Neal K. Katyal of the Georgetown
Law Center and Prof. Laurence H. Tribe of Harvard Law School argue in an article
in the current Yale Law Journal. Their target is not tribunals as such but
rather the "exceptional unilateralism" that the president's order exemplified.

"Our position is that the Constitution sets up a structure whereby the
concurrence of all three branches is normally needed in order to authorize a
decisive departure from the legal status quo," the two professors write, adding:
"Under the order, the executive branch acts as lawmaker, law-enforcer and
judge." It is the kind of "accumulation of all powers," they say, that James
Madison described in the Federalist Papers as "the very definition of tyranny."

Others reject such dire views. "We've been reasonably true to our values and
constitutional structure," said Douglas W. Kmiec, an assistant attorney general
in the Reagan administration who is now law school dean at the Catholic
University of America. "We have never confronted a problem of this magnitude,
and we're trying to adjust laws and procedures in a responsible way, a
responsibly aggressive way. An equally robust defense bar will push the envelope
back in the opposite direction. That usually brings us to the right place."

Whether such optimism is warranted -- and past experience suggests it may not
always be -- will not be evident until the wavering balance between liberty and
security, sunlight and shadow, finds its new equilibrium. For now, it is enough
to suggest that history will judge this challenging period in part by where the
balance finally comes to rest.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush consulting with John Ashcroft. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); WITNESSES (90%); JUDGES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); WAR ON TERROR
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(89%); POLITICS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); IMMIGRATION
LAW (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%); IMMIGRATION (76%);
LIBERALISM (76%); HIJACKING (76%); REFUGEES (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); REGIONAL &
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (74%); HISTORY (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); APPEALS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); LAW
SCHOOLS (69%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (64%); RESEARCH
INSTITUTES (60%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) GREENHOUSE, LINDA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             383 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senior Pentagon Official Urges Links With Moderate Muslims

BYLINE:  By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


The Bush administration's leading hawk on Iraq, in a speech warning of a
dangerous gap between the West and Islam, has called for a broad American
initiative to strengthen ties with moderate Muslim nations and with the
"tolerant people in the Muslim world."

Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense, said Friday that the United
States must support Muslims who put themselves at risk as they campaign for free
speech or religious tolerance, and who lead the debate about Muslim values.

"We need to recognize that the terrorists target not only us but their fellow
Muslims, upon whom they aim to impose a medieval, intolerant and tyrannical way
of life," Mr. Wolfowitz said.

The "vast majority of the world's Muslims have no use for the extreme doctrines
espoused by groups such as Al Qaeda or the Taliban," he said, adding that
members of this majority "are, in many cases, on the front lines of the struggle
against terrorism" and that "we in the West have an obligation to help them."

Speaking to the World Affairs Council in Monterey, Calif., Mr. Wolfowitz cited
American military engagements of the last decade in denouncing "those who seek
to portray this war against terrorism as a war against Islam."

"Whether it was Kuwaitis, or Iraqi Kurds, or Somalis, or Bosnians or Kosovars
or, most recently, Afghans -- the people we were defending were predominantly
Muslim," he said. "And we helped them, not because they are Muslims, but because
they were human beings."

The speech -- which had been reviewed by the National Security Council, the vice
president's office and the State Department -- called to mind the cold-war clash
with the Soviet Union over political freedoms, religious tolerance and free
emigration. At the time, Moscow's abuses were recorded and denounced by Western
leaders, and its victims honored by human rights groups.

In that tradition, Mr. Wolfowitz saluted several moderate Islamic nations and
threw a spotlight on individuals in a number of countries -- regardless of
whether their leaders are friendly or hostile to America -- striving for
democracy, women's rights and economic development.

He cited Indonesia, Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan and Turkey as nations taking great
risks, not only in working to combat terrorism but also in struggling to enter
the modern era, and therefore worthy of American support. And he praised several
Islamic scholars, lawyers and officials who have been ostracized, beaten or
jailed after urging tolerance. He noted how Kurdish-controlled areas of northern
Iraq have established self-government and a level of prosperity that far
surpasses the rest of Iraq.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (95%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); TALIBAN (78%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
(78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); COLD WAR (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); WOMEN (68%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (61%) ISLAM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FREEDOM OF
SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;  RELIGION AND CHURCHES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: SHANKER, THOM; WOLFOWITZ, PAUL D (DEPUTY SEC)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (53%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); JORDAN (79%);
MOROCCO (79%); INDONESIA (79%); TURKEY (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); KOSOVO (79%);
ISRAEL (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); KUWAIT (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (53%)

REGION: MIDDLE EAST;  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             385 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FRONT LINES

BYLINE:  By ANDREA KANNAPELL

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 850 words


MIDEAST -- With the U.S.-brokered end of the months-long siege of the Ramallah
headquarters of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and with the Israeli Army
holding itself to brief raids after a more than a month of devastating
incursions in the West Bank, the focus in the Mideast began to turn to an
international peace conference proposed by the U.S. Since it would involve
foreign ministers of Europe, Russia, the United Nations, Arab states and Israel,
not national leaders, the conference could sidestep the refusal of the Israeli
prime minister, Ariel Sharon, to negotiate with Mr. Arafat. Sharon's biggest
threat: Likud, Page 1.

By convening the meeting, planned for the summer, the Bush administration has
put the U.S. back in the center of Middle Eastern diplomacy -- a position it had
tried to avoid. And while expectations for the conference are realistically low,
some people, noting that more than 2,000 Israelis and Palestinians have been
killed since October 2000, said the U.S. should simply impose a peace plan. But
strong votes for support of Israel in Congress made it clear that President Bush
would face domestic opposition to press Israel any harder.

The sense of movement at week's end contrasted with the frustrations that
preceded it. Last weekend, Palestinians dressed as Israeli soldiers killed four
people -- including a 5-year-old girl -- in a settlement near Hebron. Israel
raided Hebron on Monday, killing at least 8 and saying it arrested 150 terrorist
suspects and found a car bomb and two suitcases of explosives. On Wednesday, in
the Gaza Strip Israeli troops opened fire in a residential area after, according
to Israel, Palestinian militants tried to set off explosives. Three
Palestinians, including a 2-year-old girl, were killed.

And then Israeli soldiers returned to Nablus, one of the West Bank's largest
cities -- and, after heavy fighting last month that left 75 Palestinians dead,
one of its most devastated. Israel retreated after saying it had seized bombs
and interrupted planned attacks.

The U.N. fact-finding mission intended to investigate Palestinian claims of an
Israeli massacre in the West Bank town of Jenin was disbanded after the U.S.
dropped its support for the inquiry in the face of Israel's continued resistance
to the composition of the investigative team, the scope of its investigation and
the possibility that it could be used to charge Israeli commanders and soldiers
with war crimes.

Israeli troops continue to surround the Church of the Nativity, where some 25
Palestinians wanted by Israel along with perhaps 150 other people have been
holed up for a month, reportedly subsisting on boiled grass. One man, identified
as a hardened Palestinian fighter, rushed into the church's courtyard, shooting
and yelling, and was shot to death by Israeli snipers. During another gunfight,
fires broke out in the church compound, but the most historic area, the
traditional birthplace of Jesus, appeared to remain unharmed. On Thursday, 10
people dashed past soldiers into the compound, carrying a small amount of food.


AFGHANISTAN -- A force of 1,000 Western soldiers -- mostly British troops,
augmented by an American unit -- began one of the largest ground operations of
the eight-month war in Afghanistan, searching the mountainous areas of the
southeast for Al Qaeda and Taliban forces. They reported finding trenches,
bunkers and caves used by their quarry, but the fighters were gone. Reporters,
as has often been the case in Afghanistan, were barred from directly observing
the action.

The complexities of keeping an international coalition working were underlined
when British commanders announced that, because transferring prisoners to
another foreign government might violate the Geneva Conventions, British
soldiers would hand over any prisoners to the Afghan authorities, not to the
U.S. The interim Afghan government is expected to hand over any prisoners the
U.S. says it wants.

Physicians for Human Rights, based in Boston, has found recent human remains at
a large site in a desert in northern Afghanistan. Its report lends credence to
accounts that hundreds of Taliban soldiers who surrendered to Northern Alliance
troops at Kunduz in November were either killed by troops of the Uzbek leader,
Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, or died while being transported in sealed cargo
containers. General Dostum, the deputy defense minister for the interim
government, has become the northern representative for Hamid Karzai, the interim
government's leader.

DOMESTICALLY -- In a ruling that could, if upheld, curtail many Sept. 11
investigations, a federal judge said the law regarding material witnesses could
not justify holding people in grand jury investigations. Liberty and/or
security? Page 1. And five pipe bombs exploded near mailboxes in rural areas of
Illinois and Iowa, injuring five people; three more bombs were found. All were
rigged to explode when moved or when the mailbox was opened and were accompanied
by anti-government notes. Mail service there was suspended, and a broad
investigation began.   ANDREA KANNAPELL

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: U.S. Special Forces soldiers arrive in Tbilisi, Georgia, to help
teach troops there counterterrorism. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
SHOOTINGS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (87%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); HIJACKING
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%);
BOMBINGS (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (77%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (76%); IMMIGRATION (76%); REFUGEES (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); PRIME
MINISTERS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%);
FIRES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) PALESTINIANS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: KANNAPELL, ANDREA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); TBILISI, GEORGIA (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES
(95%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); EUROPE (92%); GEORGIA (90%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GREAT BRITAIN;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             388 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nepal Says Over 400 Rebels Are Dead After Several Battles

BYLINE:  By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 5


The government of Nepal says that its security forces have killed more than 400
Maoist rebels since Thursday in training camps hidden in remote areas, at a cost
of only three soldiers' lives.

Such a rout of the Maoists would constitute the worst military blow yet to the
rebels in their six-year-long insurgency.

The government's claim of victory is difficult to verify because no journalists
have been allowed to visit the battlefield. If true, it would also mean the
security forces had finally taken the offensive. In February and again last
month, thousands of guerrillas successfully mounted surprise attacks on police
and army posts.

Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, who engaged in three rounds of peace talks
with the Maoists last year, has now turned fully to war. The rebel leader,
Pushpa Kamal Dahal, issued a statement Thursday calling for renewed negotiations
and "a positive political way out."

But Mr. Deuba, who said in a recent interview that the rebels betrayed him in
the last rounds of negotiations, forcefully rejected Mr. Dahal's overture,
saying today that the government would not talk to the rebels "until they laid
down arms and surrendered."

Mr. Deuba is aggressively seeking foreign military assistance, casting Nepal's
battle with the Maoists, in which more than 4,000 people have died since it
began in 1996, as part of the global war against terrorism.

He left Katmandu today for the United States and Britain. He is to meet on
Tuesday in New York with President Bush, whose administration is proposing $20
million in military aid, and with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain on his
way home.

"I will appeal to them to help us fight and defeat terrorism," Mr. Deuba said
today before he boarded his flight.

The United States government has already offered considerable moral support to
Nepal, a constitutional Hindu monarchy surrounded by India and China. In
January, Colin L. Powell became the first American secretary of state to visit
the impoverished Himalayan kingdom, which has a population of 23 million.

The American ambassador in Katmandu, Michael E. Malinowski, has publicly
described the rebels as terrorists who "under the guise of Maoism or the
so-called people's war are fundamentally the same as terrorists elsewhere -- be
they members of the Shining Path, Abu Sayyaf, the Khmer Rouge or Al Qaeda."

Last month, a team of 15 American military officers spent more than two weeks in
Nepal to assess the situation and the country's military needs.

The rebels, inspired by the Shining Path guerrillas of Peru, say they are
fighting against the monarchy and for land reform and the liberation of Nepal.
They call themselves Maoists, but have not won the support of China, the
neighboring behemoth and birthplace of Maoism.

Some critics of the Nepalese government's approach say it focused too much on a
military solution and too little on addressing the abject poverty that has made
Nepal fertile soil for guerrillas. Nepali human rights groups, as well as
Amnesty International, have also accused the security forces of using torture
and summary executions.

Mr. Deuba has said he will act firmly against those who commit human rights
abuses. He maintains that the government cannot effectively pursue antipoverty
programs until peace is restored.

Defense ministry officials have yet to provide a detailed description of how the
security forces managed to kill hundreds of Maoists in the new military
operation while losing only three men. But journalists and Western diplomats in
Nepal say the government may have done much of its fighting from helicopters.

Suman Pradhan, the news editor of The Katmandu Post, said reporters for the
newspaper in the districts that encircle the Maoist strongholds say they have
seen helicopters heading into the Maoist areas where the death toll has been
highest.

A Western diplomat said tonight: "If the Royal Nepal Army is engaging from
helicopters, they may just have the Maoists in their line of sight. If you're
battling people and they're on the ground and you're in the air, you have an
advantage."

According to the Defense Ministry, 40 rebels were killed Thursday night when
security forces attacked a Maoist training camp in the western Doti district.
About 350 more died in a raid in the jungles of the Rolpa district. Today, the
ministry said 15 more bodies had been recovered in the two districts.

The government has suspended civil liberties and press freedom since declaring a
state of emergency in November to combat the Maoists.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMED
FORCES (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); PEACE PROCESS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (74%); DEFENSE SPENDING (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(71%); AL-QAEDA (71%); WAR ON TERROR (69%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%) DUGGER, CELIA W; DAHAL, PUSHPA KAMAL; DEUBA, SHER
BAHADUR (PRIME MIN)

CITY: KATHMANDU, NEPAL (89%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NEPAL (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
INDIA (92%)

REGION: NEPAL

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             389 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hugo Banzer, 75, Ex-Dictator; Guided Bolivia to Democracy

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: LA PAZ, Bolivia, May 5


Former President Hugo Banzer, a onetime dictator who led Bolivia to democracy
and helped wipe out cocaine production, died of a heart attack today. He was 75.

The two-time president, who resigned from office last August after falling ill
with lung cancer that had spread, is likely to be remembered with mixed
feelings.

Opponents contend that the former dictator never lost his authoritarian streak,
continuing to abuse human rights and failing to help the Andean nation's Indian
majority even as an elected leader. But his supporters say Mr. Banzer did more
to strengthen Bolivian democracy than any of his predecessors, and his efforts
to stamp out coca cultivation won him praise in Washington.

"Hugo Banzer was the leader of the Nationalist Democratic Action party, but he
ended up being much more than that," a teary-eyed Jorge Quiroga, Bolivia's
president, said today. "He ended up being an example for all Bolivians, and for
democracy in all of the country."

The government declared 30 days of mourning, and ordered the city of Santa Cruz,
Mr. Banzer's home, to shut down for his funeral on Monday.

Mr. Banzer was an American-trained soldier and a political survivor, overcoming
13 coup attempts while he was dictator from 1971-78, leading a government
accused of widespread human rights abuses.

After the era of Latin American dictatorships, he reinvented himself as a
democrat, running in every election in the 1980's and '90's before winning the
presidency in 1997.

Hugo Banzer Suarez was born May 10, 1926, in Concepcion, a sleepy ranching town
in Santa Cruz Province. He went to the Bolivian Army Military High School in La
Paz, graduating as a cavalry lieutenant.

He was sent to the United States Army's School of the Americas in Panama, and
received more training at Fort Hood, Tex., in 1960. He later went to Washington
as a military attache.

He held various government posts in the 1960's, but was exiled to Argentina in
1971 after leading a failed coup attempt against Gen. Juan Jose Torres, the
leftist president.

In 1964 Mr. Banzer was appointed minister of education, and in 1969 he became
director of the military academy, a prestigious post he held until he was
dismissed in January 1971 by General Torres.

In August 1971, Mr. Banzer sneaked back into Bolivia to lead a coup that ousted
General Torres, and declared himself president.

Mr. Banzer's military rule ushered in violent repression of opponents. Censors
clamped down on the news media, and in 1974 Mr. Banzer prohibited all political
activity.

Widely accepted figures say that during Mr. Banzer's 1971-78 tenure, 19,000
people sought asylum in foreign countries, 15,000 were arrested and at least 200
were killed for political reasons.

Mr. Banzer was overthrown in 1978, but he helped establish his democratic
credentials in 1985 when he placed first in a presidential election, but with
less than 50 percent of the vote. Rather than seizing office, he stepped aside
and allowed Congress to constitutionally elect Victor Paz Estenssoro as
president.

In 1997, Mr. Banzer came in first again, and this time was voted into the
presidency by Congress.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (Foreign)

PERSON: Hugo Banzer

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hugo Banzer, ex-leader of Bolivia. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (92%); DEATHS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); COUPS (89%); MILITARY RULE (78%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (78%); POLITICS (78%); COCAINE (78%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); LIBERALISM (76%); ARMIES (74%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(74%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); CENSORSHIP (71%); HIGH SCHOOLS (68%); MILITARY
SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (68%); ARRESTS (65%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (63%); LUNG
CANCER (57%); CANCER (57%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

BANZER, HUGO

CITY: LA PAZ, BOLIVIA (58%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOLIVIA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); ARGENTINA
(79%); CHILE (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%)

REGION: BOLIVIA

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             390 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Rejects All Support For New Court On Atrocities

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


Bush administration officials said today that the new International Criminal
Court should expect no cooperation from the United States, and that its
prosecutors would not be given any information from the United States to help
them bring cases against any individuals.

On the day the Bush administration formally renounced support for the treaty, as
expected,Pierre-Richard Prosper, the State Department's ambassador for war
crimes, said "If the prosecutor of the I.C.C. seeks to build a case against an
individual, the prosecutor should build the case on his or her own effort and
not be dependent or reliant upon U.S. information or cooperation."

Mr. Prosper was one of several government officials who fanned out today to
explain the administration's decision to drop support for a treaty that
democratic nations have ratified. In a letter to Kofi Annan, the secretary
general of the United Nations, the Bush administration said the Clinton
administration's signature on the treaty creating the court was no longer
legally binding.

"The United States does not intend to become a party to the treaty," John R.
Bolton, an undersecretary of state, wrote to Mr. Annan in a one-paragraph
letter. "Accordingly, the United States has no legal obligations from its
signature on the December 31, 2000."

Officials said that Mr. Bolton's statement was also intended to relieve the
United States of obligations under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
a 1969 agreement that requires states to refrain from taking steps to undermine
treaties they sign, even if they do not ratify them.

The decision was a victory for a faction of policy makers in the administration
who had argued that the treaty was flawed and dangerous. The group, led by
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Mr. Bolton, the undersecretary of state
for arms control and international security, contended that the treaty would
require the United States to cede some of its sovereignty to an international
prosecutor who would be answerable to no one and could initiate capricious
prosecutions of American officials and military officers.

Senator Russell D. Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat, said he too believed the
treaty had problems that required further discussion. But Mr. Feingold added
that the sharp disavowal could harm American efforts to combat terrorism and
would contribute to the mistrust of Washington in Europe and elsewhere, where
some view the United States as quick to follow a unilateral path.

"Beyond the extremely problematic matter of casting doubt on the U.S. commitment
to international justice and accountability," Senator Feingold said, "these
steps actually call into question our country's credibility in all multilateral
endeavors.

"As we continue to fight terrorism worldwide," he added, "we are asking
countries around the globe to honor important commitments, to crack down on the
financial and communications networks of terrorists and international criminals,
and to share sensitive intelligence with the United States. This is not the
right time to signal a lack of respect for multilateralism."

Mr. Rumsfeld said he believed that the court would be an obstacle to the fight
against terrorism. He said the court would "necessarily complicate U.S. military
cooperation" with countries that were party to the treaty by potentially opening
American servicemen and women to prosecution. Mr. Rumsfeld said the United
States would try to convince countries that would incur obligations to hand over
Americans that any such action would be illegitimate.

"By putting U.S. men and women in uniform at risk of politicized prosecutions,"
Mr. Rumsfeld said, the court "could well create a powerful disincentive for U.S.
military engagement in the world."

The decision produced widespread criticism from officials at several human
rights organizations. Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch said: "This will
further aggravate Washington's closest allies who are the main supporters of
this court. The administration is seeking to delegitimize it by casting doubt as
to its credibility and effectiveness."

The court, which will soon begin work in The Hague, will assume jurisdiction
over charges of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed after
July 1 of this year. Until now, such courts have been set up on an ad hoc basis.

Mr. Prosper said the United States would not allow itself to become a safe haven
for people sought by the court. Asked what the United States would do if it had
custody of a non-American sought by the international court, Mr. Prosper said
Washington might consider sending the suspect back to the country where the
crime was committed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); TERRORISM (84%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (84%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (63%) WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TREATIES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: RUSS FEINGOLD (79%) LEWIS, NEIL A; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             394 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

White House On Autocrats: Malaysian Si, Cuban No

BYLINE:  By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


President Bush today continued the rehabilitation of Asia's longest-serving
leader, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia, welcoming him to the Oval
Office and calling him an ally in the war on terror. At the same time, Mr. Bush
toned down Washington's long-running complaints about Dr. Mahathir's sometimes
brutal suppression of dissent.

The meeting was particularly notable because Mr. Bush used the moment to
castigate Cuba's leader, Fidel Castro, as a dictator who "ought to have free
elections," "ought to have a free press" and "ought to free his prisoners." But
he made no public comments about Malaysia's record on the same issues.

It was a striking omission: Mr. Bush's State Department, in its most recent
human rights report, documented Malaysia's intimidation of the press; its use of
the police and courts for arbitrary arrests of Dr. Mahathir's political
opponents; and its manipulation of electoral procedures devised to favor the
governing coalition that has held power since 1957.

During a brief exchange with reporters in the Oval Office, Mr. Bush was asked
whether the United States has changed its view that Dr. Mahathir's former deputy
prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, was jailed in 1998 because of a power struggle
with Dr. Mahathir. Mr. Anwar remains in jail, and the State Department report
refers to him as a political prisoner.

"Our position has not changed," Mr. Bush said quietly, as Dr. Mahathir sat next
to him.

Dr. Mahathir was given top-level attention at the meeting: Vice President Dick
Cheney sat in, along with Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, and
Richard Armitage, the deputy secretary of state.

Mr. Bush used the moment to praise the 76-year-old Dr. Mahathir, who has run
Malaysia for 21 years, for his efforts to track down Al Qaeda leaders in his
country.

American officials say they believe that Qaeda plotters used Malaysia as a base
to plan attacks -- which were foiled -- in Singapore, although in January Dr.
Mahathir told reporters that he saw no evidence of Al Qaeda in his country.

Today he revised that view. "At that time we were not very certain," he said,
"but we have discovered that some of these people who were active, who planned
to overthrow the government by force of bombs, had activity in Pakistan and
eventually to Afghanistan, where they did meet with the Al Qaeda people."

Mr. Bush said he expected "continued cooperation" from Malaysia.

Asia experts inside and outside the government say Dr. Mahathir has skillfully
used the war on terrorism to win his way back into Washington's good graces. He
was shunned after the jailing of Mr. Anwar -- a former finance minister with
many friends in Washington -- and for his periodic outbursts about American
imperialism and the power of Jews in the United States.

But now Malaysia is often cited by administration officials as an exemplary
moderate Islam nation that cracks down on suspected terrorists. Its military
ties with the United States are growing closer. More than 60 suspected Islamic
militants have been arrested, many of them on charges suggesting that they were
plotting against the sitting government in Kuala Lumpur.

In fact, Dr. Mahathir's warm reception here was reminiscent of how President
Clinton, eager to expand trade in Asia, welcomed President Suharto of Indonesia
to the White House and brought along much of his cabinet to greet the
authoritarian leader. Only a week before, the Secret Service had deftly avoided
an encounter with Mr. Castro when Mr. Clinton and Mr. Castro attended a
reception at the United Nations.

The outspoken Dr. Mahathir is now one of the leading critics of the United
States in Asia, and he did not depart from that line today.

"The West is very impatient," he said in a luncheon speech. "You want overnight
change." But he cautioned that "sudden change, even if it's for the good, is
disruptive," and added, "Democracy for people who are not used to it can
undermine stability, resulting in war."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); ELECTIONS (79%);
POLITICS (79%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); COUPS (75%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES
(73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); ARRESTS
(73%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  MALAYSIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
CUBA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); FIDEL CASTRO (70%); DICK CHENEY (59%); CONDOLEEZZA
RICE (56%) SANGER, DAVID E; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CASTRO, FIDEL (PRES);
MAHATHIR MOHAMAD (PRIME MIN); ANWAR IBRAHIM

COUNTRY: MALAYSIA (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (94%); ASIA (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); SINGAPORE (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: MALAYSIA;  CUBA

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             399 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Faults Colombia

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 21


The United Nations said today that Colombia failed to protect the people of the
river town of Bellavista in a May 2 battle in which 119 civilians were killed
when a rebel rocket landed on a church where they had sought refuge.

The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in a report
to President Andres Pastrana, attributed the killings to the rebel Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia. But it said that paramilitary fighters battling the
rebels were also to blame for having entered the town and that Mr. Pastrana's
government failed to protect the people despite repeated warnings about the
dangers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES
OF COLOMBIA (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (83%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (58%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (57%) UNITED NATIONS

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BELLAVISTA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             402 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Trials of Job Hunting Beyond a Certain Size

BYLINE:  By MELINDA LIGOS

SECTION: Section 10; Column 4; Job Market; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1147 words


When 390-pound Robert Diaz goes on a job interview, he goes to almost desperate
lengths to appear smaller.

When he's waiting in the reception area, he tries to cover his belly with his
portfolio. When he is walking into an interview, he treads delicately, almost
tiptoeing through the office. And when he sits down in front of his prospective
boss's desk, he never plops down in his chair, he eases himself into it.

Still, nothing can really hide his frame, and few hiring managers, if any, can
get past it.

"Usually, the interview is over almost as soon as they see me," says Mr. Diaz, a
resident of Flushing, Queens, who has been looking for a job as a law librarian
since last fall after spending the last 10 years in business for himself as a
math tutor. When he left his last professional position at a law firm in 1992,
he weighed only 270 pounds. Now, he says, as soon as he walks in the door for an
interview, he gets the same reaction from employers.

"Their eyes immediately dart down to my belly," he says. "Then, there's a brief
look of shock. And then they want to get me out of their office as quickly as
possible."

Discrimination against overweight workers is nothing new. In fact, employment
lawyers say it has been on the rise since the economy tightened. "In this job
market, anything considered to be a flaw, including obesity, is going to be a
drawback," said Richard S. Corenthal, a lawyer with Meyer, Suozzi, English &
Klein in Mineola, N.Y.

Still, even as people like Mr. Diaz struggle to get a job, obese workers are
slowly gaining protection against discrimination under many states' disability
laws.

In April of this year, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that so-called morbid
obesity -- defined as obesity which causes other medical problems like
arthritis, asthma and others -- is a handicap that may be protected under the
state's antidiscrimination laws. In that case, Regina A. Viscik, a woman who
weighed more than 400 pounds, was fired after just four days on the job as an
assistant for the Fowler Equipment Company in 1988.

Part of Ms. Viscik's job was to travel back and forth many times to a fax
machine, a task made difficult because of arthritis and other conditions brought
on by her weight, according to her lawyer, Christopher Kelly, a partner at the
Reppert, Kelly law firm in Westfield, N.J.

After four days, "Her boss basically said, 'I'm sorry, but we need someone who
can move around a little quicker,' " Mr. Kelly said. A spokesman for Fowler said
Ms. Viscik was fired for making too many personal phone calls.

Mr. Kelly heralds the ruling as a victory for those whose obesity leads to
physical handicaps. Other states have adopted even more liberal laws relating to
discrimination against overweight people.

Four jurisdictions in the country -- San Francisco; Santa Cruz, Calif.; Michigan
and the District of Columbia -- have all adopted weight-based discrimination
laws. San Francisco's was recently tested when Jennifer Portnick, a 240-pound
aerobics instructor, filed a complaint with the city's Human Rights Commission
last September contending that she was rejected for a job with Jazzercise Inc.
because of her size. The case was recently settled, and Jazzercise says it will
no longer require prospective instructors to appear svelte as long as they are
in good shape.

New York's human rights laws recognize obesity as a disability and forbid most
employers to discriminate against such workers, according to Mr. Corenthal.

Adoptions of such laws are indications that discrimination against overweight
job seekers may soon become as taboo as sexual or racial discrimination, says
Josephine Tucker, co-chairwoman of the employment law division of Morrison &
Foerster, a law firm with offices in Irvine, Calif.

"If you've just put on a few extra pounds, you're still not going to be
protected," Ms. Tucker said. "But if you're truly obese, you may be." As more
states adopt such laws, Ms. Tucker says, prospective employers may become more
wary of making comments to job seekers about their weight, even in a joking
manner.

"Employers know that they can't make a racist joke to a job seeker, or question
whether their sex will prevent them from doing a job," Ms. Tucker says. "But
many don't realize yet that they can't say to a fat person, 'Are you going to be
able to do the job quickly enough?' "

Such quips still abound in the workplace, regardless of the antidiscrimination
laws in place in many states, says Dr. Kelli Friedman, a research associate at
Structure House, a residential weight-loss center in Durham, N.C. In a study of
its patients conducted last July, 25 percent said they felt they were not hired
for a job because of their weight. Others complained of being passed up for
promotions or receiving bad assignments.

Such discrimination often stems from the common myths that overweight people are
slower or less motivated than their slimmer counterparts, says Jeffrey E.
Christian, chief executive of Christian & Timbers Inc., a Cleveland recruiting
firm with offices in New York. Mr. Christian often coaches obese job seekers to
address an employer's concerns directly. "I tell them to say something like, 'As
you can see, I'm a big woman, and some people may not think I can get as much
work done as others. As a result, I've had to work harder than everyone else.' "

"Get that issue off the table quickly so that the employer can remember
something else about the interview besides the fact that you're overweight," Mr.
Christian advises.

But tactics like these may not be enough to sway some employers. In one recent
interview for a librarian position at a publishing firm, Mr. Diaz says his
interviewer asked him to follow him to an office down the hall, but kept turning
around and looking worriedly at Mr. Diaz as they walked. "He was kind of
mumbling to himself, and I could tell he was very concerned about something,"
Mr. Diaz said. As soon as they got to the man's office, Mr. Diaz realized what
the problem was.

"His office was decorated in a Japanese motif, and he had these really small
black-lacquer chairs," he said. Mr. Diaz was about to sit down, when the man
asked him if he would mind standing throughout the interview. "He told me the
chairs were too delicate," Mr. Diaz says. The interview lasted only five
minutes, and both men knew that Mr. Diaz would not be back for a second. "He
just seemed disgusted at having to even speak to me," Mr. Diaz said.

At another recent interview at an insurance company, Mr. Diaz says, a
prospective employer explained that some employees took a half-hour for lunches,
while others opted to take an hour, and joked, "You look like an hour-lunch
guy."

"I had to laugh along with her, because I wanted to appear agreeable," he says.
But he admits that the comments still stung. "I'm trying to develop a tough
shell, or I'm going to have my feelings hurt all the time."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Diaz, a former law librarian, must contend with responses
to his weight. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMPLOYMENT (91%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%);
LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (90%); EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS (90%); MANAGERS &
SUPERVISORS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); OBESITY (89%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (88%); LEGAL
SERVICES (88%); DISABLED PERSONS (86%); LAW LIBRARIES (74%); LITIGATION (73%);
LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (72%); OBESITY RELATED DISEASES (70%); SUPREME COURTS
(65%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (64%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (64%) LABOR;  WEIGHT;
OBESITY;  DISCRIMINATION

COMPANY: MEYER SUOZZI ENGLISH & KLEIN PC (66%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (66%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (66%)

PERSON: LIGOS, MELINDA

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (78%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             406 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Peru: Court To Seek Fujimori Extradition

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 95 words


The Supreme Court has agreed to ask Japan to extradite former President Alberto
Fujimori, who has been accused of rights violations in the massacres of Peruvian
political opponents, a court source said.

The extradition bid is Peru's latest attempt to shake Mr. Fujimori from his
self-imposed exile in Japan and bring him to trial. Justice Minister Fernando
Olivera said the Supreme Court and government officials were preparing the
request, which will eventually be forwarded to Tokyo. "Fujimori is acting like a
delinquent trying to evade justice," Mr. Olivera said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (96%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (88%); POLITICS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (85%) EXTRADITION;  JAPAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PERU;  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (58%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); JAPAN (94%)

REGION: PERU;  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             408 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Myanmar: Abuses Persist, Rights Group Says

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 75 words


Amnesty International called the recent release from house arrest of the
pro-democracy leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, a positive development.

But it urged continued international pressure on the military government over
human rights abuses, including forced labor and political arrests. Despite a
highly publicized program of releases, it said that at the start of this year,
about 1,600 political prisoners were still being held.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HOUSE
ARREST (88%); ARRESTS (88%); FORCED LABOR (84%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%)

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI (73%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (92%); ASIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             409 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Paradise Torn by Feuding, Kashmiris Long for Independence

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR, Kashmir, May 28


Dil Bazeer Asharaf is fed up.

He is 24 years old. He earned a bachelor's degree from the University of
Kashmir, and then he completed a two-year program in computer science at a
well-regarded technical institute. He has a girlfriend, but he cannot find a
job.

So he works in his brother's telephone shop, where people come to make
long-distance calls from a 7- by-22-foot space wedged between a
fruit-and-vegetable seller and a general store. Business is lousy, he said.

Why?

"It's the militants," he said.

The militants are the men who have taken up arms and have been waging a war for
the past 12 years to wrest the state of Jammu and Kashmir away from Indian
control.

A few years ago, Mr. Asharaf would have voted -- had any such vote been held --
to unite mostly Muslim Kashmir with Pakistan. But no longer. He said the turning
point was when Pakistanis and Afghans who had been trained in Al Qaeda camps in
Afghanistan, which were run by Osama bin Laden, effectively took over what had
been an indigenous Kashmiri guerrilla army.

Mr. Asharaf's anger with the militants is expressed by many residents here. That
is good news for the government of India.

But there is more. Mr. Asharaf is just as fed up with the Indian military and
police forces, and with being part of India. "The army is also no good," he
said. "They're killing innocent people and harassing everyone."

For example, he said, an Indian military officer had come in the day before and
had told him he must keep a record of all telephone calls made to numbers
outside Kashmir.

Although Mr. Asharaf does not want to be part of Pakistan, he wants nothing to
do with India, either. He wants independence for Kashmir.

That appears to be attitude of most Kashmiris, according to polls, many Indian
officials and interviews conducted over several days here with merchants,
shoppers, and people enjoying a religious holiday in a park on the edge of
glistening Dal Lake.

This region of towering mountains and exquisite natural beauty has become a war
zone. Soldiers in full combat gear are everywhere. Residents fear to go out at
night. Tourists shun the place.

In the last few years, a daily average of one soldier, two civilians and three
militants have been killed, a spokesman for the army here, Lt. Col. Mukthiar
Singh, said in an interview this week. The Indian government says its security
forces have killed a total of 15,000 militants. Human rights organizations put
the number of dead at many times that, and residents here say that many of the
men the government calls militants are only suspected sympathizers.

The war, the fear, the death and destruction, have taken a heavy psychological
toll. In 1990, about 1,700 men and women sought help in Srinagar at the
Psychiatric Diseases Hospital, a run-down facility where bare light bulbs hang
from exposed wires in the director's office. Last year, the number seeking help
was 47,828, according to hospital records.

Most of the patients are women. The major illnesses are depression and
post-traumatic stress disorder, hospital doctors said. Suicide rates are
climbing, primarily among teenagers.

Children here are being deprived of a normal childhood, said Dr. Mushtaq A.
Margoob, an associate professor in the department of psychiatry at the
Government Medical College, Srinagar. Instead of spending Sundays with their
parents in the beautiful Mughal gardens here, families stay at home, fearing
another bombing.

This was a hospitable society where, at one time, "when somebody invited you for
lunch, you found you were there for dinner," Dr. Margoob said. "When you're
invited for dinner, you'll have breakfast."

Now, many people are afraid to venture out at night, fearing the army, which
increases its checkpoints after dark, as much as the militants.

"My sister never goes out," said Hilal Ahmad Bhat, who took his sister's
children to a park on a recent holiday along Dal Lake, where other children were
splashing and laughing in the park fountains and men were hawking colorful
balloons. "I thought, 'O.K., let's take them out, we'll have some fun.' "

His sister's husband was killed a few years ago by shrapnel from a grenade
thrown at soldiers. She has two daughters, 13-year-old Farhana, in bright red
today, and 10-year-old Farhat, in orange.

"What is the future for these girls?" asked Mr. Bhat, who was married five
months ago. "I'm 25; sometimes I don't think we're going to get rid of this
thing."

He said militants had come to his house demanding money and food, which they
paid for. "We are helpless," he said.

The militants later destroyed his house because he has a government job and
comes from a family that has long been pro-India -- an exception here, he
agreed. A few days later, a militant leader came and offered compensation, but
Mr. Bhat turned it down. Then a senior Indian official came and offered
compensation, but he never came back and nothing happened.

Many here say that the Indian government is not doing even the little things it
could to take advantage of Kashmiris' resentment of the militants.

Last week, Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee visited Kashmir for the first
time in nearly two years. He announced a number of economic and development
plans, but he pointedly did not meet with any leaders of the Hurriyat, a
coalition of 23 political parties and organizations that advocates a negotiated
settlement of the Kashmiri conflict.

If the prime minister were determined to win the hearts and minds of Kashmiris,
one Pakistani analyst said, he would also have visited the widow of Abdul Ghani
Lone, a senior Hurriyat leader who was assassinated on May 21, a few days before
the prime minister's visit. He did telephone Mr. Lone's son on the day of the
assassination, but no representative of the prime minister was sent to Mr.
Lone's funeral.

"I don't like Pakistan. I don't like India," said Mehrajuddin, who is the owner
of the Hasty Tasty restaurant on Srinagar's most elegant shopping street and who
uses only one name. He cursed the government for the lack of electricity, which
meant that his restaurant had to close at 8 p.m.

"We want independence."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Even with two degrees, Dil Bazeer Asharaf, 24, cannot find a
job, so he helps at his brother's shop in Srinagar. (Raymond Bonner/The New York
Times) Map of Kashmir highlighting Srinagar: Srinagar is the summer capital of
the Indian-held part of Kashmir.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL-QAEDA (90%); ARMIES (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); TERRORISM (75%); FRUIT & VEGETABLE STORES (75%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (72%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); POLICE FORCES (69%); RELIGION (67%);
INTERVIEWS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (60%); LONG DISTANCE TELEPHONE
SERVICE (56%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (50%) PUBLIC OPINION;  MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS;  SUICIDES AND
SUICIDE ATTEMPTS;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (51%) BONNER, RAYMOND

STATE: KASHMIR (96%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (95%); INDIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: INDIA;  PAKISTAN;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU;  SRINAGAR (KASHMIR)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             410 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Talks On A Rights Tribunal

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 88 words


The special United Nations envoy to Cambodia for human rights, Peter Leuprecht,
said a number of countries were pressing the United Nations and Cambodia to
resume talks on holding an international trial for the surviving leaders of the
Khmer Rouge.

The United Nations recently withdrew from the talks, saying the Cambodian side
did not seem serious about reaching an agreement. This is the first time a
United Nations official has publicly suggested in Cambodia the possibility that
the talks could resume.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; LEUPRECHT, PETER

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             419 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Estonia: Soviet Era Officers Charged

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 101 words


Eight former Soviet K.G.B. officers have been charged with crimes against
humanity for their role in the deportation of Estonian civilians to Siberia in
1949, when Estonia was part of the Soviet Union, the police said.

The officers are accused of direct involvement in the deportation of nearly 400
people on March 25, 1949, in an operation aimed at intimidating the local
population into joining collective farms. Estonian courts have already indicted
four former K.G.B. officers on similar charges. Russia has called on Estonia to
stop the prosecution of former K.G.B. officers residing in Estonia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%)
DEPORTATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: KGB (SOVIET SECURITY POLICE)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); ESTONIA (92%); EUROPE (90%)

REGION: ESTONIA;  SIBERIA;  RUSSIA

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             420 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women's Rights: Why Not?

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


We now have a window into what President Bush and America's senators think of
the world's women: Not much.

An international women's treaty banning discrimination has been ratified by 169
countries so far (without emasculating men in any of them!), yet it has
languished in the United States Senate ever since President Carter sent it there
for ratification in 1980. This month the Senate Foreign Relations Committee got
around to holding hearings on it, but the Bush administration, after shyly
supporting it at first, now is finding its courage faltering.

The support came from Colin Powell's State Department, but then John Ashcroft's
Justice Department found out about the treaty -- and seems to be trying to
defend America from the terrifying threat of global women's rights. You'd think
he might have other distractions, like fixing the F.B.I., but the Justice
Department is conducting its own review of the treaty in what looks suspiciously
like an effort to eviscerate it.

I wish Mr. Ashcroft could come here to Pakistan, to talk to women like Zainab
Noor. Because, frankly, the treaty has almost nothing to do with American women,
who already enjoy the rights the treaty supports -- opportunities to run for
political office, to receive an education, to choose one's own spouse, to hold
jobs. Instead it has everything to do with the half of the globe where to be
female is to be persecuted until, often, death.

Mrs. Noor, a pretty woman with soft eyes and a gold nose ring, grew up in the
Pakistani countryside, and like her three sisters she never received a day's
education. At the age of 15 she was married off by her parents, becoming the
second wife of the imam of a local mosque. He beat her relentlessly.

"He would grab my hair, throw me on the floor and beat me with sticks," she
recalled. Finally she ran away.

Her husband found her, tied her to the bed, wired a metal rod to a 220-volt
electrical outlet and forced it into her vagina. Surgeons managed to save her
life, but horrific internal burns forced them to remove her bladder, urethra,
vagina and rectum. Her doctor says she will have to carry external colostomy and
urine bags for the rest of her life.

At least she survived. Each year about one million girls in the third world die
because of mistreatment and discrimination.

In societies where males and females have relatively equal access to food and
health care, and where there is no sex-selective abortion, females live longer
and there are about 104 females for every 100 males. In contrast, Pakistan has
only 94 females for every 100 males, pointing to three million to seven million
missing females in that country alone. Perhaps 10 percent of Pakistani girls and
women die because of gender discrimination.

In most cases it is not that parents deliberately kill their daughters. Rather,
people skimp on spending on females -- just like Sedanshah, a man at an Afghan
refugee camp I visited near here. When his wife and son were both sick, he
bought medicine for the boy alone, saying of his wife, "She's always sick, so
it's not worth buying medicine for her."

At Capital Hospital here in Islamabad, a nurse named Rukhsana Kausar recalled
fraternal-twin babies she had treated recently. At birth, the girl twin weighed
one pound one ounce more than the boy. At seven months, their position was
reversed: the boy weighed one pound 13 ounces more than his sister.

Critics have complained that the treaty, in the words of Jesse Helms, was
"negotiated by radical feminists with the intent of enshrining their radical
anti-family agenda into international law" and is "a vehicle for imposing
abortion on countries that still protect the rights of the unborn."

That's absurd. Twenty years of experience with the treaty in the great majority
of countries shows that it simply helps third-world women gain their barest
human rights. In Pakistan, for example, women who become pregnant after being
raped are often prosecuted for adultery and sentenced to death by stoning. But
this treaty has helped them escape execution.

How can we be against that? Do we really want to side with the Taliban mullahs,
who, like Mr. Ashcroft, fretted that the treaty imposes sexual equality? Or do
we dare side with third-world girls who die because of their gender, more than
2,000 of them today alone?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (93%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (77%); HEALTH CARE
(75%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (74%); FOREIGN POLICY (71%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); LIFE EXPECTANCY (69%); ABORTION (60%) WOMEN;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES;
DISCRIMINATION;  ABORTION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(56%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); JIMMY CARTER (58%) KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D; BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES); ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); HELMS, JESSE (SEN)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             421 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: CAPTIVES;
Pakistan Declares It Captured 2 Americans at Afghan Border

BYLINE:  By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, June 17


Pakistan said today that it was holding two Americans captured more than a month
ago while trying to cross the border from Afghanistan, while Pakistani officials
said privately that there might be more Americans among their prisoners.

Aziz Ahmed Khan, spokesman for the Pakistani Foreign Ministry, said during a
news conference here that the two Americans had been detained in the country's
tribal areas, the remote region near the Afghan border where many Qaeda and
Taliban fighters are believed to have taken refuge. He said the two had been
captured with others who were also crossing the border from Afghanistan.

"I was told that probably two of them were American passport holders," Mr. Aziz
said.

He declined to disclose details of the detentions or the names of those being
held.

Later in the day, a senior Pakistani intelligence official who spoke on the
condition of anonymity said that the nationality of the two men, who have been
in custody since early May, had been "reasonably ascertained" and that the
United States was being notified about them, though officials in Washington said
today that they had heard nothing.

Yet there are strong indications that a number of American officials have known
about the captives' nationality for some time. The Associated Press said in a
report that, according to a senior Pakistani Interior Ministry official, F.B.I.
agents had questioned the two men. And Pakistani officials suggested that the
process of verifying the prisoners' claims of American nationality was slowed
down, with American concurrence, to give the Pakistanis time to interrogate
them.

Law enforcement officials in Pakistan are not constrained by American law; nor
are they ordinarily constrained by American-style rules that would limit their
powers during interrogations.

In Washington, officials at both the State Department and the White House
expressed puzzlement at the reports and insisted that they had no knowledge of
any Americans taken into custody after entering Pakistan from Afghanistan.

"I have just found nothing to substantiate this," one senior American official
said. "I've asked direct, point-blank questions, and I have just heard nothing
to substantiate those stories either last week or this week."

Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said: "We've seen these
reports, and we're seeking further information from the Pakistani authorities.
But like many of these stories that have been circulating for the last week or
so, we don't have anything on it."

He added that the United States was "at this point, seeking information from the
Pakistani authorities."

The detentions of Americans would raise troubling questions for the Bush
administration, which has already drawn criticism for not granting
prisoner-of-war status to suspected Qaeda and Taliban fighters captured in
Afghanistan.

The administration has also drawn criticism for its handling of Jose Padilla,
the Brooklyn-born man suspected of Qaeda ties and declared an "enemy combatant."
He has been incarcerated without being charged with a crime.

In those cases, Bush administration officials have argued that the threat posed
by the detainees was too great to grant them the rights normally afforded to
prisoners of war or criminal suspects.

The Pakistani official said that his government was holding other people who
claimed American citizenship, but that they would be interrogated before a
determination of their nationality was made. Last week, a senior Pakistani
official said that about a half-dozen prisoners captured in Pakistan said they
were Americans.

"There may be others who are currently being interrogated by Pakistani law
enforcement agencies before their claims of nationality can be sorted out and
the legal implications sorted out," the senior Pakistani official said.

Americans are subject to the law of whatever country they are in, but normally
the State Department takes an interest when a United States citizen is arrested
overseas. One former senior State Department official said the American Embassy
gets involved typically to let the foreign government know that Washington is
observing whether basic human rights are being observed.

But in the case of Americans detained while trying to cross into Pakistan,
several other factors may be at work. Instead of seeking to help a citizen, as
they would in a typical arrest, United States authorities are themselves
interested in learning what they can from anyone entering Pakistan from
Afghanistan.

Still, one senior official said the notion that the administration was eager to
have American citizens interrogated harshly by Pakistani authorities was
far-fetched. The official dismissed the notion that "we are complicit in any
such effort by the Pakistanis."

"I think that's incredible," the official added. "I just don't see how that
could be true."

According to the State Department's annual human rights report, Pakistani law
enforcement officials routinely violate the human and civil rights of criminal
suspects, through torture, extrajudicial killings and other methods that
Americans officials are prohibited from employing.

It was unclear what charges, if any, the Americans were being held on, or what
efforts American officials had made on their behalf. Last week, an official at
the American Embassy in Islamabad said he was unaware of any Americans being
held in Pakistani custody.

Nor was it clear today whether either of the two Americans in detention had any
association with Mr. Padilla, who was arrested May 8 on suspicion of trying to
build a radiation-dispersal bomb. Mr. Padilla is believed to have spent time in
Pakistan and Afghanistan and to have conferred with leaders of Al Qaeda.

Last week, senior Pakistani officials said they believed that one of their
American prisoners was an associate of Mr. Padilla's. They said that the man
went by the name of Ahmed Muhammad, and that he also used the name of Benjamin.

It was unclear today if Mr. Muhammad was one of the two Americans whom Pakistan
said it was holding.

A Pakistani official said last week that officials in his government were
reluctant to disclose the nationality of the people they were detaining for fear
that they would be constrained in their interrogations.

In a report today, The Associated Press said that a Pakistani intelligence
officer described the two men as being of Afghan heritage.

Pakistan's announcement today raised the possibility of a network of American
freebooters fighting alongside the Taliban, Al Qaeda or other militant groups.

At least two Americans were captured during the war in Afghanistan, where they
were accused of aiding the Taliban: John Walker Lindh, the 21-year-old
Californian charged with conspiring to kill Americans and aiding a foreign
terrorist group, and Yasser Esam Hamdi, a 22-year-old native of Baton Rouge,
La., who is being held by the military and has yet to be charged with a crime.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%);
HIJACKING (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); POWS & MIAS (73%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); CITIZENSHIP (71%)
TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  PAKISTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  CITIZENSHIP

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (82%); PRISONERS
OF WAR (59%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); FEDERAL BUREAU
OF INVESTIGATION

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (55%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (59%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             422 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 20, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ulster Protestant Says British Police Urged '89 Killing of Lawyer

BYLINE:  By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: BELFAST, Northern Ireland, June 19


A man who confessed to killing a well-known Roman Catholic lawyer in Belfast 13
years ago said today that he had acted at the direction of the Northern Ireland
police.

The case has drawn widespread attention because of allegations that British
authorities colluded with the Protestant guerrillas who shot the lawyer, Pat
Finucane, in 1989.

The confessed killer, Ken Barrett, 39, a member of the paramilitary group
responsible for the killing, the Ulster Freedom Fighters, said in a BBC
interview that officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary had told him Mr.
Finucane was a member of the Irish Republican Army and should be eliminated. He
said a British Army undercover agent had given him Mr. Finucane's picture six
days before the murder and told him where the lawyer lived.

Mr. Barrett, who has moved to England and is under police protection, said the
assassination squad he was part of carried out the killing only after the police
assured them that a security patrol had been withdrawn from the escape route.

Mr. Finucane (pronounced fin-OOO-kin), 39, who had defended a number of
high-profile Catholic rebels, was killed by gunmen who invaded his North Belfast
home during a Sunday lunch and fired at him repeatedly as he sat at the dining
table with his wife and three children.

Legal and human rights groups in Britain and the United States said British
intelligence and police officials made Mr. Finucane a target for death by
accusing him of sectarian sympathies, threatening him through menacing warnings
to his clients and actively assisting Protestant paramilitary killers.

The family, which has denied he was a member of the I.R.A., has led a campaign
for an independent public investigation after two confidential judicial
inquiries in the 1990's reported no evidence to support the claims of collusion.

Mr. Barrett was secretly taped making his statement for a BBC presentation that
was broadcast tonight. Filmed and recorded while sitting in a car talking to a
reporter, Mr. Barrett said a policeman had told him that Mr. Finucane "is an
thorn in everybody's side -- he'll have to go."

He explained that "the peelers wanted him whacked," using a slang word for
police officials. "We whacked him, and that's the end of the story as far as I'm
concerned."

He said Protestant guerrillas would not have thought of killing Mr. Finucane
otherwise because lawyers were considered off limits. "To be honest, Finucane
would be alive today if the peelers hadn't interfered," Mr. Barrett said.
"Solicitors were kind of taboo, you know what I mean? We used a lot of Roman
Catholic solicitors ourselves."

Sir John Stevens, the London chief of police, is to issue a report next month on
the Finucane case and the charges of collusion. Mr. Barrett has been questioned
by members of the investigating team.

Mr. Finucane's widow, Geraldine, said on BBC that Britain should investigate the
matter. "It is difficult to think of anything more serious than to accuse a
government of systematically murdering its own citizens as a matter of policy,"
she said.

In the one formal charge to have arisen out of the Finucane case, William
Stobie, 51, a member of the Protestant paramilitary and police informer, was
acquitted of conspiracy last November. A month later he was shot dead in
Belfast. The Red Hand Defenders, a cover name for several Protestant
paramilitary groups, took responsibility for the killing, accusing Mr. Stobie of
"crimes against the Loyalist community," Protestants who want to keep Ulster a
British province.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%);
BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); RELIGION (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); MURDER (78%); LAWYERS (78%);
SHOOTINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CIVIL
WAR (75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); CHILDREN (73%); ARMIES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%)
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (83%); ULSTER DEFENCE ASSOCIATION (ULSTER
FREEDOM FIGHTERS) (57%) IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY

PERSON: HOGE, WARREN; BARRETT, KEN; FINUCANE, PATRICK

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); LONDON, ENGLAND (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); ENGLAND (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%)

REGION: NORTHERN IRELAND;  BELFAST (NORTHERN IRELAND);  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             423 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 20, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Enter The Globocourt

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Two weeks before a supernational criminal court opens over strong U.S.
objections -- a U.N. war crimes tribunal is setting a legal precedent for the
"globocourt" that will add to the dangers faced by war correspondents from every
nation.

Nine years ago, Jonathan Randal of The Washington Post quoted a Bosnian Serb
official who advocated the expulsion of non-Serbs from northwest Bosnia. For his
role in that savage ethnic cleansing, the Serb is now being tried in The Hague
for war crimes.

A U.N. investigator showed up at the Paris home of Randal, now retired from The
Post, to get him to testify against the accused. The former reporter verified
the accuracy of his printed account (always a mistake -- never talk to the
globocourt without a lawyer) but declined to appear as a witness at the trial.

The reason to resist becoming a participant is obvious: if dictators see
reporters as potential witnesses in prosecutions, tyrants in trouble will be
likely to kill those witnesses. As Randall argued in resisting a subpoena,
"Journalists would as a collective profession be put at risk of greater harm and
danger."

This is not a problem of protecting sources; the sleazy Serb interviewee spoke
on the record and was directly quoted. The central issue goes to the heart of
protecting human rights: will courageous journalists be able to gain access to
war zones as objective observers -- not just to tell which side is winning, but
to bear witness to the murder and rape of innocents?

The European judges wholly missed that central point, instead holding that
Randal today runs no personal risk. They demand that France haul him in; how
dare any writer resist an order to come before an international tribunal to be
cross-examined under oath about what he has written?

I know Randal; for decades, he and I were almost alone in public defense of the
brutalized Kurdish people, and Jonathan often did it the dangerous way, from
inside terror-ridden Iraq. When this guy, now researching a new book, argues
against putting journalists at increased risk in war zones and under tyrants'
thumbs, he knows whereof he speaks.

Stipulate that even accused war criminals have legal rights (and that should go
for suspected terrorists, too). Journalistic privilege is not absolute. But the
reporter's appearance in court in this case is far from crucial to the defense
of the accused, and certainly not so dispositive as to override the public
interest in being able to learn the truth about mass murder in the future.

The harassment of Randal comes down to a case of self-righteous European judges,
perhaps contemptuous of America's First Amendment, reacting angrily to any
affront to an authority they assert is "not bound by the laws and judicial
pronouncements of any state." Making law by fiat, these judges tell the world's
journalists that a U.N. tribunal has "a right to question their report" -- a
power beloved by totalitarians and forbidden to government by the U.S.
Constitution.

That is a vivid example of what we can expect from the international criminal
court that comes into being July 1. With no intention of submitting its
formation for ratification to the Senate, which he knew would have rejected the
globocourt overwhelmingly, President Clinton embarrassed the U.S. by signing the
multilateral abomination; President Bush properly informed the U.N. last month
that the U.S. was no longer a signatory.

This principled decision drew much cluck-clucking from fair-weather allies who
like being able to convict -- under their ideas of justice -- citizens of the
U.S. and other democracies.

But Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld formally noted "the lack of any
effective mechanism to prevent politicized prosecutions of American service
members and officials." This could "create a powerful disincentive for U.S.
military engagement in the world. If so, it could be a recipe for isolationism."

Read that to mean: no immunity from the globocourt for U.S. peacekeeping troops,
no U.S. peacekeeping. By gleefully sticking their thumb in the eye of the
superpower, Europe's UNilateralists have damaged their sore thumb more than our
unblinking eye.

Globocourt enthusiasts cannot have U.S. service members both involved and
indictable, its citizens both engaged and endangered. Step one: get off Randal's
back.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); SUBPOENAS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); WITNESSES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); WRITERS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (77%); PRIVILEGED
COMMUNICATIONS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
WAR & CONFLICT (73%); TERRORISM (72%); SEX OFFENSES (69%); MURDER (58%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (58%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%)
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS; WASHINGTON POST

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (58%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (58%)

PERSON: SAFIRE, WILLIAM; RANDAL, JONATHAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%); PARIS, FRANCE (57%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); UNITED STATES
(92%); IRAQ (79%); FRANCE (77%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             426 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico's President Opens Up the Files on Decades of Repression

BYLINE:  By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, June 22


Not that long ago, the basement of the National Archives of Mexico served as a
secret dungeon where dissidents were tortured. They called the place the Black
Palace.

Now the archives are opening up to reveal the secrets of the state. In a
decision without precedent in Latin America, President Vicente Fox has
declassified Mexico's secret police files dating from 1952 through 1985, making
good on a promise to shine light down a black hole of history.

This week, scholars and dissidents' families began poring over the files,
looking for clues into what happened during a never acknowledged war by the
government against its citizens. The first chance to examine the documents is
being given to government investigators and the families of hundreds of people
who disappeared while in custody during the 1970's and 1980's.

"The files of the political police will never, never, never again be hidden in a
basement, their existence denied along with the terrible chapters of our recent
past," said the interior secretary, Santiago Creel.

The opening of the files followed Mr. Fox's signing last week of a new freedom
of information law that will give the Mexican people a far greater right to know
what their government is doing.

Both acts are part of Mr. Fox's efforts to move Mexico toward a modern democracy
after seven uninterrupted decades under the Institutional Revolutionary Party.

The old governing party fashioned what the Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa
called "the perfect dictatorship" -- a government appearing to be democratic,
but "suppressing by all means, including the worst, whatever criticism may
threaten its perpetuation in power."

The old governing party wanted Mexico to be all things to all people: a friend
to Washington and to the left-wing movements of Latin America. Meanwhile, it
repressed domestic opponents, sometimes brutally.

Somewhere in the newly opened files, scholars are hoping, may be the working
papers of one of Mr. Creel's predecessors, Fernando Gutierrez Barrios, assuming
that he did not destroy them before his death two years ago.

From the 1950's through the 1980's, Mr. Gutierrez spied on uncounted Mexicans.
He was chief of the Federal Security Directorate, Mexico's secret police agency,
which is now defunct, and he later became interior secretary, the most powerful
security official. In those roles, he was responsible for tapping thousands of
telephones, said historians, who also said he played a major role in the
killings of hundreds of student protesters gathered on Tlatelolco Plaza on Oct.
2, 1968, an event long shrouded in secrecy.

Mr. Gutierrez worked as a liaison to the Central Intelligence Agency and to
Fidel Castro, while giving sanctuary to, and spying on, exiled Latin American
leftists. Over the years, his agents are believed to have secretly arrested,
tortured and perhaps killed many would-be Mexican revolutionaries.

The fates of several hundred people who disappeared in the years after the
Tlatelolco killings remain a mystery. A special prosecutor has been empowered to
investigate former government officials.

Mr. Creel said the opening of the files would help "clear up the murky past and,
above all, to do justice."

"This is a history that Mexicans need to know fully," he said, "so that, above
all, this never happens again."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICS
(90%); CULTURE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); LIBERALISM (89%); TORTURE
(89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); HISTORY (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); ARRESTS
(76%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  POLICE

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (90%); FIDEL CASTRO (50%) FOX QUESADA, VICENTE
(PRES); WEINER, TIM

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (96%); LATIN AMERICA (91%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             429 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 26, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Women in Political Spotlight

BYLINE:  By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 25


If Afghanistan has produced a surprise of late, it is the vocal and fearless
entry of its women into the traditional male domain of politics.

With the continuing discoveries of Al Qaeda weapons, violent clashes between
warlords, and politics so confused that the description byzantine barely catches
the complexity, it can sometimes seem to outsiders that little progress is being
made in post-Taliban Afghanistan.

For women, that is not the case. Just six months ago, under the Taliban, they
were not allowed to leave the house uncovered, or receive education beyond the
age of 8. Now they have found their voice -- to the joy of many, and the
consternation of some.

"Afghanistan has come out of a very dark and terrible graveyard," said Dr.
Nazdama, assistant director of the hospital in the town of Gardez, southeast of
Kabul, and one of the Pashtun women delegates to this month's grand council, or
loya jirga, which marked the firm emergence of women in Afghan politics.

Dr. Nazdama, who uses just one name, was one of 200 women who joined 1,400 male
delegates and determinedly used the platform to show Afghanistan that women want
peace, not war, education, not guns, construction and jobs, not poverty.

"This is the wish of all women, that they do not hear one single more bullet,"
said Hasina Mukhles, an engineer from northern Afghanistan.

"The last 9 or 10 days have changed things a lot in the whole of Afghanistan,"
said Dr. Nazdama, referring to the effect of speeches by women broadcast over
national television and radio, and therefore followed in every outlying village.
"Six months ago you would not have been able to stand here and talk," she noted
to a female reporter. "Nor could I have done so."

A group of female delegates berated a group of warlords and political leaders as
they sat in one of the side tents the first evening, the women blaming the men
for causing so much of the suffering and destruction of recent years. They
fielded a female presidential candidate and a woman was elected deputy
chairwoman of the loya jirga.

Despite their gains, many of the outspoken women said they felt the strong
undertow of resistance to their return to public life, and pondered how far
women had to go to win equal rights in their country.

Dr. Sima Samar, the interim minister of women's affairs for the last six months,
was cautious in predicting rapid change in a society where women for so long
have had no voice.

"We will see the effect in a while; it takes time," she said.

Fatiha Serour, a senior adviser on women's issues to the United Nations special
representative Lakhdar Brahimi, said women had to coordinate better in order to
be effective. She hopes that a network of 40 women who emerged from the loya
jirga as clear leaders will be able to make connections across Afghanistan and
work on an agenda for elections in two years.

Still, the very spectacle of women jostling with men for a public microphone to
make speeches from the floor at the loya jirga was a stark contrast to the
disappearance of women from public life for five years under the Taliban. Women
spoke, too, from the podium, and some even approached the United Nations press
organizers to ask them to transmit more footage of female delegates, as people
back home were complaining they could not see them on television.

Dr. Samar, one of two women ministers in the interim government, was elected
deputy chairwoman of the loya jirga, beating a dozen male candidates in a secret
ballot.

Now, despite facing taunts and even implied death threats for her role and her
outspokenness, she has agreed to head the new commission for human rights, a
post that will bring her up against many of the most notorious commanders and
warlords. "I am used to playing with fire," she said. "Somebody has to do it,"

Reflecting on the nine days of the grand council, she said: "For me all the men
and women coming to the loya jirga and sitting together was a success. Me
winning was a success. A woman as candidate for president was a success. No one
was dreaming of this six months ago."

In the competition for the presidency, the second-place finish of 35-year-old
Dr. Massouda Jalal, a pediatrician who works for the World Food Program, behind
Hamid Karzai, but ahead of two other men, was a genuine surprise. "I think it
has changed the mentality of people, for women not to be so weak, or like
second-class citizens," Dr. Jalal said.

"Now everyone knows that Afghan women have the right and still have the courage
to be president," said Mariah Sazawar, a journalist for the weekly newspaper
Bedar, and a delegate from the northern town of Mazar-i-Sharif.

"It was very important to show from the start that women want to be considered
for all the highest posts," said Fatima Gailani, the daughter of a religious
leader, and herself one of the female delegates. "It would have been more
difficult if we had waited until the next elections."

The newfound visibility has come at a price. A newspaper published two days
before the loya jirga began on June 11 quoted Dr. Samar as saying she did not
believe in Islamic Shariat law -- a misquote, she says -- and called her the
Salman Rushdie of Afghanistan, intimating she deserved the same death threat
that the British author earned for alleged blasphemy in his work.

Days after the council concluded, she disclosed that she had received
threatening notes from the floor as she presided over the proceedings. "They are
trying to discourage me, make me angry or make me shout," she said of her
opponents.

Many other female delegates came up against milder, but no less insidious, forms
of opposition. "Nine men and two women came from my province, and the men did
not want us to come -- they were making excuses, that for example there was not
good security on the roads," said Saleha Mirzad, a school director from Nimruz
Province in southwestern Afghanistan. "But we women said: 'Whatever the
conditions, we will go.' "

Ms. Sazawar, the journalist from Mazar-i-Sharif, was standing outside the Kabul
Polytechnic compound where the loya jirga was held, lamenting its democratic
shortcomings, when a policeman barged into the conversation, shouting her down.
She and her female colleagues quickly moved away.

A passing male delegate, Haji Abdul Khaliq, from Helmand Province, said: "In my
opinion, rights should be given equally to men and women. They can do things
equally. But from the Islamic point of view, women do not have the right to be a
judge or president."

Even Pir Gailani, a much revered religious leader, was accused by other
delegates of trying to start a quarrel by bringing his daughters to the
gathering, Ms. Gailani said.

"There is some pressure from our brothers who carry guns, but they cannot
totally control us," said Ms. Gailani. "Especially today, people spoke very
strongly against warlords and guns, and they said they want educated experts in
government posts. Everyone asked for that."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Sima Samar, an advocate of women's rights, was elected
deputy chairwoman of the loya jirga, beating a dozen men in a secret ballot.
(Associated Press); Afghanistan's first woman to be a presidential candidate,
Dr. Massouda Jalal, finished behind Hamid Karzai, but ahead of two male
opponents. (Natalie Behring-Chisholm)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); POLITICS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); TERRORISM (89%); WOMEN (89%); AL-QAEDA (77%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%) POLITICS
AND GOVERNMENT;  WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: SIMA SAMAR (78%); HAMAD KARZAI (58%) SAMAR, SIMA (DR); JALAL, MASSOUDA
(DR)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             431 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 47 words


A report in the World Briefing column on Friday referred incorrectly to a United
Nations human rights investigator who accused rebels in eastern Congo of
massacring 150 people, and also misspelled the official's given name. The
investigator, Asma Jahangir, not Asna, is a woman.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (87%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CIVIL WAR (87%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  CORRECTION STORIES;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

REGION: CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             434 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE STRATEGY;
Ex-Prosecutor Wants Tribunals to Retain Liberties

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1152 words


Mary Jo White, the departing United States attorney in Manhattan, says she
believes the proposed military tribunals for suspected terrorists ought to have
"nearly all of the safeguards that are built into civilian criminal trials" that
are consistent with national security, including open hearings and unanimous
verdicts on the death penalty.

Ms. White, who has successfully prosecuted six major terrorism trials in New
York, said that with safeguards, the tribunals could be preferable to
conventional trials in a time of war. Having these safeguards, she said, "gives
more credit to what we are doing."

"What remains to be seen," she added, "is what those procedures and safeguards
will be."

Ms. White, 54, who stepped down yesterday as the chief federal prosecutor in
Manhattan, acknowledged that the Bush administration had not sought her views on
tribunals.

Although the final rules on tribunals have not been announced, news accounts
suggest the administration is moving in the direction of affording defendants
more civil liberties than was first reported.

Ms. White's remarks came in a wide-ranging interview on Saturday, and included
some of her most revealing public comments about Osama bin Laden and terrorism.

The former prosecutor, who rarely agreed to interviews, sounded relaxed and
satisfied, saying her decision to resign was her own, though she had delayed it
because of the Sept. 11 attacks.

"I was never asked to stay, never asked to leave," she said.

Ms. White said that she was considering writing a book on terrorism, and has not
ruled out the possibility of someday running for office, although she would
offer no details.

At a time when critics contend that Sept. 11 reflected a significant
intelligence failure, Ms. White said, "no one should be quick to point fingers
or affix blame."

Since assuming her post in 1993, three months after the first attack on the
World Trade Center, Ms. White has been investigating terrorism, convicting about
three dozen terrorists through guilty pleas and in trials.

"Obviously, I'm extremely proud of the perfect conviction rate in these cases,"
she said. "It's very important that terrorists be convicted, but I'm at least
equally proud that it's been a fair trial in every one of them."

Her interest in protecting due process, even for terrorists, permeated her
comments on tribunals. "If we dipped that bar, we are in a sense diluting our
principles."

"So you have to be very careful when you use a military tribunal," she
continued, "that it's used appropriately, and has as many of the procedural
safeguards in it as are consistent with national security."

Ms. White said she supported President Bush's comprehensive antiterrorism
legislation, which gives the government broad new powers for investigating
terrorism.

Such powers "are only as good as the people wielding them," she said, adding,
"If they get overused, used in the wrong context, used on the wrong person, that
can be troubling." She said the attorney general "has been quite clear; he
understands that concern."

Ms. White said that although the criminal justice system continued to be "a
critical and highly effective tool in the counterterrorism arsenal," she
believes international terrorism is primarily a matter for the military.

"I'm actually in favor of military tribunals," she said, "but with the right
safeguards in them, and applied to the right people."

The original order, she said, was "written very broadly, and remains to be
fleshed out in terms of safeguards and applicability."

She expressed concern that "it could be applied to the credit-card guy," a
reference to a low-level operative in one recent terrorist plot, and "all the
way to bin Laden."

Although Ms. White said she did not agree with objections that past trials had
compromised national security, she added that rules can be crafted for military
tribunals that eliminate "any possible national security risk, and that's a good
thing."

Ms. White also said that recently, before the December indictment of Zacarias
Moussaoui in Virginia in the Sept. 11 attack, her office discussed with
Washington "what the advantages and reasons would be to have the case brought in
New York, making crystal clear, before even uttering such an argument, that our
country is at war and that there's no place for egos, and no matter what
decision was to be reached, you'll have the full support of this office and
everybody in it.

"This is not a tug of war," she said. "This is not the time for anything but
unity."

During her tenure, Ms. White said, she threatened to resign three times. She
said that when she first assumed the post, one of her admired predecessors, J.
Edward Lumbard Jr., advised, "Be prepared to resign on principle two or three
times." Ms. White would not describe the circumstances that led her to act on
the advice.

She said that before she advocated that a trial stemming from the Sept. 11
events be held in Manhattan, she sought the views of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani,
who also served as United States attorney, about how such a trial would affect
the city's psyche as it sought to recover.

"I thought he was the best, most authoritative proxy," Ms. White said. "The
message back was he would be supportive. Not a 'must be done here,' but he'd be
supportive of whatever I wanted to do."

One of the continuing challenges will be the penetration of terrorist groups;
eight years ago, for example, an informant helped foil a plot to blow up New
York City landmarks.

"But that opportunity doesn't present itself very often, and it comes with all
sorts of problems," Ms. White said, citing the possibility of double agents.

"So we needed to have intelligence of this, and we essentially did not," she
said. "It's hard to get in. They know -- it's like the F.B.I. guy with the
button-down collar can't go over and infiltrate in Afghanistan."

Ms. White also pointed to blocking the movement of terrorist money.
"Unfortunately, it's not as expensive as you'd like it to be to carry out some
of these terrorist operations," she said, "but it's critical to dry up every
single dollar."

Mr. bin Laden's capture or death "would have a significant impact," including
psychologically, but by no means would eliminate terrorism, she said, noting its
global reach.

"He has a charisma and an organization and contacts, the elimination of which
would significantly weaken al Qaeda, but not eliminate the risk."

On Sept. 11, Ms. White said, she immediately thought "terrorism and bin Laden"
after the second jet hit the trade center.

Ms. White said she moved to a secure post uptown, where she received calls from
David N. Kelley, co-chief of her terrorism unit, and Barry W. Mawn, director of
the F.B.I.'s New York office. Both were at the scene and were separated when the
south tower collapsed.

"They both thought the other had died," Ms. White said. Her only bright moment
that day was telling each that the other was alive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mary Jo White's office successfully prosecuted six major federal
terrorism trials in Manhattan. (Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); VERDICTS (77%); GUILTY PLEAS (77%); RESIGNATIONS (74%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (64%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

PERSON: MARY JO WHITE (94%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (78%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) WEISER,
BENJAMIN; WHITE, MARY JO (US ATTY); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             435 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Mexico: Inquiry Into Anti-Leftist Campaign

BYLINE:  By Tim Weiner (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 81 words


The government has appointed a lawyer to investigate cases of torture and murder
committed by the state in a counterinsurgency campaign against leftists during
the 1970's. The lawyer, Ignacio Carrillo Prieto, will be a special prosecutor
with the power to investigate and try cases against government and army
officials. President Vicente Fox pledged last year to investigate accusations
that hundreds of leftists and sympathizers were killed by government forces.
Tim Weiner (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); MURDER (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); LIBERALISM
(90%); TORTURE (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%);
ARMIES (83%); POLITICS (83%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
TORTURE;  MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (52%) WEINER, TIM; PRIETO, CARRILLO

COUNTRY: MEXICO (93%)

REGION: MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             437 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Burmese Repression

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 137 words


To the Editor:

"On the Road to Mandalay, an Ethical Predicament" (Bagan Journal, Jan. 1) noted
an important reason that tourism to Myanmar can be irresponsible and unethical.
Myanmar's tourist infrastructure has been built with forced labor.

If tourists flocked to Myanmar, the junta would build more hotels, roads and
tourist attractions by forcing people to work on them.

You quote Ma Thanegi, a journalist, who suggested that every visitor brings a
fresh perspective to the Burmese people. But the vast majority of the Burmese
people have already made clear that they want democracy, first in mass uprisings
in 1988 and again with elections in 1990. It is the government that needs the
fresh perspective of democracy, not the Burmese people.

JEREMY WOODRUM
Washington Director
Free Burma Coalition
Washington, Jan. 3, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DESTINATIONS & ATTRACTIONS
(88%); JOURNALISM (88%); TOURISM (88%); FORCED LABOR (87%); POLITICS (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HOTELS & MOTELS
(72%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: FREE BURMA COALITION

PERSON: WOODRUM, JEREMY

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: MYANMAR

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             439 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Troops Move on Rebel Zone as Talks Fail

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Jan. 10


A day after President Andres Pastrana declared an end to peace talks with
leftist rebels, convoys of government troops and tanks moved toward a vast
demilitarized zone that the guerrillas were allowed to occupy during three years
of negotiations.

The country braced for renewed fighting between the army and the country's
largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, which is Latin
America's oldest and most powerful insurgency. But it remained unclear whether
Mr. Pastrana would order an all-out attack on the guerrillas' "safe area."

On Wednesday, in a nationally broadcast address in which he announced that the
talks had broken down, Mr. Pastrana said the rebels had 48 hours to withdraw
from the zone. But the president did not say when the 48 hours would begin or
what he would do once the deadline was reached.

Several government officials said there was a possibility, however slight, that
the rebels and the government could still come to an agreement to return to the
table.

As tension gripped the country, the army stepped up its presence in major
cities, in case the rebels strike first. Gen. Fernando Tapias, head of the armed
forces, met with his top commanders at a southern army base to work on plans to
retake the isolated jungle zone, which Mr. Pastrana ceded to the rebels on Nov.
7, 1998, as a safe haven for peace talks.

"Right now, there is a movement of troops, waiting for a presidential order,"
said a military spokesman. "These people have to be ready for whatever decision
the president makes, whether he says go back home or go in. They will be ready."

It was a dark turn for peace talks that began with high hopes in January 1999.
Mr. Pastrana, a former television anchor and the son of a former Colombian
president, had won office just months before, pledging to end a war that had
begun in 1964.

But from the beginning the peace talks stumbled. At the opening ceremony on Jan.
7, 1999, the rebel leader, Manuel Marulanda, failed to appear, leaving Mr.
Pastrana alone on a dais.

Over the next three years, the talks repeatedly broke down, with the guerrillas
often walking out after accusing the government of failing to combat right-wing
paramilitary groups.

The government also stepped away, angered by rebel killings of civilians that
shocked the nation.

With each dead end, more Colombians concluded that the rebel group, known as the
FARC, did not want peace, and the popularity of Mr. Pastrana plummeted.
Newspaper columnists took to portraying him as weak and indecisive, and
cartoonists pictured him as a man too small for his clothes.

Yet Mr. Pastrana stuck to his peace plan, which included periodic renewals of
the rebel zone, which is about the size of Switzerland.

"I did it at the cost of my popularity, using up my political capital and my
place in the history of Colombia," Mr. Pastrana told the nation on Wednesday.
"But I kept going forward because it was my commitment to you and the nation."

Mr. Pastrana's decision to abort the talks surprised Colombians, even though
many supported the move.

While some analysts here believe the president acted under pressure from the
military and the growing chorus of Colombians fed up with the peace plan,
officials close to the president said he simply decided the talks could no
longer advance.

The government had been trying for three months to prod the rebels to abide by
an agreement reached in October in which they committed to negotiating a
cease-fire and placing a moratorium on kidnappings.

But FARC leaders said they first wanted Mr. Pastrana to cancel measures he had
put in place last fall to control the movement of people into the zone. The
government refused, leading to the breakdown.

"The government saw that it could not make progress," said Senator Samuel
Moreno, who met with the president today and has advised on the peace efforts.
"I think the government ran out of patience. The FARC did not give them room to
maneuver."

Diplomats and human rights groups were concerned that the rupture would bring an
escalation in a conflict that already claims 3,500 lives a year. Today Ecuador,
fearing a spillover of refugees and rebels, began to bolster security along its
northern border with Colombia.

James LeMoyne, Secretary General Kofi Annan's special representative in the
country, said he was in contact with both the government and rebels to find a
way out of the impasse.

"The objective of peace is worth so much and the cost of war so terrible," Mr.
LeMoyne said, "that I urge the parties to do everything possible to find a
solution."

In the demilitarized zone, where 90,000 civilians live, residents were fearful
that a pullout of rebel forces could soon lead to the arrival of right-wing
paramilitary groups. Those groups, which human rights groups say have ties to
some army units, have committed killings and torture, mostly of civilians they
accuse of being rebel sympathizers.

In recent months, the paramilitaries have stepped up violence against civilians
who live just outside the zone, killing mayors, journalists and others.

"They have been assassinating a lot of people," Francisco Arteaga, a municipal
official in the town of Mesetas, said by telephone. "We are terrorized because
we have been fine until now, and now we are living this terrible uncertainty."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Colombian troops on patrol near the rebel-occupied zone
yesterday. President Andres Pastrana has ordered the rebels to withdraw. (Agence
France-Presse) Map of Columbia highlighting Bogota: Rebels have been battling
the government in Bogota since 1964.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (93%); ARMED FORCES (93%); PEACE PROCESS (92%); WAR &
CONFLICT (91%); ARMIES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); WRITERS (60%) CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (88%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             445 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DAMASCUS;
Syria Repackages Its Repression of Muslim Militants as Antiterror Lesson

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, Jan. 13


After spending the last 20 years in prison for being a ranking member of the
Muslim Brotherhood, Khalid al-Shami suddenly found himself released on a cool
night last month, lost in a capital he no longer recognized.

"I couldn't find my house because everything had changed," said Mr. Shami,
reliving his first confused, exhilarating night. "I didn't know where I was." He
checked into a hotel after convincing the manager that the dark-haired,
40-year-old man on his expired driver's license and passport was indeed him.

Mr. Shami counts himself among the lucky. In February 1982, just weeks after his
arrest, Syria suppressed a Brotherhood insurgency, first with guns and then with
bulldozers, leveling entire neighborhoods in the city of Hama, massacring about
10,000 residents. Thousands more members of the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested
and never seen again.

For years the events in Hama were only whispered about. But since Sept. 11,
things have changed, and Syria is seeking to repackage its experience in
asphyxiating Muslim extremism as a textbook antiterrorism campaign.

The government exudes a certain sense of vindication that what was once
condemned as a human rights horror might now help improve long-troubled ties
with Washington. Syrian intelligence agencies are even sharing their knowledge
about tracking militant cells with the West, earning praise from American
officials.

Yet in one of those odd twists of diplomacy, Syria remains firmly lodged on the
State Department's list of nations that support terrorism. It has even been
mentioned peripherally as a possible target because of its support for groups
that Washington labels terrorists.

Syria, for its part, remains a staunch critic of the United States and is
already using its new seat on the United Nations Security Council to focus
attention on ending Israel's occupation of Arab lands, while dismissing the
American role in Middle East peace talks as too biased.

"Relations exist on two levels," said Imad Fawzi Shueibi, a political analyst
and a professor at Damascus University. "Publicly there is conflict, but on the
second level the U.S. knows that it needs the Syrians."

American officials in Washington have previously said that a top official from
the C.I.A. held secret talks with his Syrian counterparts about helping the
United States investigate and uproot Osama bin Laden's network, Al Qaeda.

The United States Embassy here refused to comment on the talks. But other
diplomats noted that ever since the events in Hama, Syria's half dozen or so
overlapping intelligence agencies have all tracked extremist groups operating in
the Middle East and among Arab exile communities in Europe.

The Syrians, caught off guard by the virulence of the Muslim uprising, wanted to
wipe out all Brotherhood cells and to ensure that no other organization ever
emerged suddenly to threaten Hafez al-Assad, the president at the time.

They were known to investigate virtually every terrorist group, even those like
Al Qaeda that had no links to Syria.

"They keep their eyes on anybody who is doing any organized activity because
they want to make sure that they are not a threat," said one diplomat. "They
want to know who is in contact with whom, who is calling whom, where they are
meeting."

Syrian agents were active in the large Arab exile communities in France, the
Netherlands and Germany, tracking people who committed terrorist acts or might
be planning ones. No diplomats or Syrian officials would confirm whether Syria
provided specific information that led directly to any Al Qaeda cells. But any
intelligence sharing with the United States constitutes a notable shift in
relations.

One figure who emerged from the attack investigation is a Syrian-born executive
in Germany who the authorities suspect may be a link between the hijackers and
Islamic militants there. The executive, Mamoun Darkazanli, was listed with 27
people and organizations whose assets were frozen by the United States on the
grounds that they provided money to Al Qaeda. Mr. Darkazanli has declined to
comment.

American officials have praised the Syrians for contributing to the
antiterrorism effort, while affirming that they are likely to be asked to do
more.

"They have said and done some things, and have cooperated with us recently, that
suggest that they're looking for a better relationship with the United States,"
said Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in a television interview last fall.

So many Congressional delegations are tramping through Damascus these days, with
six scheduled for January alone, that Foreign Ministry officials started
jokingly calling it "the American month."

President Bashar Assad, until recently reluctant to meet any American
delegations, has been seeing them all. After one meeting last week, the
government news agency quoted him as urging the United States to "take advantage
of Syria's successful experiences."

Other senior officials are less oblique. "The kind of terrorism we faced was the
same kind and probably the same persons now fighting the United States," said
Adnan Omran, the minister of information. "We were ahead in fighting terrorism."

Syrian officials hope that Washington can straddle what amounts to the fault
line in their relationship -- how to define terrorism. They, too, regard Muslim
fundamentalists as a strategic enemy, but they will not yet abandon the
Palestinian and Lebanese Islamist groups with whom they share views on Israel.

"Those fighting to regain occupied territories are not terrorists," said Mr.
Omran, noting that American delegations, in their focus on what happened in the
United States, often neglect the distinction he makes.

Syria is on the State Department's terrorism list because it supports Hezbollah,
the Lebanese guerrilla group that is making the transition to a political party
and that the United States accuses of being a terrorist organization. In
addition, Damascus hosts political leaders from the militant Palestinian Islamic
groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad along with older secular groups battling Israel.

The Syrians dismiss the list as an American favor to Israel. But at the same
time Hezbollah has not carried out any attacks on Israeli targets since October,
a fact analysts attribute to Syria's desire to avoid American attention to its
friends.

Two decades after the Syrian government faced down its own Muslim insurgency, it
still keeps an estimated 500 members of the Muslim Brotherhood in jail. Men like
Mr. Shami believe that they are being released because of health problems. Now
60, he had a heart attack in jail a few years ago and no longer poses much
threat.

Given Washington's twin goals of figuring out how to defang terrorist groups and
negotiating an end to the Arab-Israeli dispute, the Syrians anticipate better
ties.

"Syria is a good alternative to bin Laden, especially when he says he is
speaking for Islam, speaking for the Palestinians and against the Israelis,"
noted one top Syrian official. "If Syria was signing agreements with Israel,
then perhaps bin Laden would be the only symbol of the struggle."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khalid al-Shami was a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Syria.
(Neil MacFarquhar/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (87%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%);
ARRESTS (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); PEACE
PROCESS (67%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); POLITICS (61%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (51%)

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (94%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%);
EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             446 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DAMASCUS;
Syria Repackages Its Repression of Muslim Militants as Antiterror Lesson

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, Jan. 13


After spending the last 20 years in prison for being a ranking member of the
Muslim Brotherhood, Khalid al-Shami suddenly found himself released on a cool
night last month, lost in a capital he no longer recognized.

"I couldn't find my house because everything had changed," said Mr. Shami,
reliving his first confused, exhilarating night. "I didn't know where I was." He
checked into a hotel after convincing the manager that the dark-haired,
40-year-old man on his expired driver's license and passport was indeed him.

Mr. Shami counts himself among the lucky. In February 1982, just weeks after his
arrest, Syria suppressed a Brotherhood insurgency, first with guns and then with
bulldozers, leveling entire neighborhoods in the city of Hama, massacring about
10,000 residents. Thousands more members of the Muslim Brotherhood were arrested
and never seen again.

For years the events in Hama were only whispered about. But since Sept. 11,
things have changed, and Syria is seeking to repackage its experience in
asphyxiating Muslim extremism as a textbook antiterrorism campaign.

The government exudes a certain sense of vindication that what was once
condemned as a human rights horror might now help improve long-troubled ties
with Washington. Syrian intelligence agencies are even sharing their knowledge
about tracking militant cells with the West, earning praise from American
officials.

Yet in one of those odd twists of diplomacy, Syria remains firmly lodged on the
State Department's list of nations that support terrorism. It has even been
mentioned peripherally as a possible target because of its support for groups
that Washington labels terrorists.

Syria, for its part, remains a staunch critic of the United States and is
already using its new seat on the United Nations Security Council to focus
attention on ending Israel's occupation of Arab lands, while dismissing the
American role in Middle East peace talks as too biased.

"Relations exist on two levels," said Imad Fawzi Shueibi, a political analyst
and a professor at Damascus University. "Publicly there is conflict, but on the
second level the U.S. knows that it needs the Syrians."

American officials in Washington have previously said that a top official from
the C.I.A. held secret talks with his Syrian counterparts about helping the
United States investigate and uproot Osama bin Laden's network, Al Qaeda.

The United States Embassy here refused to comment on the talks. But other
diplomats noted that ever since the events in Hama, Syria's half dozen or so
overlapping intelligence agencies have all tracked extremist groups operating in
the Middle East and among Arab exile communities in Europe.

The Syrians, caught off guard by the virulence of the Muslim uprising, wanted to
wipe out all Brotherhood cells and to ensure that no other organization ever
emerged suddenly to threaten Hafez al-Assad, the president at the time.

They were known to investigate virtually every terrorist group, even those like
Al Qaeda that had no links to Syria.

"They keep their eyes on anybody who is doing any organized activity because
they want to make sure that they are not a threat," said one diplomat. "They
want to know who is in contact with whom, who is calling whom, where they are
meeting."

Syrian agents were active in the large Arab exile communities in France, the
Netherlands and Germany, tracking people who committed terrorist acts or might
be planning ones. No diplomats or Syrian officials would confirm whether Syria
provided specific information that led directly to any Al Qaeda cells. But any
intelligence sharing with the United States constitutes a notable shift in
relations.

One figure who emerged from the attack investigation is a Syrian-born executive
in Germany who the authorities suspect may be a link between the hijackers and
Islamic militants there. The executive, Mamoun Darkazanli, was listed with 27
people and organizations whose assets were frozen by the United States on the
grounds that they provided money to Al Qaeda. Mr. Darkazanli has declined to
comment.

American officials have praised the Syrians for contributing to the
antiterrorism effort, while affirming that they are likely to be asked to do
more.

"They have said and done some things, and have cooperated with us recently, that
suggest that they're looking for a better relationship with the United States,"
said Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in a television interview last fall.

So many Congressional delegations are tramping through Damascus these days, with
six scheduled for January alone, that Foreign Ministry officials started
jokingly calling it "the American month."

President Bashar Assad, until recently reluctant to meet any American
delegations, has been seeing them all. After one meeting last week, the
government news agency quoted him as urging the United States to "take advantage
of Syria's successful experiences."

Other senior officials are less oblique. "The kind of terrorism we faced was the
same kind and probably the same persons now fighting the United States," said
Adnan Omran, the minister of information. "We were ahead in fighting terrorism."

Syrian officials hope that Washington can straddle what amounts to the fault
line in their relationship -- how to define terrorism. They, too, regard Muslim
fundamentalists as a strategic enemy, but they will not yet abandon the
Palestinian and Lebanese Islamist groups with whom they share views on Israel.

"Those fighting to regain occupied territories are not terrorists," said Mr.
Omran, noting that American delegations, in their focus on what happened in the
United States, often neglect the distinction he makes.

Syria is on the State Department's terrorism list because it supports Hezbollah,
the Lebanese guerrilla group that is making the transition to a political party
and that the United States accuses of being a terrorist organization. In
addition, Damascus hosts political leaders from the militant Palestinian Islamic
groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad along with older secular groups battling Israel.

The Syrians dismiss the list as an American favor to Israel. But at the same
time Hezbollah has not carried out any attacks on Israeli targets since October,
a fact analysts attribute to Syria's desire to avoid American attention to its
friends.

Two decades after the Syrian government faced down its own Muslim insurgency, it
still keeps an estimated 500 members of the Muslim Brotherhood in jail. Men like
Mr. Shami believe that they are being released because of health problems. Now
60, he had a heart attack in jail a few years ago and no longer poses much
threat.

Given Washington's twin goals of figuring out how to defang terrorist groups and
negotiating an end to the Arab-Israeli dispute, the Syrians anticipate better
ties.

"Syria is a good alternative to bin Laden, especially when he says he is
speaking for Islam, speaking for the Palestinians and against the Israelis,"
noted one top Syrian official. "If Syria was signing agreements with Israel,
then perhaps bin Laden would be the only symbol of the struggle."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khalid al-Shami was a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Syria.
(Neil MacFarquhar/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (87%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); RELIGION
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (75%); ARRESTS (75%); WAR
& CONFLICT (75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); HIJACKING (70%); PEACE
PROCESS (67%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); POLITICS (61%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  SYRIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  PENTAGON
BUILDING

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (51%) ;MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (94%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%);
EUROPE (79%)

REGION: SYRIA;  HAMA (SYRIA);  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             449 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: PACIFIC TERROR;
U.S. and Philippines Setting Up Joint Operations to Fight Terror

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1200 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 15


In the first major expansion of the war on terrorism, American and Philippine
military officers in Manila began preparing joint operations today against a
Muslim extremist group linked to Al Qaeda in the southern Philippines.

More than 600 American troops, including 160 Special Operations forces trained
in counterterrorism, are expected to be sent this month to train and advise
1,200 Philippine Army soldiers in how to destroy Abu Sayyaf, a terrorist group
that is holding hostages, including two Americans.

Sending the United States troops to the southern island of Mindanao, which is
near Basilan Island, Abu Sayyaf's base, would mark the largest single deployment
of American military might outside Afghanistan to fight terrorists since the
Sept. 11 attacks. And it is a further sign that the Philippines may well become
the site of the war's next phase.

Though the American forces are expected to be involved initially only in
assisting and training Philippine troops, they will also accompany them on
patrol in rebel areas, will be armed and will be authorized to fire in
self-defense. They could become involved in offensive military action if the
Manila government requested it, officials said, though that would require a
change in the Philippine Constitution.

"It is not a modest number," Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said today,
describing the size of the American contingent to a group of radio reporters.
"But it is a group of people that are going to be with the Philippine forces for
the purpose of training."

Mr. Rumsfeld said military support troops, including logistics and medical
specialists, would take part in an effort that formally begins next month. A
senior military official said the number of American forces could increase,
depending on how the campaign progresses.

Pentagon officials have been loath to describe highly classified details of the
mission, but there have been clear hints in recent days that the United States
and its longtime ally, the Philippines, are joining in a major effort to wipe
out what they consider to be a dangerous terrorist cell in Southeast Asia.

The Abu Sayyaf group has as many as 2,000 members, some of whom have trained in
Afghanistan, and is fighting to establish an Islamic state in the southern
Philippines.

The group has conducted bombings, killings and a multitude of kidnappings for
ransom, using the money to buy weapons and speedboats. It is holding hostage an
American missionary couple, Martin and Gracia Burnham of Rose Hill, Kan., and a
Filipina nurse in the jungles of Basilan Island.

United States and Philippine forces conduct annual training exercises. But in
the aftermath of the attacks on Sept. 11, this year's operation -- called
"Balikatan" or "Shouldering the Load Together" -- is much different in size,
scope and location.

More American troops, especially Special Operations forces like Navy Seals and
Army Green Berets, are involved than in previous years.

In a sign of the importance the Pentagon is putting on the mission, the American
commander is Brig. Gen. Donald C. Wurster of the Air Force, the head of all
Special Operations forces in the Pacific. General Wurster is a former commander
of the Air Force's elite 16th Special Operations Wing at Hurlburt Field in
Florida.

The operation, which Filipino officials are careful to call an "exercise" to
avoid inflaming domestic sensitivities to a large American military presence, is
expected to last through June, or possibly the end of the year, officials said.

The Philippine president, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, has walked a political
tightrope at home, welcoming American military help in defeating a deadly foe,
but careful not to aggravate the same tensions that led to the United States'
being forced out of major bases in the country, like the Subic Bay naval base.

A presidential spokesman, Rigoberto Tiglao, said using foreign troops for combat
in the Philippines would violate the country's Constitution. The American troops
"can only take an expanded role in the sense that they can go to an advanced
post to observe our operations, but definitely no combat role," he said.

Philippine military officials have also said they expect shipments of small arms
from the Pentagon, and the arrival of at least eight UH-1H Huey helicopters from
the United States that would be equipped with night-flying equipment.

"We are not butting into their sovereignty," said Representative Porter J. Goss,
a Florida Republican who heads the House Intelligence Committee. "But we are
trying to help them in their effort to stamp out blatant terrorism."

Pentagon officials say they are working closely with Philippine officials in the
war on terrorists. "There's no question that we believe that if they could clear
the Abu Sayyaf group out of Basilan Island, that would be a small blow against
an extended Al Qaeda network," Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz said
in a recent interview.

But Mr. Wolfowitz said the Manila government is "very anxious to do it
themselves," adding, "That's the sort of crucial standard for anything, if they
would ask for anything, we would do for them."

Meantime, the fight against terrorists in Afghanistan continued today.  American
soldiers uncovered a cache of weapons hidden near the airport in Kandahar, while
the local Afghan militia continued to hunt down Taliban officials and Al Qaeda
fighters who fled as the city fell to anti-Taliban forces last month.

The weapons, including rocket-propelled grenades, were found in buildings and
tunnels about 300 yards from the edge of the airport after a group of men were
seen in the area Monday evening, Capt. Daniel Greenwood, a military spokesman,
said at a news briefing on Tuesday.

While weapons are no longer carried openly in Kandahar by people other than the
anti-Taliban militia, few have been surrendered to the fledgling government
there, and many are believed to be hidden in the city and surrounding towns.

On Sunday, two heavily armed senior Taliban commanders who worked under
Kandahar's Taliban police chief, Hafaz Majeed, were arrested in Maiwand, a town
to the west of Kandahar on the road to Helmand Province, an anti-Taliban
military official said today.

Muhammad Zali, a commander under Kandahar's current anti-Taliban governor, Gul
Agha Shirzai, said his troops had seized the two Taliban officials without a
fight at a home in Sangisar, a district of Maiwand.

In London today, British officials turned aside accusations by human rights
groups, lawyers and members of Parliament that the treatment of terror suspects
being transported to the American military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
violated international standards.

Foreign Secretary Jack Straw conceded that the men -- at least three of whom say
they are British -- had not been formally charged. But he said they were
considered a threat since they were thought to be members of Al Qaeda.

Mr. Straw told the BBC that he had raised the matter with Secretary of State
Colin L. Powell in a phone call on Saturday night. Human rights groups have
strongly criticized reports that the were hooded, manacled, shackled and, in
some cases, sedated, and that they are being locked up in outdoor wire-fence
cells.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (97%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (94%); ARMED FORCES (91%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); ARMIES (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); RELIGION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HIJACKING (78%); MILITARY TRAINING (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); NURSES & NURSING
(69%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  PHILIPPINES-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  HOSTAGES;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: ABU SAYYAF GROUP (91%); AL-QAEDA (91%) ;ABU SAYYAF (REBEL GROUP);
AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SCHMITT, ERIC; RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PHILIPPINES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: PHILIPPINES;  NEW YORK CITY;  MINDANAO (PHILIPPINES)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             451 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE AMERICAN PRISONER;
Whether Walker Knew of Counsel Is Issue

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 734 words


A battle has broken out between Attorney General John Ashcroft and lawyers who
say they represent John Walker, the Californian-turned-Taliban warrior, about
whether investigators improperly kept Mr. Walker from conferring with the
lawyers while he was being questioned.

Legal experts said the battle might be laying the groundwork for a defense claim
that Mr. Walker's constitutional rights had been violated. If the courts agreed,
they could bar prosecutors from using the statements Mr. Walker made during the
45 days he has been held.

"The case against him is almost entirely based on his own statements," said H.
Richard Uviller, a criminal law expert at Columbia Law School, "so if those
statements are barred from court, there goes the case."

The exchange on the issue began on Tuesday night, after Mr. Ashcroft had
outlined the charges against Mr. Walker. A lawyer hired by Mr. Walker's parents
issued a statement on behalf of the family saying it appeared that Mr. Walker
had not been told a lawyer had been hired for him.

"Despite repeated attempts by his family and his counsel to see him, John has
not been given access to a lawyer," the statement said.

Mr. Ashcroft responded yesterday, saying in television appearances that Mr.
Walker had been told of his rights under the Supreme Court's 1966 Miranda
decision, which declared that suspects must be told they have a right to an
attorney and a right to remain silent.

"Both in writing and orally," Mr. Ashcroft said on ABC, "he indicated he wanted
to make statements absent an attorney, and that's a right we respect in
America."

Mr. Walker's parents have sought to portray him as a naive youth, but lawyers
said a 20-year-old was an adult in the eyes of the law. Many states require
permission from parents before officers can question children, but those rules
generally permit questioning of people 16 or older.

An adult has the right to decide to speak to investigators without a lawyer.
Additionally, a lawyer paid by a relative does not become a person's lawyer
until the person agrees to be represented, and Mr. Walker could decide not to be
represented by the lawyer his parents hired, James J. Brosnahan.

Further, the Supreme Court has said a suspect does not even have a
constitutional right to be informed that a lawyer has been hired by a relative.
In a 1986 decision, the justices approved a murder conviction based on a
confession, even though the police did not tell the suspect that his sister had
arranged for a lawyer.

"We have never read the Constitution to require that the police supply a suspect
with a flow of information to help him calibrate his self-interest in deciding
whether to speak or stand by his rights," the justices said in that case.

Still, lawyers said yesterday, there was room for a legal battle in the Walker
case on several counts. Even though adults can waive their rights, decisions not
to confer with a lawyer must be made in a "knowing and intelligent waiver."

The courts have given the authorities wide latitude in defining what is a
knowing waiver, often focusing on questions like whether a suspect was
threatened or drunk.

But Nathan Lewin, a prominent Washington defense lawyer, said he expected
lawyers for Mr. Walker to argue that after the chaos of Afghanistan, the injured
Mr. Walker could not have grasped the implications of declining a lawyer.

Yale Kamisar, an expert on Miranda rights at the University of Michigan Law
School, said the length of time Mr. Walker was in custody without his family
being able to communicate with him might also be an issue. Mr. Kamisar said the
courts had not defined how long the authorities might be able to hold a suspect
without disclosing that a lawyer had been hired to represent him.

Some legal experts said yesterday that the Justice Department could make a
persuasive case that in a war setting, the authorities would have extensive
leeway. Mr. Kamisar said the authorities could justify questioning someone for
hours or days without telling him that his family had hired a lawyer.

"But when it turns into a couple of days or more," Professor Kamisar said, "it
seems to me the balance shifts in favor of the defense" in its assertion that a
suspect should be told a lawyer has been hired to represent him.

"If you've got a constitutional right to have a lawyer," Mr. Lewin said, "you
have a right to talk to someone who will hire you a lawyer."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); LITIGATION (78%); HIJACKING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(77%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); MIRANDA RULE (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); CRIMINAL LAW (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); CHILDREN
(74%); TERRORISM (74%); LAW SCHOOLS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(69%); MURDER (56%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: ;TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: GLABERSON, WILLIAM; WALKER, JOHN; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); UVILLER, H
RICHARD (PROF)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (73%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Chip On China's Shoulder

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


As soon as the two planes hit the World Trade Center, Chinese Internet users
logged into online chat rooms to discuss the terror attacks.

"Just one word: cool!" says the first of 6,000 comments on the attacks in a chat
room on Sina.com, a leading Chinese-language portal. "Now the day has come for
the American dogs."

"Why not the White House?" asks another a moment later. The gleeful declarations
continue in a rush:

"Excellent!!!!!!!! But the hijacked planes didn't carry a nuclear bomb."

"Just great. Really fantastic. Serves 'em right."

"So cool to see America bombed. Guys, let's use the Internet to wage war on 'em
as well. This is the perfect moment for it."

"I'm waiting for the third plane, the fourth plane, the fifth plane, the sixth
plane. Ha, ha!"

Not until the 44th message is there a reproach: "Do you people here have no
shame?" someone writes. "Do you have no morality?"

The messages are still sitting there in cyberspace on the Sina.com site. A few
days ago, I logged on using a Chinese-language computer here in Beijing and read
through these messages. To anyone who deeply loves China, as I do, it is
devastating to see how the deaths of thousands of Americans left many people
here chortling.

I asked Chinese friends whether these online comments were representative of
public opinion. Not entirely, they said, but the stories they told left me
pained.

One friend who runs a business financed with American money found on Sept. 12
that the company's e-mail message system was full of jokes about the attacks.
Another recounted how at the Communist Party School (where officials stayed up
late to watch satellite television feeds of the destruction and showed unseemly
good cheer), a luncheon for more than 80 top officials echoed with positive
comments about the terror attacks.

All this has to be put in perspective. Most Chinese I talked to were appalled by
the attacks, and the United States Embassy in Beijing was showered with messages
of sympathy from ordinary Chinese and with cash donations for the victims. Jiang
Zemin and other Chinese leaders drafted an immediate message of condolence that
they sent to Washington.

Even in the chat rooms, the initial tone of xing zai le huo (gloating at the
pain of others) faded as the death toll grew.

Yet there is something going on here, something more complex -- and, to me, far
more worrying -- than simply schadenfreude at seeing America humbled. It is a
rapidly increasing Chinese nationalism.

This nationalism has deep roots in China and results in part from the battering
that the country suffered at foreign hands over the last 200 years. But the
latest surge in nationalism is the result in particular of "patriotic" campaigns
planned by President Jiang since 1990 as a way of knitting together the country,
of providing a new "glue" for China to replace the discredited ideology of
Communism.

I spent a couple of days at Beijing University talking freely to the nation's
best and brightest. This in itself, along with the relatively free debate in
Internet chat rooms, is a sign of real political progress in China.

When I lived here in the late 1980's and early 1990's, there was no outlet like
the Internet to express one's views, and I could talk to university students
only after escaping the goons who routinely tailed me. This time I had no tails
to shake.

Yet what I found heartbreaking is that this new openness and political maturity
in China is accompanied by a dangerous sign of political immaturity: this
booming, aggrieved, chip-on-the-shoulder nationalism among many ordinary people,
much more so than even a decade ago.

Why is this a risk? Think of Japan, where nationalism combined with an economic
boom to help lead to the Asian half of World War II. Or of Germany, where a
similar combination helped cause World War I. Or even -- this is an example
Americans tend not to recall -- the way nationalism and new-found strength in
the United States led Washington to provoke the Spanish-American War.

Elsewhere in the world, we were far too late in recognizing the way movements in
Iran, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan arose to preach intolerance and hatred. In China
it is still early enough to reshape this nationalist tide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNET & WWW (91%); CHAT ROOMS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LANGUAGE &
LANGUAGES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HIJACKING (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS
(78%); WEB SITES & PORTALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); AIRLINES (73%); POLITICS
(69%); POLITICAL PARTIES (62%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (60%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(55%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET

COMPANY: SINA CORP (58%)

TICKER: SINA (NASDAQ) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS517919 ALL OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS (58%); SIC4899 COMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES, NEC (58%)

PERSON: ;KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (88%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: CHINA;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  IRAN;  SAUDI ARABIA;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             455 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fighting Terror in the Philippines

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 479 words


American troops are already arriving in the Philippines to assist Filipino
troops fighting the violent Muslim separatist group known as Abu Sayyaf. The
organization has a record of terrorism and should be dismantled. But before
proceeding with a plan that could easily engage American forces in combat, the
Bush administration owes the country a far more candid discussion of its plans
than it has yet presented.

So far, the administration has provided only vague and conflicting descriptions
about the American role, suggesting that officials either have not thought
through the plan or are being deceptive about it. The Pentagon has a long and
ignoble history of announcing that it is dispatching American forces abroad as
"advisers," when they are really meant to be combatants. We hope the Bush team
will not play that game.

The Pentagon says it is sending more than 600 American troops to the Philippines
as advisers, including 160 Special Operations troops along with helicopters,
night vision equipment and small arms. As the plan was described earlier this
week, Special Forces soldiers could accompany Philippine troops into battle,
with permission to fire in self-defense. The Americans could also be involved in
offensive operations if asked by Manila, even though such actions would appear
to violate the Philippine Constitution. This sounds like the kind of loosely
designed operation that has led the United States into costly military blunders
in the past decades.

The Philippines today is considerably more democratic than it was in the days of
Ferdinand Marcos, who was overthrown in 1986, and its military forces are less
prone to coup attempts and human rights abuses. The current president, Gloria
Macapagal Arroyo, requested American help in her efforts to oust Abu Sayyaf from
its main stronghold, Basilan Island. Still, the Bush administration must be
careful to respect Philippine nationalist sensitivities. Manila spent decades as
an American colony and 11 years ago insisted on closing down United States naval
and air bases.

While there is a long history of separatist unrest among Muslims in the southern
Philippine islands, Abu Sayyaf is a fringe group with limited political support.
Some of its 500 or so members appear at least loosely connected with Osama bin
Laden and other Al Qaeda figures, and Abu Sayyaf is responsible for plenty of
terrorism on its own. Its trademark is kidnapping, and it currently holds an
American missionary couple.

Future American military actions against terrorism should, where possible, come
at the request of friendly democratic governments, with local military forces
taking a lead in the fighting and the United States role clearly spelled out to
the American people. A mission to help the Philippines defeat Abu Sayyaf could
be designed to meet these tests. The present plan falls disturbingly short.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); RELIGION (78%); COUPS (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HIJACKING (77%); NAVIES
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%); MILITARY
BASES (70%); HELICOPTERS (67%); NIGHT VISION DEVICES (67%); TRADEMARKS (65%)
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  TERRORISM;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PHILIPPINES-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: ABU SAYYAF GROUP (91%) ;ABU SAYYAF

PERSON: GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%) BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES)

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PHILIPPINES (99%)

REGION: PHILIPPINES;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             457 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indian Role in Kashmir

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 157 words


To the Editor:

Re "Redefining Pakistan" (editorial, Jan. 15):

President Pervez Musharraf is engaged in removing terrorist groups from Pakistan
because they are a threat to the security and stability of Pakistan and all of
South Asia.

India must also play its role in making South Asia a terrorist-free zone by
ridding these groups of their rallying cause: the denial of self-determination
for the people of Kashmir.

For more than 50 years, the Indian government has refused to deliver on its
promise to enable Kashmiris to choose by plebiscite whether they want to join
India or Pakistan or become an independent nation.

India's continued occupation of Kashmir and its brutal human rights record
serves as a stain on the record of the world's largest democracy.

India must now work with Pakistan to bring Kashmir back to continuity with its
history of being an abode of peace and religious tolerance.

ARIF RAFIQ
Greenvale, N.Y., Jan. 15, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); TERRORISM
(88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(52%); RELIGION (50%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (73%) RAFIQ, ARIF

STATE: KASHMIR (96%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (96%); INDIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); SOUTHERN ASIA (90%)

REGION: INDIA;  PAKISTAN;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             461 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Conditions at Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 115 words


To the Editor:

Regardless of legal niceties, it seems inconceivable that anyone could call the
conditions at the Guantanamo holding area humane (front page, Jan. 23).

Eight-foot metal cages are unfit habitations for human beings, no matter how
heinous their possible crimes or how intense our collective anger and grief.

If our country's highest officials fail to appreciate the sheer indecency of
these conditions, surely they should be able to grasp the international
political liabilities. It ill behooves a country that regularly lectures the
world on human rights to create such a shameful facility, much less display and
defend it to the world.

LOIS C. AMBASH
New York, Jan. 23, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%);
HIJACKING (87%); TERRORISM (86%); NAVIES (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
PRISONERS OF WAR;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: AMBASH, LOIS C

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (64%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             463 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Car Bomb Kills Figure in 1982 Lebanese Massacre

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Jan. 24


A powerful car bomb in a Beirut suburb today killed Elie Hobeika, a former
Christian militia chieftain whose gunmen carried out the 1982 massacre of
Palestinian refugees in the Sabra and Shatila camps.

A sedan rigged with explosives blew apart near Mr. Hobeika's home in the Beirut
suburb of Hazmiyeh just as his sport utility vehicle went by. The explosion
killed three other people, including two bodyguards, wounded six more, and
ignited several other vehicles and buildings near the Beirut-Damascus highway.

There was no confirmed claim of responsibility.

Lebanese officials quickly blamed Israel in the attack, and Israeli officials
quickly rejected the accusations. Mr. Hobeika had just this week reaffirmed that
he would testify in a case initiated by Palestinians in a Belgian court last
June against the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, accusing him of war
crimes in connection with the massacre.

Mr. Hobeika, 45, was the intelligence chief of the pro-Israel Lebanese Forces
militia that was held responsible for the slayings of hundreds of men, women and
children in the Palestinian refugee camps in September 1982. An Israeli
commission of inquiry found that Mr. Sharon, then the defense minister and
architect of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, was among those who bore "indirect
responsibility" for the massacre.

Mr. Sharon today dismissed the Lebanese allegations about Mr. Hobeika's
assassination.

"I am simply saying, from our point of view, we have no link to this subject at
all, and this is not worthy of a comment," Mr. Sharon told reporters.

A previously unknown group calling itself Lebanese for a Free and Independent
Lebanon sent a fax to a Western news agency office in Cyprus, accusing Mr.
Hobeika of being a Syrian agent and saying he was killed to protest Syria's
influence on Lebanon. There was no way to authenticate the claim, and other
anti-Syrian organizations in Lebanon said they had never heard of the group.

The list of those who might want to see Mr. Hobeika gone is a virtual who's who
of players in the 15-year Lebanese civil war that ended in 1990. His foes
include some former members of his own right-wing militia, as well as the
Israelis and the Palestinians.

"The enemies of Hobeika are everywhere," said Hazem Saghiyeh, a columnist for
the London-based newspaper Al Hayat.

The assassination cast a pall over Beirut, reviving memories of the civil war
despite residents' striving for years to put that pain behind them.

Over the years, Mr. Hobeika had given various explanations of the killings, at
one time saying he was not there and at another that he was just following
orders. The Lebanese Forces militia had received training and arms from Israel,
which had stationed troops near the camps.

An appeals court in Belgium, which implemented a sweeping international human
rights law in 1999, is expected to rule by early March whether it has
jurisdiction in the case.

A group of Belgian senators who met with Mr. Hobeika this week quoted him as
saying he was "terrified" of the consequences of the trial for the Christian
community in Lebanon. But he said that his testimony would confirm his own
innocence.

His death "was a major blow for the case because he is an important witness,"
Vincent Van Quickenborne, one of the senators, said in a television interview.
He said Mr. Hobeika told the delegation that he had documents that would prove
his innocence. He did not say he would accuse Mr. Sharon, the senator said.

Lebanese officials suggested the timing of the killing indicated that Israel was
the prime suspect.

"My initial evaluation is that of course Israel doesn't want witnesses against
it in this historic case in Belgium, which will certainly convict Ariel Sharon,
the permanent and continued criminal," said Marwan Hamadeh, the Lebanese
minister for displaced people, speaking in Jordan.

Aside from the possibility that Palestinians might have sought revenge for what
transpired in the camps, Mr. Hobeika was also considered a traitor by members of
his former militia for switching sides and allying himself with Syria during the
war. Some analysts also suggested that the Christian community would not want
their role in slaying Palestinians and others dredged up.

After the war, Mr. Hobeika benefited from a 1991 general amnesty for all those
involved in the fighting. He won election to parliament in 1992 and again in
1996 but lost in 2000. He held various ministerial posts before leaving the
government to become a businessman. He had been mentioned as a possible
presidential contender.

A few years ago, one of his bodyguards wrote a sensational biography of Mr.
Hobeika, accusing him among other things of having sexual adventures with wives
of fellow Lebanese politicians and cabinet ministers.

"He was a typical warlord in the worse sense of the word," said Mr. Saghiyeh,
the Al Hayat columnist. "He had nothing to do with ideology, with ideas, with
causes. It was just killing for the sake of killing. He could move and change
his alliances just like that. This guy was born to be killed this way."

Mr. Hobeika had acknowledged that he might face trouble because of his wartime
role.

"I think that somehow I have burned my future, because of what I have done in
the days of war," he said in a 1993 interview. "I still have to wear the burdens
of my actions during the war, and I have done a lot of bad acts."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Elie Hobeika had enemies among the Israelis, Palestinians and
members of the militia he once led. (Reuters); A car bomb explosion in the
Beirut suburb of Hazmiyeh killed Elie Hobeika and three others and ignited
several vehicles and buildings in the area. (Pierre Abu Karam/Agence
France-Presse) Map of Lebanon highlighting Hazmiyeh: A bomb was detonated near
Elie Hobeika's home in Hazmiyeh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); REFUGEES (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); ASSASSINATION (89%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (78%);
IMMIGRATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); MOTOR VEHICLES
(73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); NEWS REPORTING (69%); WRITERS (69%);
APPEALS COURTS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(64%); PRIME MINISTERS (54%) BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  PALESTINIANS;  IMMIGRATION
AND REFUGEES;  TERRORISM

PERSON: MACFARQUHAR, NEIL; HOBEIKA, ELIE; SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (95%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); LEBANON (95%);
SYRIA (93%); BELGIUM (71%)

REGION: LEBANON;  HAZMIYEH (LEBANON);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             464 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRISONERS;
POWELL ASKS BUSH TO REVIEW STAND ON WAR CAPTIVES

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Breaking with other cabinet officials, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell has
asked President Bush to declare that the United States is bound by the Geneva
Conventions in its treatment of the captives in Afghanistan and at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, administration officials said today.

Seeking a review of a presidential decision made nine days ago, when the
administration determined that the captured fighters were not prisoners of war
and hence not fully protected by the Geneva Conventions, Mr. Powell and his
lawyers at the State Department urged Mr. Bush to affirm that the international
law of war does govern the United States' treatment of all captives of the
Taliban military and the terrorist network Al Qaeda.

Mr. Powell asked for the review after allies and human-rights advocates
suggested that the United States had skirted some of the conventions' technical
requirements.

President Bush and others have insisted that the United States is treating the
prisoners fairly and in a manner consistent with the conventions' broad
requirements. But the administration has refused to confer official
prisoner-of-war status because it wants flexibility in interrogating the
prisoners.

The Geneva rules require, for example, that during interrogation, prisoners of
war have to state only their name, rank and serial number. Donald H. Rumsfeld,
the secretary of defense, has said that the military wants information from the
captives that would prevent terrorist attacks.

In response to Mr. Powell's request, the National Security Council, asked other
senior cabinet members to submit their views by today, and Sean McCormack, a
spokesman for the council, said they did. The council is to take up the issue on
Monday.

It was not clear whether Mr. Powell was seeking any concrete changes in the
captives' treatment or simply an unequivocal affirmation that the United States
would follow the letter of the Geneva Conventions.

Mr. Powell's unusual request for a review of settled policy surfaced today when
a White House memorandum on the questions he raised was reported by The
Washington Times.

Among the questions is whether the Geneva Conventions require a formal
proceeding before captives are refused prisoner-of-war status, as many legal
experts contend. Mr. McCormack said that the president's decision that the
captives were not P.O.W.'s was not up for review. And State Department officials
said that Mr. Powell himself believed that no matter how their status was
determined, in the end they would not qualify as P.O.W.'s.

In the memorandum, written on Friday, the White House counsel, Alberto Gonzales,
advised Mr. Bush that "arguments for reconsideration and reversal are
unpersuasive." He said that the office of the general counsel at the Justice
Department agreed with him.

Mr. Powell, the memorandum said, contended that the Geneva rules "apply to both
Al Qaeda and the Taliban," and added, "I understand, however, that he would
agree that Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters could be determined not to be prisoners
of war (P.O.W.'s) but only on a case-by-case basis following individual hearings
before a military board."

Mr. McCormack said today that the memorandum quoted in The Washington Times was
a draft and misstated some of Mr. Powell's views. Senior officials close to Mr.
Powell, who was not himself available for comment, struggled to clarify what he
wanted to be reconsidered.

"The debate is not actually over whether these people are prisoners of war," one
State Department official said. "They are not. The debate is why they are not
prisoners of war."

Another senior official agreed that "Powell has never argued and never advocated
that they should be designated as P.O.W.'s." The question, he said, was whether
the Geneva Conventions controlled how the United States determined the status of
the prisoners.

"The position of the State Department is that the Geneva Conventions do apply,"
this official said. "And it is in our political interests around the world to
make sure the conventions do apply, but that these people don't qualify under
the Geneva Conventions to be prisoners of war."

The White House cast the matter somewhat differently.

President Bush has already decided "that they are not P.O.W.'s, and that is not
being reconsidered," Mr. McCormack said. "There are some issues still being
debated among the lawyers. It should surprise no one that we are working through
these complex legal issues because this is a new kind of conflict. Terrorism is
different, and it is hard to know how to apply existing international norms to
this new kind of conflict."

The administration decided on Jan. 18 that the captives could not demand the
full privileges accorded to prisoners of war, including basic legal rights and a
reasonably comfortable life in camp.

But lawyers and legal experts outside the administration argue that the
president cannot decide this by fiat and that the convention calls for the
captives to be screened by a "competent tribunal" that sets their status.

Mr. Bush will attend the the National Security Council meeting on Monday at
which the issue will be discussed. Among the officials who had submitted their
opinions by today on the questions were Mr. Rumsfeld; Vice President Dick
Cheney; Attorney General John Ashcroft; the director of central intelligence,
George Tenet; and Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Other administration officials said that Mr. Rumsfeld had also asked the
president to review the question of whether the Geneva Conventions apply to
these prisoners. While Mr. Rumsfeld's views on the issue is unclear, he was
apparently reflecting concerns of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which relies on the
Geneva Conventions to protect captured Americans.

Although the memorandum was described as a draft, Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's
national security adviser, distributed it to other cabinet officials on Friday.

In a brief telephone interview tonight, Ms. Rice said that Mr. Bush had made his
decision not to regard the captives as prisoners of war based on a legal opinion
from the Justice Department.

Mr. Bush, she said, knew that the State Department's legal counselor believed
that the United States was bound by the Geneva Conventions regarding Taliban and
Qaeda prisoners. Told of Mr. Bush's decision, she said, Mr. Powell asked that
the president look at "other considerations," apparently referring to the
political implications of rejecting the Geneva Conventions for the antiterror
coalition.

The Geneva rules clearly state that if there is any doubt over a prisoner's
status, "such persons shall enjoy the protection of the present convention until
such time as their status has been determined by a competent tribunal."

The administration argues that there is no doubt.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A sentry watched from a guard tower yesterday as a Congressional
delegation visited the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (Associated
Press/Pool photo)(pg. 16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); POWS & MIAS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LAW OF WAR (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); HIJACKING (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); NAVIES
(71%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (70%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  TERRORISM;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL
BASE (CUBA);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); PRISONERS OF WAR (84%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
(54%) ;TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%) SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES); RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (93%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             465 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Global Icon Retools For Meaner Streets

BYLINE:  By STEPHANIE STROM with LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1943 words


TO show support for New York in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,
Klaus Schwab, the founder of the World Economic Forum, moved his annual jamboree
here this year from its traditional home in Davos, Switzerland.

But the sojourn of the forum -- an unparalleled gathering of world leaders,
celebrity chief executives, academics, writers and other movers and shakers that
begins on Thursday -- from the quiet ski resort perched on the slopes of the
Alps to the mean streets of Manhattan also mirrors a sharp shift in the global
psyche.

Holding the forum in Davos, a secluded playground for European vacationers and,
on occasion, the idle rich, would have sent the wrong message. Not only has
globalization been cast by terrorists as the cause of many ills, but also it may
be the culprit behind the synchronized slowdown of the world economy, the first
global downturn since the oil crisis of the 1970's.

"More than anything else, the issues discussed this year will be addressed more
somberly," said Robert D. Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International.
"I think when historians look at the 1990's, they will look at it as a period of
irrational exuberance in many respects. The cold war was over. Western economies
grew at a rapid rate. Stock markets were doing extremely well. And there was a
feeling almost of invulnerability. A new sense of realism has descended on us,
and we realize we're all in peril."

From its inception 31 years ago, when 440 people attended and almost no one
noticed, to now, when thousands participate and thousands more wish they had
been invited, the forum has become an icon of globalization for both its
admirers and the legions of detractors who decry its embrace of free trade,
deregulation and market capitalism.

The protests against the forum have actually enhanced its credibility, although
they have never approached the scale and fury of those that derailed the World
Trade Organization's meetings in Seattle in 1999 and in Genoa, Italy, last year.

Davos was difficult to get to and to infiltrate; Manhattan is not. But many
protesters say they will be staying away, afraid that any confrontation with the
New York City police, who have become heroes since the September attacks, would
damage their image. "Don't get me wrong, I am extremely supportive of the people
who will be protesting in New York," said John Sellers, executive director of
the Ruckus Society, a human rights group in San Francisco that has helped
organize protests against global trade. "But I don't trust the media to make us
look anything but ugly and unreasonable, particularly when we'd be standing
across the barricades from New York's finest, the heroes of Sept. 11."

Instead, Mr. Sellers and others will head for an "anti" forum, the World Social
Forum, to be held at the same time as its economic nemesis but in Porto Alegre,
Brazil. Its organizers expect as many as 50,000 people to attend.

Thanks to Mr. Schwab's canny sense of what makes for a good mix of people,
however, some of the protesters will be working both sides of the barricade. In
recognition of the antiglobalization protests, and to enliven five days of forum
sessions on television, the Swiss impresario has reached out to people like Sara
Horowitz, executive director of Working Today, and Peter Brey, secretary general
of the Terre des Hommes Foundation, whose groups push for labor rights, better
schools, health care and other social benefits in third-world countries.

Reflecting the sweeping, often touchy-feely aspect of many sessions, Ms.
Horowitz said, "One panel I am on is about religion and what is the mission
behind social entrepreneurial efforts, and how you inject moral values into what
we all do."

Like Mr. Brey, she will shift between the panel sessions at the Waldorf-Astoria
and the protests on Park Avenue outside.

The forum is unlike the other targets of protesters -- the International
Monetary Fund, for example, and the World Bank -- in that its role as a private
policy broker is overshadowed by its appearance. To outsiders, the gathering
seems little more than a five-day cocktail party or, worse, a shadow world
government.

But while conceding the remarkable social potential of the event, participants
say the forum affords the opportunity to reach out to headline-makers from the
worlds of business, government, culture and politics.

"YOU get as much out of it as you put into it," said Flemming R. Jacobs, a Dane
who is head of the NOL Group, a shipping and logistics management company based
in Singapore. "In the past, there have been wall-to-wall panels on a wealth of
really different issues, and in some instances, it has been difficult to choose
one over the other. I try to make as many as possible and then grab a cup of
coffee with some of the more interesting personalities. It is interesting how
approachable everybody is."

Still, the serious side of the forum pales next to the star power of the
attendees, and in the past, special e-mail kiosks have enabled more plebeian
participants to connect, quickly and easily, with the most powerful.

This year, Bill Gates, the Microsoft founder and chairman, can mix it up with a
rival, Nobuyuki Idei, chairman and chief executive of Sony. Kim Dae Jung, the
president of South Korea, can exchange views with Thomas Klestil, the president
of Austria, and Hamid Karzai, the president of Afghanistan.

ALL this comes with a cost, of course. Mr. Schwab gets most of the
organization's income from corporations, which pay annual fees of $17,647 plus
$7,353 for each person attending. American companies have gradually become the
biggest source of this corporate revenue, and their executives often get
prominent billing at forum events.

But entertainment is never ignored. Daniel Boulud, perhaps the reigning prince
of the New York gastronomic scene, whose restaurants -- Restaurant Daniel, Cafe
Boulud and db Bistro Moderne -- will no doubt be mobbed by forum participants,
will be the host of a panel called "Tell Me What You Eat . . ." exploring the
clues that food offers about culture and national identity.

And a host of other luminaries, ranging from Alec Baldwin, Quincy Jones and
Jenny Holzer to Elie Wiesel and Francis Fukuyama, will also be roaming the
convention halls, as they have in the past.

"I think you go for the same reason you go to parties -- to see a lot of people
you only get to see when you go to parties, because you're too busy with work
and traveling all the time," said Joichi Ito, founder and chief executive of
Neoteny, a technology investment company in Tokyo, who is looking forward to
stealing a few moments with John Gage, chief scientist at Sun Microsystems. "The
forum is the only time I can get to see all these busy people in one place and
have business meetings and get new ideas."

This will be Mr. Ito's second forum, in part because he misunderstood the proper
protocol for getting an invitation. "I kept getting invited to all of the
regional conferences," he said, referring to the smaller conclaves Mr. Schwab
convenes in various locales around the globe throughout the year. "I was
insulted because I wanted to be invited to the forum in Davos, but then someone
from Klaus's organization pulled me aside and explained that it was only by
attending some of the regional conferences that you get invited to the annual
conference."

He was glad to hear that New York was a temporary venue for the forum. "There's
something kitsch about hanging out with rich and famous people in a ski resort
in Davos," he said. "There's nothing kitsch about hanging out with rich and
famous people at the Waldorf-Astoria."

Indeed. Insiders tend to refer to the forum simply as "Davos." "Waldorf" or
"Manhattan" just don't have quite the same ring.

But many are hoping that the forum's Manhattan excursion will rejuvenate the
gathering. Several participants last year grumbled that it had lost its focus
and become too much of a media circus. The issues discussed and the ideas
engendered were lost in the news of who was having lunch with whom and which
corporate chieftain was the best skier.

"My first year, two years ago, was a real winner," Mr. Jacobs said. "It was full
of enthusiasm, speed, lots of new ideas. Last year, I walked away with less
inspiration and fewer ideas."

In recent years, questions have been raised about Mr. Schwab's management of the
organization's finances, and last year the Swiss, who have always viewed the
forum as a bit of a nuisance, complained that their tax dollars were being
siphoned off to provide extra security from protesters while crime rates in
Zurich were rising.

The sideshows, in other words, overtook the main event. "The decision to move it
to New York was incredibly controversial," said Esther Dyson, the technology
consultant and head of Edventure, who has her pick of conferences but always
attends the forum. "It had reached the pinnacle, and the move to New York could
be a mess or it could reset it and give it new life. It needs to be given a new
life. It was successful, but it really wasn't headed anywhere. It'll change
now."

There is at least one sign that the forum will regain some of its luster as a
serious venue for promoting the exchange of ideas. Saudi Arabia plans to send a
delegation of some 50 princes, high-ranking officials and other dignitaries to
undertake a charm offensive in the wake of the terrorist attacks, said Hassan
Yassin, a Saudi businessman and former head of the Saudi Information Office in
Washington.

"Holding the forum in New York is a very good way to show that what happens to
America is of concern to all of the international community, including Saudi
Arabia," Mr. Yassin said. "New York is the central unit of the world economy,
and any harm done to it has tentacles that reach out around the world."

After the forum, the Saudis plan to fan out across the country in an effort to
mend fences and repair their country's tattered image here. "Unfortunately,
there were Saudi citizens among those who attacked America," Mr. Yassin said.
"We want to show we are not all siblings of those terrorists."

MR. SCHWAB, for his part, says context and timing as much as change of venue
will make this forum different from those of the last few years. "I think this
time people feel we are living in a new world, and it's the first big meeting of
global decision makers since Sept. 11," he said. "People this year expect to
come out with a vision, or at least some signposts, for what this new world will
be."

Many participants agree, predicting that Sept. 11 and, to a lesser extent, the
global economic slowdown will dominate the discussions and restore the forum's
heft.

"There are so many new issues that didn't exist last year," said Jeffrey E.
Garten, dean of the Yale School of Management and a former under secretary of
commerce. "Is America wallowing in its own obsessions or are our preoccupations
shared by the world? How can we reconcile economic weakness with a show of
foreign-policy strength? And what is the answer to the question of whether
government is re-emerging as a more powerful force dominating world markets or
is it a temporary phenomenon?"

That sort of issue is what will draw Dani Rodrik, an economist at Harvard's
Kennedy School of Government. Mr. Rodrik, a globalization expert and a critic of
traditional globalization theories, sees the forum as another venue for the
debate -- a debate he sees gradually incorporating the protesters' views.

"Even those who fundamentally disagree with the ideas being propounded by the
antiglobalization groups," he said, "have to appear that they are paying lip
service to them and you will see that at the Waldorf."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A protester at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland,
last year. (Reuters)(pg. 1); Michael Moore, director general of the World Trade
Organization, and panelists, top, discussed global trade at the 2001 World
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. But Klaus Schwab, its founder, with his
wife, Hilde, right, has added star power to the event. Last year, the mix
included Quincy Jones, above, and, below, Yasir Arafat and Kofi Annan.
(Photographs from the World Economic Forum)(pg. 12) Chart: "Who's
Expected"Mention the World Economic Forum and people think of billionaires (Bill
Gates) and chief executives (David H. Komansky, Henry McKinnell) rubbing
shoulders with kings and presidents (Kim Dae Jung, Thabo Mbeki). They will be
there this year among the 3,000 attending, and so will many others who need no
introduction. Kofi AnnanJeff BezosZbigniew BrzezinskiStephen M. CaseDale
ChihulyAbby Joseph CohenSteve ForbesEllen FutterHerbie HancockRem KoolhaasMario
MontiNicholas NegroponteGeorge E. PatakiColin L. PowellAnthony RobbinsOlympia J.
SnoweJohn SweeneyDesmond TutuChristie WhitmanElie Wiesel (pg. 12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); GLOBALIZATION (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
TRADE (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); HISTORY
(77%); EXECUTIVES (77%); CELEBRITIES (77%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (77%);
MOUNTAINS (76%); ECONOMIC NEWS (74%); DEREGULATION (73%); RESORTS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); POLICE FORCES (71%); SKIING (71%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (60%) WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM;  COMPANY REPORTS AND FORECASTS

COMPANY: GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC (83%)

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (94%); WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION (59%)

TICKER: GS (NYSE) (83%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (83%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
(83%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (83%); SIC6289
SERVICES ALLIED WITH THE EXCHANGE OF SECURITIES OR COMMODITIES, NEC (83%);
SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (83%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION
COMPANIES (83%)

PERSON: THABO MBEKI (59%); BILL GATES (58%) SCHWAB, KLAUS

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (94%); NEW YORK, USA (94%); WASHINGTON, USA
(79%); ALPS (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ITALY (72%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             470 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: VIDEOTAPE;
In October Interview, bin Laden Hinted at Role

BYLINE:  By JIM RUTENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 726 words


In a television interview Osama bin Laden gave in late October, he said the
anthrax attacks last fall were "a punishment from God" and hinted in vague
language at having a hand in the Sept. 11 attacks.

The interview was conducted by the Arab television network Al Jazeera, but was
not shown until last night on CNN, which said it obtained a copy independently
and showed it against Al Jazeera's wishes.

Al Jazeera has yet to show the tape. In November its executives denied knowing
of the interview. Later, after United States and Middle Eastern officials who
had seen the interview confirmed that it was conducted by Al Jazeera, its
executives said they would not show it because its contents were not newsworthy.

CNN executives disputed that view last night and noted that the interview
included new statements from Mr. bin Laden about the anthrax attacks last fall,
the restrictive effect of new security precautions in the United States and the
Bush administration's handling of the news media.

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain first referred to the interview in November
during a speech in which he cited excerpts to support the West's case that Mr.
bin Laden was responsible for the attacks.

In the excerpts, Mr. bin Laden at first seemed to deny the United States'
allegations about his involvement in the attacks.

"America has made many accusations against us and many other Muslims around the
world," he said according to CNN's translation. "Its charge that we are carrying
out acts of terrorism is unwarranted."

However, Mr. bin Laden went on to say, "If inciting people to do that is
terrorism, and if killing those who kill our sons is terrorism, then let history
be witness that we are terrorists."

Mr. Blair, in his November speech, depicted Mr. bin Laden's remarks as the most
solid indication to that time that the leader of Al Qaeda had a role in the
events of Sept. 11. Since then, new videotapes have emerged that point more
directly to his involvement, particularly one shown in December in which Mr. bin
Laden, dining with associates, laughs and boasts about the attacks.

In the interview shown on CNN, Mr. bin Laden said of the anthrax attacks, "These
diseases are a punishment from God and a response to oppressed mothers' prayers
in Lebanon, Iraq, Palestine and everywhere."

He also seemed to gloat about the security precautions being taken in response
to Sept. 11.

"I tell you," he said, "freedom and human rights in America are doomed. The U.S.
government will lead the American people and the West in general into an
unbearable hell and a choking life."

Mr. bin Laden displayed a knowledge of the White House's reaction to his
organization. He mocked the Bush administration's request to major American
television networks in October that they handle Mr. bin Laden's videotaped
statements with care, and warning that they could contain hidden messages to
followers. "They made hilarious claims," Mr. bin Laden said. "They said that
Osama's messages have codes in them to the terrorists. It's as if we were living
in the time of mail by carrier pigeon, when there are no phones, no travelers,
no Internet, no regular mail, no express mail and no electronic mail."

The man conducting the interview for Al Jazeera was not identified and officials
from Al Jazeera were unavailable for comment last night. United States officials
have said they believe that the interview was conducted by a correspondent based
in Kabul and took place in Afghanistan.

CNN said it obtained a tape of the interview -- which has been circulating among
British, American and Middle Eastern government officials for several weeks now
-- from a non-governmental source.

In response to the broadcast of the tape, Al Jazeera said in a statement
included in the CNN report that it would end its news-sharing relationship with
CNN and that it would "take the necessary action to punish the organizations and
individuals who stole this video and distributed it illegally."

Eason Jordan, CNN's chief news executive, said in an interview, "Once the tape
fell into our hands we had a journalistic obligation to report it."

Al Jazeera's decision not to broadcast the interview with Mr. bin Laden came
after Vice President Dick Cheney met with the emir of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin
Khalifa al-Thani, whose family finances the network, to complain about the its
broadcasts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION INDUSTRY (91%); ANTHRAX (91%); INTERVIEWS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RELIGION (78%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CABLE TELEVISION (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE;  ANTHRAX

ORGANIZATION: CABLE NEWS NETWORK; AL JAZEERA (TELEVISION NETWORK)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (94%); TONY BLAIR (51%) RUTENBERG, JIM; BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             471 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: MATERIAL WITNESS;
Hearing Set On Charges Of Coercion By the F.B.I.

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 701 words


A federal judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered a hearing into whether the
authorities violated the rights of a Jordanian student who was held as a
material witness in the investigation of the Sept. 11 terror attacks and later
charged with perjury.

The judge, Shira A. Scheindlin of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said that
if proven true, allegations raised by the defendant, Osama Awadallah, 21,
"suggest that he may have been the victim of coercion and intimidation" when he
was interrogated by the authorities in San Diego.

Mr. Awadallah, who was attending college near San Diego at the time of his
arrest, contends that 20 F.B.I. agents surrounded him on the street on Sept. 20,
refused to let him return home, and did not advise him of his rights against
self-incrimination and to counsel. He was questioned without a lawyer, the judge
said, and was detained as a material witness.

"These allegations -- in addition to Awadallah's youth, inexperience with law
enforcement officials, and limited English capabilities -- make it quite
possible that his 'will was overborne' by the interrogating agents," the judge
said.

Later, Mr. Awadallah was moved to New York where he says he was physically
abused. In court papers, he says that a jail guard shoved him against a wall and
kicked his leg shackles, and that marshals pinched his arms while his hands were
cuffed behind his back.

In October, after testifying twice before a federal grand jury, Mr. Awadallah
was indicted on two counts of perjury, for which he could be sentenced to as
much as 10 years in prison. Prosecutors say he lied when he denied knowing the
name of one of the suspected Sept. 11 hijackers, Khalid al-Midhar.

Judge Scheindlin questioned whether prosecutors had actually trapped Mr.
Awadallah into making the statements that the government now says are false.

"The facts of this case," the judge said, "raise a question about whether the
government had a legitimate basis for repeatedly asking the particular questions
that it now accuses Awadallah of answering falsely."

Mr. Awadallah has pleaded not guilty to the charges, and has not been accused of
terrorism. He has admitted knowing another suspected hijacker, Nawaf Alhazmi.

In her 83-page decision, Judge Scheindlin did not rule on whether Mr.
Awadallah's allegations were true. Rather, she said she was accepting them as
true, as required under law, for purposes of deciding whether an evidentiary
hearing was necessary.

In scheduling a hearing Feb. 15, she raised the possibility that she might
suppress some or all of Mr. Awadallah's statements, which could lead to
dismissal of the charges.

Jesse Berman, one of Mr. Awadallah's lawyers, said yesterday, "It means we still
have three branches of government, thank God."

"It's a court saying, 'I've got to see what the facts are here, because if it
happened the way the defense says, the government did something very wrong,' "
Mr. Berman said.

Mr. Berman said he had not yet been able to reach his client, who is free on
bond and attending classes at Grossmont College in El Cajon, Calif.

Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for United States Attorney James B. Comey, said there
would be no comment. But prosecutors have told the judge in court papers that
there was no "coercive pressure or threats" against Mr. Awadallah, and that he
"voluntarily accompanied" F.B.I. agents to their office on Sept. 20 and answered
their questions.

The prosecutors also wrote the judge that the F.B.I. was investigating Mr.
Awadallah's allegations of abuse. The prosecutors said the Bureau of Prisons had
found no evidence that he had been assaulted or abused, and that he had twice
instigated confrontations with guards. "The government does not condone or
lightly dismiss allegations of mistreatment of prisoners by prison authorities,"
Robin L. Baker and Karl Metzner, the prosecutors, wrote.

In her decision, Judge Scheindlin also barred the government from introducing
computer-generated photographs of Osama bin Laden found in Mr. Awadallah's
apartment.

She said the material was "highly inflammatory when our country is currently
engaged in a war against terrorism in Afghanistan, a prime purpose of which is
to arrest Osama bin Laden."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%);
JUDGES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); HIJACKING (89%);
JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
EVIDENCE (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); GRAND JURY (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); ARRESTS (73%); PRISONS (70%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (65%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  PERJURY

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

PERSON: WEISER, BENJAMIN; SCHEINDLIN, SHIRA A (JUDGE); AWADALLAH, OSAMA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%); SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%); CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  JORDAN;  SAN DIEGO (CALIF)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             473 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FORUM IN NEW YORK: FORUM;
ECONOMIC FORUM SHIFTS ITS FOCUS TO NEW DANGERS

BYLINE:  By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1345 words


The world's most powerful policy makers and entrepreneurs, who have in the past
used the World Economic Forum to promote the opportunities promised by
technology and borderless commerce, seem more obsessed this year with their
endless vulnerabilities.

In seminar rooms and in the hallways of the Waldorf-Astoria in Manhattan this
week, the men and women who once trekked to Davos, Switzerland, to talk about
how the Internet could revolutionize life in Indian villages have spent much of
the last few days discussing more prosaic concerns: Keeping their corporate
headquarters secure, their chemical and biological materials out of the wrong
hands, and how to best fight terrorism.

While the meals have been opulent -- sushi and cocktails at the Four Seasons,
followed by endless courses at Le Cirque 2000 -- for the chief executives and
prime ministers, economists and "media leaders" gathered at the World Economic
Forum, the main dish is anxiety.

Gone, too, is any post-Sept. 11 reticence about criticizing the Bush
administration's war against terrorism and its charting of the economic rules of
the road.

Almost every speaker congratulated the United States on how it has fought the
war in Afghanistan. But in the next breath, many European and other leading
diplomats say that Mr. Bush's use of the phrase "axis of evil" on Tuesday night,
to describe Iraq, Iran and North Korea, made them fearful that a superpower on a
roll was now looking for trouble.

The phrase instantly entered the Davos lexicon here and led members of the
coalition against terrorism to question whether they had been seduced by the
mirage of a new partnership with Washington, only to discover that Mr. Bush
planned to run the war his way -- if necessary.

The confrontations have been polite, but not exactly subtle. On Friday morning,
no sooner had Secretary of State Colin L. Powell finished a brief discourse
about dealing decisively with "rogue regimes," than Javier Solana, the secretary
general of the council of the European Union and the former secretary general of
NATO, told him that his allies do not just want consultation. They want a real
vote, he said.

"For me, the coalition is a collective ambition to share responsibility, but to
share also decision-making," he said.

The sentiments grew more blunt in small-group discussions seeking ideas for both
fighting terrorism and "draining the swamp" of poverty that can breed
terrorists.

After leading an hour and a half of discussion that produced more sound bites
than new policy approaches -- "freeze-dried foreign policy" muttered one
human-rights official -- Joseph Nye, dean of Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government, summed up the message he was hearing. "For the Europeans," he said,
" 'axis of evil' was a bridge too far. There's a strong suspicion here that Bush
is back to unilateralism, that after Afghanistan, America isn't especially
interested in listening to the rest of the world."

Davos was on the road to pessimism even before this year's session. At the last
meeting in Switzerland, Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, turned what was
supposed to be a rapprochement with Shimon Peres, then the former Israeli prime
minister, into an ugly confrontation accusing Israel of "fascist military
aggression," that was built on policies of "murder, persecution, assassination,
destruction and devastation."

Mr. Arafat is surrounded by Israeli tanks this year, and did not make the
meeting. Mr. Peres is scheduled to take part in three sessions today.

Mr. Arafat is not the only one who is missing. Relatively few Japanese
executives and just a smattering of government officials showed up. In the past,
they came to argue that that they had their economic problems in hand and that
their country was on the cusp of a rebound.

Now the numbers look bleak -- on Friday the Nikkei stock average dropped below
the Dow Jones industrial average for the first time in 45 years -- and the
government's popularity is sinking. So when a panel considered whether Japan
would emerge from its difficulties intact, no one made a successful argument
that Japan could find its way back for years.

Even without the Japanese, business executives here were in a deep funk. "If you
want to talk to negative people talk to C.E.O.'s," said Treasury Secretary Paul
H. O'Neill, who used to be one, at Alcoa.

But Mr. O'Neill, who once argued that he had his finger on the pulse of the
American economy because he made real products sold in real markets, has been in
Washington long enough to believe that he now has a truer picture.

Company executives worry incessantly about what could go wrong, but he argued
"that is not really reflective of what is going on in the real economy."

For true doom and gloom, though, there was the discussion on Friday about
"asymmetric threats," an exploration of whether nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons could be used by rogue states or groups.

Some C.E.O.'s wondered openly about whether their factories or laboratories
could become victims of theft, sabotage or attack, or, to bring the issue truly
close to home, whether they were safe inside the Waldorf.

For all the worry, the protests were nonexistent on Thursday and Friday. On
Saturday, some 7,000 protesters gathered for nonviolent marches but there were
38 arrests.

Ever since the debacle of the World Trade Organization meeting in Seattle two
years ago, store windows have been shattered and tear gas has been the official
odor of meetings of world leaders. But near Park Avenue this week, windows were
intact and the strongest smells have emerged from the coffee cups as idle police
officers seek a place to stay warm.

Thus, New York bore no resemblance to Genoa, Italy, last summer, which was
wrapped with razor wire to protect leaders of industrialized nations for their
annual summit. Genoa was a ghost town of empty sidewalks and locked steel
grates.

In contrast, traffic buzzed slowly around the East Side, and participants at the
conference scooted across Lexington Avenue to pick up a latte at Starbucks.
"Look!" said one amazed veteran of recent global conferences, "They've still got
windows!"

But if the ranks of the protesters were thinned, so were the ranks of the
entrepreneurs.

A few years ago in Davos the world seemed more prosperous and the stars of the
show were Bill Gates, the Microsoft chairman, and Silicon Valley C.E.O.'s who
ran seminars like "Wiring the World," and mixed it up with bureaucrats on the
question of whether the Internet would foster so-called virtual democracies --
like-minded people of many lands bringing about change.

This year, the seminars have more down-to-earth subjects, like survival. There
was "The Future of Terrorism: What Are the Next Threats?" and "Crisis
Management: Look Out Ahead."

Three years ago, Ted Turner entertained the elites with a discussion of how far
media conglomerates could reach, boasting that CNN was making national borders
irrelevant. Government officials sheepishly agreed.

But now borders are back and being secured. So is the power of government over
private enterprise.

On Friday, the subject of one media panel was whether the American military
would be within its rights to bomb broadcast facilities of Al Jazeera, the Arab
satellite network, if it appeared to be giving aid to the enemy.

Former Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia warned that unlike nuclear material -- which
is almost all controlled by governments -- chemical and biological agents are
overwhelmingly in the hands of private industry, and that the responsibility
should fall on corporations to devise ways to keep such material out of the
hands of those who would misuse them.

"We're going to have to have a private sector effort here," he said, noting that
if he were in business, "I'd want to get out in front" before the biological
version of a Three Mile Island nuclear accident led to the imposition of
"regulations that will stifle commerce."

Then the dispirited executives went to lunch, so that they could brace
themselves for the afternoon session, "New Sources of Vulnerability: Thinking
the Unthinkable."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "An Overview of Today's Events"INSIDE1. The World Economic
ForumToday, the forum focuses on bioterrorism, Islam, Northern Ireland and Latin
America. Afterward, there are two private Super Bowl parties, one at the Rainbow
Room, the other at the Four Seasons restaurant. OUTSIDE2. Falun Gong
demonstration 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.The Chinese spiritual movement has a permit to
demonstrate outside the Waldorf-Astoria through the weekend. Not shown on
map:Public Eye on Davos - New York 10 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.Discussions and speeches
through the weekend at the United Nations Church Center, 777 United Nations
Plaza, 44th Street and First Avenue Earth and Animal Liberation March 4 p.m.A
march against the forum and its member corporations, starting at 76th Street and
Fifth Avenue. (Sources: New York Police Department; World Economic Forum;
Another World Is Possible)(pg. 16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (92%); TERRORISM (90%); PUBLIC
POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
FOREIGN POLICY (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%); WAR ON
TERROR (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); HIJACKING (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (71%); EXECUTIVES (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%) TERRORISM;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (94%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); EUROPEAN UNION
(59%) WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM; EUROPEAN UNION

PERSON: JAVIER SOLANA (58%) SANGER, DAVID E; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL,
COLIN L (SEC); SOLANA, JAVIER

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA,
USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (93%); SWITZERLAND (92%); IRAQ (92%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  IRAQ;  IRAN;  NORTH KOREA

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             475 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED;
DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 37 words


Lawsin Afghanistan will require all parties to abide by democratic principles,
said the justice minister, Abdul Rahim Karimi. The laws will ban former leaders
of Communist parties and Taliban leaders from joining parties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (87%);
TERRORISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); POLITICS (85%); HIJACKING (85%) AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: KARIMI, ABDUL RAHIM (MIN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             476 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cambodians to Elect Municipal Officials

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 175 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 2


Cambodians will vote on Sunday in local elections that are considered a step
forward for democracy, more than two decades after the killing fields of the
Khmer Rouge and with a general election scheduled for next year.

Political analysts expect that Prime Minister Hun Sen's grip on power will be
weakened by the election.

The campaign has already been marred by 20 killings and political intimidation,
raising doubts about whether there could be a free and fair election.

An estimated five million Cambodians, almost half the population, will choose
leaders of the country's 1,621 "communes," or clusters of villages.

Mr. Hun Sen's opponents, the royalist Funcinpec party and the Sam Rainsy Party,
are expected to make substantial gains in the local voting.

All current commune leaders are members of Mr. Hun Sen's party, the Cambodian
People's Party, which took power in the early 1980's. The commune elections are
part of an evolving democratic system prescribed by the United Nations under a
1992 peace accord that helped to end a long civil war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (93%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (88%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (88%); CITY GOVERNMENT (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ELECTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: HUN SEN (PRIME MIN)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             477 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION/RADIO;
Black Comedy That Looks Frighteningly Prophetic

BYLINE:  By STEPHEN BATTAGLIO;  Stephen Battaglio is a New York-based freelance
writer who specializes in television.

SECTION: Section 2; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1127 words


LIKE most Americans, the director Leslie Libman has a clear recollection of
where she was when she learned that the World Trade Center towers had been
destroyed. In New Zealand to direct an action movie, she was awakened by a phone
call from relatives in the United States. The next morning, the horror of the
surreal images of the crumbling towers had not yet sunk in on the film crew,
made up mostly of New Zealanders. "Some people were running around laughing,
saying, 'It was just like a movie,' " Ms. Libman recalled. "I said, 'Yeah, it's
just like a movie I made.' "

Five years earlier, Ms. Libman and her husband, Larry Williams, had directed
"Path to Paradise: The Untold Story of the World Trade Center Bombing" for HBO.
The fact-based drama reconstructed events before and after the Feb. 26, 1993,
bombing of one of the twin towers, carried out by the followers of the blind
Egyptian cleric Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, in which six people died and more than
a thousand were injured. "Path to Paradise," originally shown in June 1997, was
actually scheduled for a repeat broadcast on one of HBO's channels the week of
the Sept. 11 attacks, but was pulled so that the cable network would not appear
to be exploiting the tragedy.

HBO executives say they currently have no plans to show the film, which is
available on video. But for those who wonder how the events of Sept. 11 could
have happened, "Path to Paradise" provides a primer on how terrorists can use
the freedoms and protections guaranteed on American soil. The film also contains
more than one prediction that another attack on the World Trade Center was a
virtual certainty, especially in the chilling final scene. Ramzi Ahmed Yousef
(Art Malik), the bomb maker involved in the attack, is in a helicopter hovering
over the World Trade Center towers when he utters the words, "Next time we will
take them both down" -- a statement he actually made to F.B.I. agents.

One reason HBO might be hesitant to show "Path to Paradise" again is that it's
not a typical docudrama about a grim event. Developed by HBO NYC Productions, a
division (now defunct) that aimed to do adventurous projects with lower budgets
than the channel's glossier original movies, it has little of the solemnity
usually seen in the genre. Ms. Libman said the film, most of which was shot on
location at the World Trade Center and in New Jersey with handheld cameras, was
conceived as a black comedy. (Mr. Williams, her husband and co-director, died in
1999.)

Some of the humor is provided by the portrayal of the bumbling Rahman follower
Mohammed Salameh (Tony Gillan), who went back to the office where he rented the
van used in the bombing to demand that his deposit be returned. Mr. Salameh was
the first of the bombers to be arrested after the attack.

Alasdair Palmer, a British journalist and a producer of the film, believes such
ineptitude in 1993 probably lulled the authorities. "I think it misled people
into thinking they weren't capable of doing what they set out to do," said Mr.
Palmer, now public policy editor of The Sunday Telegraph of London. "There was a
sort of a Keystone Kops element to it."

But "Path to Paradise" shows that the bombers weren't the only ones who
blundered. When Mr. Yousef first enters the United States, an Immigration and
Naturalization Service officer is incredulous when she sees that he has multiple
identification cards. But the I.N.S. cells at the airport are filled and Mr.
Yousef is instead released with a court date that he never makes. A senior
F.B.I. official spurns a roguish informant who warns of Mr. Abdel Rahman's
activities before the bombing (his information eventually led to the arrests and
convictions of the sheik and most of the conspirators). The bureau even has
several of the conspirators in for questioning before the attack. But not even
surveillance photos showing them training with automatic weapons can lead to an
arrest, because none of their actions have been illegal.

Told from the perspective of an F.B.I. agent played by Peter Gallagher, "Path to
Paradise" shows the bad calls and near misses in painstaking detail. The source
material came from Steve Emerson, an investigative journalist who reported on
the activities of radical Islamic groups for more than a decade. His 1994 PBS
documentary, "Jihad in America," was a crash course on the subject and became
must viewing in Washington after Sept. 11. Mr. Emerson provided the producers of
"Path to Paradise" with background interviews with F.B.I. agents, transcripts of
federal wiretaps and taped conversations of an informant who learned of plans to
destroy other New York landmarks, bridges and tunnels. The movie also contained
actual film, obtained by the F.B.I., of terrorist exercises and demonstrations
of suicide bombing missions.

Mr. Emerson's cache of material -- much of which was used verbatim as dialogue
-- helped give HBO the conviction it needed to stand up to Arab-American groups
that protested the film's original broadcast. At its 1997 convention, the
Arab-American Anti-Discrimination Committee gave "Path to Paradise" its
"Intolerance Award," claiming that the film's Arab and Muslim characters were
racist stereotypes. Arab-American groups also complained about the film's
contention that another attack by Islamic terrorists was inevitable. Mr. Emerson
said that view was hard to avoid.

"If you read the transcripts and looked at the evidence and interviewed the
F.B.I. officials who worked on the case, there was only one conclusion: they
didn't succeed that time and they are going to do it again," he said. "Every
single person who worked on that case said it was just a matter of time."

The negative reaction of the Arab and Muslim communities was enough to convince
the screenwriter, Ed Zuckerman, to take his name out of the credits (he is
listed as Ned Curren). "It didn't seem prudent," said Mr. Zuckerman, who has not
publicly acknowledged his work on the film until now. The Sept. 11 attacks would
also affect his work: he is an executive producer of the CBS drama series about
the C.I.A., "The Agency," which pulled, shuffled and edited several episodes
because of references to Osama bin Laden and anthrax.

Colin Callender, president of HBO Films and the former head of HBO NYC, said
that "Path to Paradise" seemed like "a wake-up call" when it was being made. But
the film brought about little awareness of the fervor of Islamic extremists and
the threat of terrorism at the time, just as the 1993 World Trade Center bombing
led to few effective safeguards against another attack. "I think it's hard for
people to see these movies and sort of stories when everything else is going
great," he said. "It's sometimes hard to look at stories you don't want to see."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: PATH TO PARADISE (TV PROGRAM)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Peter Gallagher and Marcia Gay Harden in the 1997 HBO film
"Path to Paradise," in which a terrorist says of the twin towers, "Next time we
will take them both down." (Eric Liebowitz/HBO)(pg. 25); Leslie Libman and Larry
Williams during the filming of "Path to Paradise: The Untold Story of the World
Trade Center Bombing." (Eric Liebowitz/HBO)(pg. 31)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); FILM (89%); MOVIE FILMING (89%); TERRORISM
(88%); ACTION & ADVENTURE FILMS (77%); DRAMA FILMS (77%); HIJACKING (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (73%); CABLE TELEVISION (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (69%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (67%); AIRLINES (66%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (64%); HELICOPTERS (62%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES
AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  TELEVISION;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS

COMPANY: HOME BOX OFFICE INC (91%)

PERSON: BATTAGLIO, STEPHEN; LIBMAN, LESLIE; WILLIAMS, LARRY

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); NEW ZEALAND (90%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             480 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 5, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: MILITARY COMMISSIONS;
Bar Group Defies Administration In Voting for Limits on Tribunals

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 4


Defying the Bush administration, the American Bar Association recommended today
that Congress have a say in establishing any military tribunals used to try
terrorism cases and that defendants in those tribunals be given extensive legal
protections.

Any such tribunals should follow the settled rules for military courts-martial,
including the right to appeal to the Supreme Court, the association said.
Defendants should be presumed innocent until proved guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt, it said, and a death sentence should require a unanimous verdict.

Meeting here, the association's policy-making body, the House of Delegates,
voted by 286 to 147 in favor of attaching those and other conditions to the use
of tribunals. The vote means that the group, while not contesting President
Bush's power to use tribunals, wants them convened only in limited
circumstances, and under established legal and constitutional rules.

The delegates also urged that for the sake of consensus, and of withstanding any
possible constitutional challenge to the tribunals, Congress have a role in
their creation. But the delegates did not specify that role.

Mr. Bush's broad announcement in November that the United States might use
tribunals to try terrorism cases did not lay out how they would operate or who
would be tried there. The Pentagon is nearly finished writing rules addressing
those questions.

The administration had lobbied the bar association not to take a position,
calling it premature to do so before the rules are issued.

Before the vote today, Solicitor General Theodore B. Olson asked the delegates
to "first, do no harm."

The list of conditions is too rigid, Mr. Olson said, and could tie the
president's hands as the United States fights a changing war on terror.

The administration needs the "support and the flexibility to respond to
circumstances we are still attempting to comprehend," he said.

The delegates applauded Mr. Olson, whose wife, Barbara, died on the jetliner
that hit the Pentagon on Sept. 11, but then rejected his request. The vote put
the full 408,000-lawyer organization behind preliminary recommendations that the
group released last month and sent to the Pentagon for review.

Bar association members here said they assumed that the first tribunals would
convene overseas later this year to try prisoners suspected of being members of
Al Qaeda. The White House has said that no American citizens will be prosecuted
before tribunals.

The American Bar Association has no enforcement power, and, although its
positions have customarily been influential in Washington, it has had a more
distant relationship with the Bush White House than with past administrations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (92%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%);
EVIDENCE (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); VERDICTS (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); APPEALS (57%) TERRORISM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
LOBBYING AND LOBBYISTS;  COURTS-MARTIAL;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (91%) AMERICAN BAR ASSN

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             487 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: REVIVING EDUCATION;
For Women in Kabul, This Test Is Welcome

BYLINE:  By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 9


Afghanistan since the collapse of the Taliban has made many an ordinary event
seem extraordinary, and few more so than the task that had Dr. Aziz Ahmad
Rahmand, a professor of contemporary Afghan history, bursting with pride, joy
and not a little gloating as he hurried about Kabul University one day this
week.

Dr. Rahmand, 45, was supervising entry examinations, the kind of duty senior
professors in most other countries might shun. But not in Afghanistan, where the
source of the professor's bliss lay in the fact that row upon row of women were
taking the exam beside men in the library and in many another unheated hall
across the bitingly cold campus.

The idea of women learning, of course, was anathema to the Taliban. So the
female candidates, many of whom wore their finest shoes to trudge through miles
of snow and slush, were mostly 18- to 25-year-olds liberated from five years of
Taliban rule spent at home doing chores, and dreaming, as many said, of the
improbable day when they might again study to become lawyers, doctors, engineers
and teachers.

It was a day for earrings and makeup and handbags and other casual flauntings
that would have had the Taliban running for the electrical cables they used for
beating women in the street who showed even a glimpse of stocking. In the
hallways, the burka, the head-to-toe shroud that became an emblem of Taliban
repression, was now a fashion statement, tossed backward from the candidates'
heads as if to say, "Take a hike, Mr. Mullah."

"The Taliban? I have nothing to say about those people, they did rudely to
Afghan women, we are happy to see them go," said Fawzia Shahbaz, 25, who
explained in self-taught English that she had spent the Taliban years "just busy
at home." Now, she said, she hoped to become a teacher, so that she could help
other women play a more productive role in Afghan society.

Dr. Rahmand took in all this, and much more. With the Taliban gone, the
resumption of studies in March, the traditional beginning of the Afghan
university year, would mean, he said, that there would be no more barely
educated mullahs insisting that 12 of the 36 hours the students spend in class
each six-day week be spent on studies of the Koran, though the residual power of
mullahs would mean that students would continue some Islamic studies.

Nor would the worst of the mullahs be around to ban books from the library, or
to have their followers shooting Kalashnikov rounds at proscribed volumes on
gynecology and human rights and other abhorred subjects that now sit as
testament to the Taliban's ways in glass cases in the library's lobby.

What conclusion did Dr. Rahmand think it most important to draw from all this
happiness? Unprompted by American visitors, he, like many others on the campus,
spent much of his time doing something else that professors elsewhere do not
generally do with such enthusiasm: praising a politician, in this case President
Bush. If Mr. Bush wants to give a convocation address on a campus where he is
certain to be welcomed with a tidal wave of approval, he might consider Kabul.

"We wish to help you, because Mr. Bush has helped us, by driving out these
terrible Taliban," Dr. Rahmand said in a rusty French learned during studies in
Europe.

"I myself was a victim of their totalitarian ways. I had to grow a ridiculous
beard, they ransacked my library, they banned me from teaching any 20th-century
Afghan history.

"Monsieur, they were monsters, and Mr. Bush has chased them away." At that, Dr.
Rahmand flourished his university identity card, showing a man with a
long-tailed turban and an eight-inch salt-and-pepper beard, barely recognizable
as the now-clean-shaven professor in the natty suit and tie and trim French
raincoat pulled from a trunk at home for today's exam vigil.

"Just look at me!" he said. "Quite absurd! And here I am now, no beard, no
turban, in charge of the examinations. Marvelous!"

The university the students will attend will differ in important ways from the
one that went into recess when the American bombing began in October. Yet in
some ways, it will remain hobbled by the legacy of years of pedagogical
convolutions by the Taliban, the anti-Soviet guerrilla groups that governed
before them and the Afghan Communists before them. As professors and students
tell it, it may be years before it is again a completely normal place.

For one thing, a lack of financing and qualified candidates will mean that it
will take time before enrollment numbers approach the 10,000 students who
studied at the university before the Communist coup of 1979 and the ensuing
Soviet invasion. About 60 per cent of the students in the 1970's were women, a
figure almost unmatched elsewhere in Asia at the time, and one also unlikely to
be replicated soon.

Enrollment last year was 2,500, and even if all of the 1,500 women expected to
take the entrance exam this month qualify, many classrooms will remain empty.

Finding qualified teaching staff is another problem. Dr. Rahmand, the historian,
said only 18 of the 250 members of the teaching staff last year had doctorates,
the remnants of a faculty that disintegrated over the years as millions of
Afghans fled abroad.

While some professors have begun to trickle back from Pakistan and Iran, many
others have settled in the United States and Europe, Dr. Rahmand said, and they
were unlikely to return to jobs that carried a current salary equivalent to $20
a month, compared with the $500 a month paid here in the late 1970's.

Books, too, are in short supply. Years of no acquisitions, along with theft and
book burning -- and that novelty of Taliban literary criticism, book shooting --
have left many shelves in the library empty.

The chief librarian, Muhammad Sadiq Wadid, 40, came running after the visitors
to make a special request. "We say hello to the educated people in the Western
countries," he said, "and we ask them, kindly, if you have any books about the
technical and scientific world, engineering, literature -- anything! -- please
send them to us.

"The Afghan people are in darkness, and we ask the Western countries to help us
shine some light," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Taliban commonly shot books, like this one at Kabul
University.; Dr. Aziz Ahmad Rahmand, a professor of Afghan history, and Nasreen
Ahmad Zai, 21, talk about a question on the Kabul University entry exam.
(Photographs by Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); WOMEN (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%);
HISTORY (89%); RELIGION (89%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (79%);
HIJACKING (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (77%);
SCHOOL ENTRANCE EXAMS (77%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (77%); TERRORISM
(74%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (74%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (69%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (64%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS;
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;  WOMEN

ORGANIZATION: ;KABUL UNIVERSITY

PERSON: BURNS, JOHN F; RAHMAND, AZIZ AHMAD (DR)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             488 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1333 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

For Saudis, Rehabilitation A New Option in Drug War
Drugs have increasingly become a source of entertainment and escape for Saudi
Arabia's young population, and addiction has become a serious enough problem
that the government is beginning to deal with it in a distinctly non-Saudi way:
openly.   A3

Palestinians Kill 2 Soldiers
Two Palestinians shot and killed two soldiers near the Israeli Army's Southern
Command headquarters, and were then shot dead. Later, Israeli warplanes struck a
Palestinian police compound in Gaza City and rockets were fired at targets in
the northern Gaza Strip.   A8


Wafa Idris, identified as the first female suicide bomber to attack inside
Israel, has been hailed in the Arabic-language press as a nationalist and
feminist hero. But her attack has stirred religious debate over whether Islam
permits women to carry out suicide missions.   A8

German Red Ink Irks Partners
Germany, the onetime locomotive for growth, is likely to have a budget deficit
of 2.7 percent of gross domestic product this year -- within a hair of the 3
percent limit that Germany itself insisted on for countries that adopt the euro.
The possible breach positions it for an embarrassing reprimand from European
finance ministers, who are to meet in Brussels tomorrow.   A5

Plea to Help Refugees in China
Human rights advocates appealed to President Bush, who is to visit Asia this
week, to push Chinese leaders for concrete efforts to help the nearly 200,000
Korean refugees there.   A10

NATION CHALLENGED   12-13

Released Afghan Prisoners Say They Were Abused
Afghan prisoners captured by American forces in two night raids last month said
that they were beaten and abused by American soldiers, despite their protests
that they supported the leader of the interim government, Hamid Karzai. The
Pentagon has acknowledged that the raids were conducted in error.   A1

Afghanistan's Porous Borders
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has berated Iran for failing to stop
Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters from crossing into the country from Afghanistan,
citing Pakistan as an example of cooperation. But loose controls at the Pakistan
border suggest that just as many fighters may have escaped to that nation.   A13


Iran Cracks Down on Warlord
In Tehran, demands for the expulsion of the exiled hard-line Afghan warlord
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar grew louder, with the government both shuttering his
organization's offices and indicating that he might be asked to leave.   A12

Health Concerns for Senate
More than 70 Senate employees and at least one senator have experienced health
problems they suspect are related to the irradiation of Congressional mail that
began after anthrax attacks in October.   A13

NATIONAL   A14-23

More Job Seekers Answering Call to Teach
The sinking economy and a wave of soul-searching after the Sept. 11 terror
attacks have swelled the number of people seeking jobs as teachers, school
officials say.   A1

Rural Drug Problem Grows
From Maine to Oregon and Georgia to Texas, rural communities are experiencing an
explosion in drugs and crime. The upsurge is testing local law enforcement
agencies and bringing the kind of violence more commonly associated with poor
neighborhoods in big cities.   A1

Cost of Crime-Fighting Rises
The cost of combating crime in the United States, for police, prisons and
courts, was $147 billion in 1999, according to a study by the Bureau of Justice
Statistics. That is more than four times the $36 billion spent on the criminal
justice system in 1982.   A14

Death Penalty Flaws Examined
Death sentences are more likely to be reversed in areas that often use that
penalty and have higher black populations, and where judges face political
pressure, according to a new study.   A16

Parties Pulling In Donations
As the House heads toward a pivotal vote on campaign finance legislation,
Republicans and Democrats alike have been raising money so aggressively that
they are breaking previous records, despite an informal fund-raising moratorium
in the weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks.   A1

Clash Over Governor's Records
By placing records from his governorship at his father's presidential library,
George W. Bush is putting them in the hands of a federal institution that is not
ordinarily bound by the state's tough Public Information Act. That concerns the
state archivist, who says the records belong to Texas and ought to be readily
available in accordance with that law.   A14

Evolution Theory's New Foe
The latest challenge to evolution's primacy in the classrooms -- the theory of
intelligent design, not the old foe creationism -- will get a full-scale hearing
before Ohio Board of Education members, who are in a heated debate over whether
established science censors other views about the origins of life.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Best-Selling Prison Author Is Found Dead in His Cell
Jack Henry Abbott, left, a convicted killer and best-selling author who was
paroled in 1981 with the support of the novelist Norman Mailer, only to kill a
waiter six weeks later, was found dead in his prison cell in an apparent
suicide, officials said.   B1

University President Resigns
Arnold J. Levine, president of Rockefeller University,announced that he was
resigning for health reasons. His departure follows an inquiry by trustees into
an incident between Dr. Levine and a female student in a campus lounge after
both had had too much to drink, according to people close to him who spoke on
condition of anonymity.   B1

Bacterial Pneumonia Death
A Massachusetts woman attending a business convention at a hotel in Cherry Hill,
N.J., died of aggressive bacterial pneumonia, and seven other conventiongoers
were hospitalized with a flulike respiratory illness, officials said.   B1

ARTS   E1-9

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Debate Over Mammograms
For decades, the value of an annual mammogram was an article of medical faith.
But now, seemingly overnight, that faith has been shaken.   A18

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-11

Hockey League Draws Fire
The N.H.L. says it is trying to protect the integrity of its season. But it is
drawing criticism for a position that threatens to keep some players from
joining their national teams, now vying for two open positions in the upcoming
preliminary round of Olympic play.   D1

OBITUARIES   A25

Robert J. Lamphere
An F.B.I. agent who supervised the investigations of some of the biggest
espionage cases of the cold war, including that of the Rosenbergs, he was 83.
A25

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

Lay to Invoke Fifth Amendment
Kenneth L. Lay, Enron's former chairman, exercising his Constitutional right
against self-incrimination, has decided not to testify before Congress tomorrow
about the company's collapse, a spokeswoman said.   A1

The Many Hats of Robert Rubin
Plenty of government officials retire to the private sector to make their
fortunes. Plenty of business executives venture into politics seeking power and
influence. Robert E. Rubin, former Treasury secretary, is doing both.   A1

Executive Deals Questioned
Even as the government looks for evidence of accounting fraud at the troubled
communications company Global Crossing, some analysts are shaking their heads
over the apparently legal ways the company's executives were able to walk away
with personal fortunes.   C1

Executives at several corporations have found a legal way to delay telling the
public when they sell their own companies' stock. But after events like the
collapse of Enron, some experts say the rules should be changed to give
investors a clear, prompt picture of stock sales.   C1

Movies as Product Lines
Two years after a management shakeup at Warner Brothers, it has become
increasingly clear that within the vast AOL Time Warner multimedia empire, the
strategy is to run a movie-franchise factory.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: The trial of Slobodan Milosevic; New York's displaced workers; Adam
Cohen on Congress's investigation of Enron.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E6
Metro Diary   B2
Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E9
Weather   D12

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
ARMIES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (77%); ECONOMIC NEWS (77%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS
(77%); PUBLIC FINANCE (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (76%); SHOOTINGS (76%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (74%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (74%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); BUDGETS (72%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%);
LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (69%); BUDGET DEFICITS (68%); RELIGION (68%); BORDER
CONTROL (67%); EMPLOYMENT (62%); ANTHRAX (61%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (60%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (77%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); SAUDI ARABIA (95%); AFGHANISTAN
(94%); ISRAEL (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); CHINA (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); GERMANY (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ASIA (79%); BELGIUM (79%); IRAN (77%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             489 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Economy;
Bracing for a flood of efforts to control speech seen as hateful or terrorist.

BYLINE:  By Carl S. Kaplan;  Carl S. Kaplan, a journalist and lawyer, wrote the
"Cyber Law Journal" column that appeared on The New York Times on the Web from
July 1997 until January 2002.

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1232 words


SINCE Sept. 11, nations that have strong laws and traditions against hate speech
are apparently growing even more alarmed about inflammatory expression that they
fear could lead to racial or religious violence.

That worries some civil libertarians in the United States, who point to a French
court decision that they believe handed governments and groups a blueprint for
how to censor online hate speech that may be illegal within one country's
borders but perfectly lawful elsewhere.

A little more than a year ago, the judge in the French case, Licra v. Yahoo,
shook the mahogany desks of lawyers around the world when he reaffirmed an
earlier ruling that Yahoo, based in Santa Clara, Calif., had violated French law
by allowing French citizens to view auction sites displaying Nazi memorabilia.

The case has jumped the Atlantic and is making its way through the courts in the
United States, where a federal judge has ruled that French sanctions against
Yahoo -- including $13,000 a day in fines -- cannot be enforced in the United
States. The two groups that sued the company in France, the International League
Against Racism and Anti-Semitism (known as Licra) and the Union of French Jewish
Students, are appealing the federal judge's decision in the United States Court
of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco.

Regardless of the appeal's outcome, nations seeking to control potentially
harmful speech that arrives from offshore are seen as almost certain to use the
French precedent to bolster their efforts.

"They will not be tempted to do it -- they will do it," said Jack Goldsmith, a
professor at the University of Chicago Law School who frequently writes about
Internet legal matters and is the author of a coming book, "Reining in the Net,"
about how countries are putting borders in cyberspace.

That is what frightens Alan Davidson, a lawyer with the Center for Democracy and
Technology, an Internet civil liberties group in Washington. The French Yahoo
ruling "really puts free expression and communication in jeopardy on the Net,"
Mr. Davidson said, warning that online speech could sink to a single country's
lowest-common-denominator standard.

Other legal thinkers, too, are beginning to consider the global implications of
the Yahoo case with respect to hate and terrorist speech on the Internet.
Several professors and lawyers -- including the author of this article -- will
be discussing the topic today in Manhattan at a conference at Cardozo School of
Law at Yeshiva University.

The case came to public attention in May 2000, when Judge Jean-Jacques Gomez of
the County Court of Paris ordered in a preliminary decision that Yahoo take
action to "render impossible" the ability of French Internet users to gain
access to the Nazi-related auctions found on Yahoo's English-language auction
pages. In reaching his decision, the judge asserted that he had jurisdiction
over Yahoo, even though it is based in the United States, because the content on
Yahoo's computers in the United States was available to French users.

The court also said Yahoo's display of the material in France had violated a
section of France's criminal code, which reflects still raw memories of World
War II.

In a later ruling, in November 2000, Judge Gomez concluded that available
technology would allow Yahoo to take reasonable steps to identify and block the
disputed material from French eyes -- thus allowing American users, for example,
to continue to view the content. Unconvinced by Yahoo's arguments that such
technology was deeply flawed, the judge said the company would be subject to a
fine of about $13,000 for each day it did not comply with his earlier order.

Yahoo announced later that it would more aggressively enforce its ban on hateful
and racist material from its auction sites, but it said the move was not in
response to the French legal proceedings.

American civil libertarians applauded when Judge Jeremy Fogel of Federal
District Court in San Jose, Calif., ruled that the French court's order and fine
would not be enforced against Yahoo in the United States. The judge said it
would be repugnant to the First Amendment for an American court to carry out the
French order. The United States Constitution, he said, protects the display of
artifacts or expression of viewpoints associated with extreme political views,
including Nazism and anti-Semitism.

But some legal observers question whether Judge Fogel's ruling, if upheld on
appeal, is the shield that some large American Internet service providers say it
is. After all, they argue, even if an American court will not enforce a foreign
judgment that runs afoul of the Constitution's free-speech guarantees, the
foreign court has other leverage. If a case involves a multinational company
with assets abroad, the foreign court could lay claim to the company's funds,
receivables or property within its jurisdiction. In addition, if the company's
executives traveled to the foreign locale, the local judge could perhaps have
them arrested.

On the other hand, private individuals and companies with no foreign assets
would presumably have less to worry about from a foreign court's order. Indeed,
Yahoo has said it has no seizable assets in France -- although some legal
experts have suggested that money owed Yahoo by its French-language affiliate,
Yahoo France, could be at risk.

Given the potential leverage of a Yahoo-style case on multinational Internet
companies, experts say that Judge Gomez has created a powerful tool for the
suppression of online speech that a recipient nation finds offensive or
dangerous. And some Western democracies are showing a heightened sensitivity to
hate speech lately.

Last month, a tribunal in Ottawa declared that a Holocaust-denial Web site based
in California and controlled by a one-time Canadian resident ran afoul of the
Canadian Human Rights Act. "The tribunal acknowledged the ability to enforce its
judgment was severely limited," said Michael Geist, a professor at the
University of Ottawa's Faculty of Law who is an expert in Internet law. "But it
wanted to make clear that this form of hate speech was illegal in Canada and not
to be tolerated."

More significant, perhaps, the 43-nation Council of Europe plans later this year
to propose a side agreement to a pending international cybercrime treaty. The
side agreement would make computer distribution of racist and xenophobic
propaganda a crime.

The United States, which has signed though not yet ratified the general
cybercrime treaty, blocked attempts to include the category of Internet hate
speech in the treaty itself. But the fact that nations are still discussing a
ban on online hate speech suggests that other cases against inflammatory
terrorist or hate speech on the Internet could land on court dockets soon,
warned Barry Steinhardt, associate director of the American Civil Liberties
Union. "I think it can and will happen, especially against multinational
corporations," he said.

But not all legal experts in this country agree that a slew of Yahoo-type cases
would be bad thing. Some argue that countries can choose for themselves what is
lawful within their own cyberborders -- that just because the world is becoming
networked, all nations need not adhere to American free-speech traditions.
"That," said Mr. Goldsmith at the University of Chicago, "is the essence of
territorial sovereignty."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Igor Kopelnitsky)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); APPEALS (90%);
INTERNET & WWW (90%); LAWYERS (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (87%); WRITERS
(86%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (78%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES
(78%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (78%); CENSORSHIP (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%);
RELIGION (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); APPEALS COURTS
(77%); RACE & RACISM (77%); VERDICTS (77%); NEW ECONOMY (76%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(76%); STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS (76%); INTERNET AUCTIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (71%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); BUSINESS TORTS (68%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND
MINORITIES;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET;
DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  FINES (PENALTIES);  TERRORISM;  COMPUTERS AND THE
INTERNET;  AUCTIONS

COMPANY: YAHOO! INC (86%)

ORGANIZATION: YAHOO INC

TICKER: YHOO (NASDAQ) (86%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(86%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (86%); SIC7375 INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL SERVICES (86%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (86%)
SIC7372 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS;

PERSON: KAPLAN, CARL S; GOMEZ, JENA-JACQUES (JUDGE); FOGEL, JEREMY (JUDGE)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SAN
FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (71%); PARIS, FRANCE (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); FRANCE (94%)

REGION: FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             490 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tribunal: How It Works

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 366 words


ORIGIN -- The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia was
established by the United Nations Security Council in 1993 and opened in The
Hague in 1994. It is the first international criminal court since the military
tribunals that judged Nazi and Japanese leaders after World War II.

OBJECTIVES -- The tribunal's mandate allows it to prosecute individuals for
serious violations of international humanitarian law committed on the territory
of any of the countries that were part of Yugoslavia before it began to
disintegrate in 1991. The mandate encompasses four broad categories: grave
breaches of the 1949 Geneva Conventions; violations of the laws or customs of
war; genocide and crimes against humanity.


JURISDICTION -- The tribunal and national courts have concurrent jurisdiction.
The tribunal can claim primacy over national courts and may take over national
investigations and proceedings at any stage if this is deemed to be in the
interest of international justice. Most defendants have been ethnic Serbs, but
Muslims and Croats also have been indicted.

JUDGES -- The court has 16 permanent judges, elected to four-year terms by the
United Nations General Assembly. The judges represent the main legal systems in
the world. They serve in panels of three judges each; there are seven appeals
judges, who serve in a panel of five .

PROSECUTION -- The Office of the Prosecutor operates independently of the
Security Council, of any state or international organization and of the other
organs of the tribunal. Its members are experienced police officers, crime
experts, analysts and lawyers. It conducts investigations by collecting
evidence, identifying witnesses, exhuming mass graves, prepares indictments and
presents prosecutions before the judges of the Tribunal.

CUSTODY AND SENTENCES -- Presently 45 accused are held at the tribunal's
detention unit for The Hague, in the high security compound of the Dutch prison
at Scheveningen. Six have been released, pending trial. Another 30 have been
indicted but remain fugitives. The maximum sentence that can be imposed on an
accused is life imprisonment. The longest sentence handed down so far was 46
years for genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); SENTENCING (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); JURISDICTION (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
WORLD WAR II (77%); WITNESSES (77%); JUDGES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); MILITARY
COURTS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); APPEALS COURTS (72%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (55%); RELIGION (53%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%); UNITED NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); JAPAN
(92%); CROATIA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA;  CROATIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             501 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Great Unwatched

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  Bob Herbert is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Stipulated: The protection of our capital, its monuments and centers of
authority, is a vital national interest.

Early in our history, when faced with a potential rebellion of unpaid officers,
one of our leaders employed an uncharacteristic emotional trick -- pretending to
be going blind -- to appeal to the infuriated military men not to march on the
capital. He soon had them in tears and in hand.

In another time, another leader risked all by turning the capital's defense over
to the man most opposed to his political aims, gambling that he could later
overcome the nation's gratitude to a man on horseback.

In our time, after the Pentagon was hit, the White House targeted and the
Capitol anthraxed, D.C. again saw itself besieged. But now, in terror of an
external threat, our leaders are protecting our capital at the cost of every
American's personal freedom.

Surveillance is in the saddle. Responding to the latest Justice Department
terror alert, Washington police opened the Joint Operation Command Center of the
Synchronized Operations Command Complex (S.O.C.C.). In it, 50 officials monitor
a wall of 40 video screens showing images of travelers, drivers, residents and
pedestrians.

These used to be the Great Unwatched, free people conducting their private
lives; now they are under close surveillance by hundreds of hidden cameras. A
zoom lens enables the watchers to focus on the face of a tourist walking toward
the Washington Monument or Lincoln Memorial.

The monitoring system is already linked to 200 cameras in public schools. The
watchers plan to expand soon with an equal number in the subways and parks. A
private firm profits by photographing cars running red lights; those images will
also join the surveillance network.

Private cameras in banks and the lobbies and elevators of apartment buildings
and hotels will join the system, and residents of nursing homes and hospitals
can look forward to an electronic eye in every room. A commercial camera atop a
department store in Georgetown catches the faces of shoppers entering malls, to
be plugged into omnipresent S.O.C.C.

Digital images of the captured faces can be flashed around the world in an
instant on the Internet. Married to face-recognition technology and tied in to
public and private agencies around the world, an electronic library of hundreds
of millions of faces will be created. Terrorists and criminals -- as well as
unhappy spouses, runaway teens, hermits and other law-abiding people who want to
drop out of society for a while -- will have no way to get a fresh start.

Is this the kind of world we want? The promise is greater safety; the tradeoff
is government control of individual lives. Personal security may or may not be
enhanced by this all-seeing eye and ear, but personal freedom will surely be
sharply curtailed. To be watched at all times, especially when doing nothing
seriously wrong, is to be afflicted with a creepy feeling. That is what is felt
by a convict in an always-lighted cell. It is the pervasive, inescapable feeling
of being unfree.

As the law now stands, there is no privacy in public places; that's why sports
stadiums are called "Snooper Bowls." A whisper to your spouse on your front
porch is the public's business, say the courts; and on that intrusive analogy,
long-range microphones may soon be allowed to pick up voice vibrations on
windowpanes.

When your government, employer, landlord, merchant, banker and local sports team
gang up to picture, digitize and permanently record your every activity, you are
placed under unprecedented control. This is not some alarmist Orwellian
scenario; it is here, now, financed by $20 billion last year and $15 billion
more this year of federal money appropriated out of sheer fear.

By creating the means to monitor 300 million visits to the U.S. yearly, this
administration and a supine opposition are building a system capable of
identifying, tracking and spying on 300 million Americans. So far, the reaction
has been a most un-American docility.

It's Presidents' Day. To save the capital and thus the nation, the leader who
manipulated his rebellious officers with an emotional pretense of incipient
blindness was George Washington, and the one who risked creating a Caesar out of
a necessary general was Abraham Lincoln. Neither would sacrifice our freedom to
protect his monument.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (88%); TERRORISM
(88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); HIJACKING (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
LOBBYING (70%); MULTIFAMILY REAL ESTATE (69%); BIOMETRICS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); HOTELS & MOTELS (66%); ADOLESCENTS (66%); RETAILERS (61%); ARMED FORCES
(57%); NURSING HOMES (50%); LONG TERM HEALTH CARE (50%); PATTERN RECOGNITION
(50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: SAFIRE, WILLIAM; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             502 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Berenson Loses Peruvian Appeal Of Her 20-Year Prison Sentence

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Feb. 18


The Supreme Court said today that it was upholding a 20-year prison term for
Lori Berenson, the New York woman convicted last June of collaborating with a
Marxist rebel group in its war against the Peruvian government.

Four of five judges on the panel voted to affirm the sentence, exhausting Ms.
Berenson's legal appeals, the presiding judge, Guillermo Cabala, announced.

Ms. Berenson, 32, a former Massachusetts Institute of Technology student, was
arrested in 1995 and sentenced to life in prison for her membership in the Tupac
Amaru Revolutionary Movement. That conviction, by a military tribunal of hooded
judges, was later overturned. But after a new trial, a three-judge panel
convicted her again, sentencing her to 20 years for having helped the rebels in
their foiled plans to attack Peru's congress in 1994. She is being held in a
mountain prison in northern Peru.

In a statement released by her parents, Mark and Rhoda Berenson, in New York,
Ms. Berenson said: "This judicial process was a farce from its beginning to its
end. I am innocent of the charges."

She can still seek a pardon from President Alejandro Toledo, whose government
has been critical of the military tribunals that imprisoned thousands during the
administration of President Alberto K. Fujimori, now in exile in Japan. Or she
can push for the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to take up her case.
Her parents have called on President Bush to press Mr. Toledo on the subject of
a release when he visits Lima, which he is scheduled to do on March 23.

Although Peruvian officials have said Ms. Berenson's case was not a priority for
the government, the foreign minister, Diego Garcia Sayan, said last week that
the case might come up during Mr. Bush's visit.

"On the hypothetical field, we can talk about everything," he said. "As a friend
of the U.S. government, we can listen to any proposals they might be interested
in."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (92%); SENTENCING (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
PRISONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JUDGES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); APPEALS
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%);
VERDICTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); PARDONS (78%); AMNESTY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); US PRESIDENTS (71%);
ARRESTS (71%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (68%) AMNESTIES AND PARDONS;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (57%); INTER-AMERICAN
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS (54%) TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT (PERU)

PERSON: BERENSON, LORI; TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO (PRES); FORERO, JUAN

CITY: LIMA, PERU (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (93%); JAPAN (79%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             506 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: U.N. Backed On Tribunal

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 73 words


Seventeen civic organizations issued a statement supporting the decision by the
United Nations two weeks ago to withdraw from talks with the government on
setting up a tribunal to try former Khmer Rouge leaders. After nearly five years
of talks, the United Nations said it had given up reaching an agreement that
would fulfill international standards of justice, and Cambodia said it would
make no further compromises.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (87%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (86%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS
(86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA); UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World: Out Front;
A Desert Kingdom Takes the Spotlight

BYLINE:  By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


SAUDI ARABIA'S annual national cultural festival opened in Riyadh in January
with a stage spectacle that likened the struggle of the Palestinians to the
victories of the Islamic past. Male dancers brandishing shields and swords
played warriors loyal to Saladin, the Muslim hero who retook Jerusalem from
crusaders nine centuries ago. On giant screens behind them, a film about Saladin
was intercut with grainy black-and-white footage of the Palestinian
interpretation of the intifada.

Palestinian children threw stones. Heavily armed Israeli soldiers fired into
crowds. Dead Palestinian babies were held in front of the cameras. A hand ripped
off the head of a pigeon. "Jerusalem will be ours again," intoned a voice in
Arabic. "We will win. We will fight. These are the swords of Saladin, and they
must be raised up again."

Presiding over this scene was Crown Prince Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz al-Saud, the
heir apparent, the first deputy prime minister, commander of the National Guard
and the kingdom's de facto ruler -- stone-faced and silent. Abdullah has never
been a warrior, and the show, televised live on the government-controlled
television, was clearly designed for domestic consumption, rather than to launch
an offensive from international stage. But within a month, the prince would be
casting himself in a very different role -- Middle East statesman -- with a
sweeping, if vague, statement that his kingdom would normalize relations with
Israel if it withdrew from the territories it occupied in 1967.

Still, the pageant and the emotions behind it were revealing. They highlighted
the dangerous background against which Saudi Arabia is being called upon to
break its traditional pattern of caution, secrecy and even denial in the face of
the region's many crises.

And public sympathy for Palestinians, which the royal family is both leading and
following, is not the only pressure on the prince. These days, the royal family
has had to mount a strategic counteroffensive to the strong criticism of the
kingdom in the United States since Sept. 11. The Saudis have denied charges that
they have not done enough to curb Islamic charities that may funnel funds into
terrorist-related organizations, and they reject criticism of their religious
schools, some of which teach hatred of the West.

Even more than the scourge of terror, the Palestinian plight has seized the
conscience of the kingdom. Television is dominated by one-sided images of the
Palestinians -- and none of Israelis -- as victims of violence. Sympathy for the
cause of Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born terrorist, runs high, Saudi officials
and academics say, not because Saudis like terrorism, but because he has latched
onto the Palestinian cause.

And this has challenged the Saudi royal family to make a grand gesture appealing
to the American and the Saudi consciences at the same time.

The logical step in that direction would be to take the lead in solving the
Israeli-Palestinian crisis. But there is a paradox here: for all the wealth and
the influence the Saudis wield, they have never been in the vanguard of the
peacemakers. And it is not entirely clear what prompted Prince Abdullah to make
his proposal now.

According to his foreign policy adviser, Adel al-Jubeir, his motivation is
simple: "It was meant as a message to the Israeli public that peace is possible.
It is meant as a signal to other leaders around the world that if they engage in
peace they will find partners in the Arab world. He sees children being shot in
the arms of their parents and pizzerias blown up and it seems senseless, when we
all know what the solution is going to look like."

Still, it is striking that suddenly, with this one gesture, Prince Abdullah has
achieved an extraordinary public relations coup. Wittingly or unwittingly, he
has shifted the focus away from the Saudi Arabia that doesn't have elections,
allow women to determine their futures or protect basic freedoms like assembly
or religion, and has prevented the American military from mounting offensive
operations in the war on terrorism from Saudi territory.

Historically, the Saudi role in shaping the Middle East's politics has been
episodic. Saudi royals have never sought to be hands-on negotiators. When
Franklin Roosevelt asked King Abdul Aziz during their historic meeting in
February 1945 for suggestions about a homeland for the Jews, the king replied,
"Give them and their descendants the choicest lands and homes of the Germans who
oppressed them."

THE boldest Saudi peace initiative came in 1981, when Crown Prince Fahd, during
a visit of President Anwar Sadat of Egypt to Washington, told the
government-controlled Saudi Press Agency that the Camp David accords were "a
failure" and he unveiled an alternative plan. It affirmed the right of the
region's countries to live in peace, but no Saudi official ever said the kingdom
or any other Arab country was ready to formally recognize Israel. Israel's prime
minister, Menachem Begin, called the plan a "liquidation formula." It went
nowhere.

From then on, the kingdom did little to actively promote peace. When Beirut was
under siege in 1982, King Fahd's only intervention was to call President Reagan
and ask him to get the Israelis to turn on the water to West Beirut. Then, when
President Bill Clinton enlisted Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco and Jordan to
represent the Muslim world and help Yasir Arafat see the merits of reaching a
compromise on Jerusalem during the Camp David negotiations in the summer of
2000, they all refused, with Saudi officials complaining that they had not been
not consulted during the talks.

In contrast to the often opaque King Fahd, who is ailing and unable to govern,
Prince Abdullah, his half-brother, is blunt-spoken, keenly aware of public
opinion and given to eruptions of emotion, even anger. Last August,

after President Bush said from his home in Crawford, Tex., that Israel was under
siege and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel moved tanks into parts of the
West Bank, Prince Abdullah was livid. Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the ambassador
to Washington, was ordered to deliver a terse message to Mr. Bush through his
national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. The message, according to a
paraphrase by a Saudi official, went something like this: "It is clear you made
a strategic decision to support Sharon irrespective of what he does and
regardless of the impact it has on your interests and your friends in the
region. You leave us no alternative except to pursue policies based on our
national interests regardless of their impact on you."

Mr. Bush promised the prince that he would give a speech calling for the
creation of a Palestinian state, which he did at the United Nations in November.
The prince asked Yasir Arafat to come up with a clear, realistic vision -- and
also decided to offer one on his own.

Prince Abdullah has not yet decided whether to formally lay out his vision in a
speech to the Arab League summit this month or call for a unanimous resolution
endorsing it. And he has dismissed the invitation of President Moshe Katsav of
Israel to visit Jerusalem.

From the prince's point of view, it is now up to the United States to advance
the ball. But just how engaged he will remain is also crucial. The news from the
West Bank late last week was not of peace, but of raids staged by Israeli
soldiers in armored vehicles in two West Bank refugee camps. Given the emotions
such images stir here, the raids cannot have encouraged would-be peacemakers.

And if history is any guide, there are lines Prince Abdullah simply will not
cross. During a pause in the funeral ceremonies for King Hussein of Jordan in
1999, President Clinton approached the prince and asked if he would like to meet
Israel's leaders, with whom the Jordanian monarch had worked to make peace. The
prince interrupted him. "I believe, Your Excellency Mr. President," he said
sharply, "that there are limits to friendship."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia greeted guests in January
at a reception for intellectuals and cultural figures at the royal palace in
Riyadh. (Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); FESTIVALS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION
(89%); FAMILY (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); INFANTS &
TODDLERS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); HIJACKING (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
DANCERS (72%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); POLITICS (67%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); CONSUMPTION (51%)
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  PALESTINIANS;  PUBLIC
OPINION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  WOMEN;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (83%) BIN LADEN, OSAMA; ABDULLAH (CROWN PRINCE);
SCIOLINO, ELAINE

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (93%); RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(85%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (85%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: SAUDI ARABIA;  ISRAEL;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             525 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tread Carefully In Afghanistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 97 words


To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Adds Troops and Helicopters in Afghan Battle" (front page, March 7):

Both President Bush and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld have said that our
troops are having trouble finding Osama bin Laden, but that we're gonna get him!

One can't help but compare this to the hunt for Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic, both long overdue at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, and spotted
out and about on the streets of Bosnia and Yugoslavia.

RITA MARAN
Berkeley, Calif., March 7, 2002

The writer is a lecturer in human rights, University of California at Berkeley.




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HELICOPTERS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%);
HIJACKING (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%); AL-QAEDA (87%); TERRORISM (87%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (87%); WRITERS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (57%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) MARAN, RITA; BIN LADEN,
OSAMA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (53%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (53%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             527 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking Our Liberties

BYLINE:  By Anthony Lewis;  Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The war against terrorism will go on indefinitely, President Bush has warned,
seeking the enemy around the world. Already American forces are committed to the
Philippines, Georgia and Yemen. Iraq may be next. Heavy fighting continues in
Afghanistan.

War without end is likely to have -- indeed is already having -- profound
consequences for the American constitutional system. It tends to produce the
very thing that the framers of the Constitution most feared: concentrated,
unaccountable political power.

The framers sought in three ways to prevent that concentration. They divided
power in the federal government, so that one branch could check another if it
grew too mighty. They made government accountable to the people, who, in James
Madison's words, had "the censorial power . . . over the government." And, in
the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, they guaranteed specific rights
like freedom of speech and due process of law.

All three of those constitutional bulwarks against concentrated power are now
threatened.

War inevitably produces an exaltation of presidential power. The president is
commander in chief of the armed forces -- a distinctive feature of the American
system -- and in wartime people tend to fall in behind the commander. The horror
of what happened on Sept. 11 intensifies that instinct. President Bush's high
level of public support is not surprising.

The danger lies in political use of that wartime popularity. Last week the
Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, offered a first mild question about
President Bush's plans to carry the war around the world. He was rebuked by the
Republican leader, Trent Lott.

"How dare Senator Daschle criticize President Bush while we are fighting our war
on terrorism?" Senator Lott asked. His crude attack showed how hard it will be
to maintain the Constitution's premise of accountable government, subject to
questioning and criticism, during a war without visible end.

Secrecy is a second threat to the constitutional premise. The Bush
administration is the most secretive Washington has seen in years -- and
intensely so in the Afghanistan war. The press has been kept at a distance much
of the time. In these conditions, how can Congress and the public perform their
constitutional function of holding the government accountable?

The record since Sept. 11 raises grave civil-liberties questions. Most attention
has been paid to President Bush's order calling for military tribunals to try
any noncitizen suspected of terrorism -- an order so thoughtlessly prepared
that, months later, operating rules have still not been issued. But out of
sight, other menacing things have been happening.

More than 1,000 aliens, some of them lawful permanent residents with green
cards, have been detained for extended periods in secrecy. The few cases that
the press has been able to examine have disturbing features.

One case has been before Federal District Judge Shira A. Scheindlin in New York.
Osama Awadallah, a green card holder living in San Diego, was detained on Sept.
20. He was held as a material witness because an old telephone number of his was
found in a car used by one of the Sept. 11 hijackers.

Mr. Awadallah said that in various places of detention across the country he had
been brutalized by guards, forced to strip naked before a female officer and
denied the right to see a lawyer. He was forced to testify before a federal
grand jury while shackled to a chair. He was charged with perjury in two
answers.

Judge Scheindlin is considering whether his treatment requires dismissal of the
charges. She has said that he may have been "unlawfully arrested, unlawfully
searched, abused by law enforcement officials, denied access to his lawyer and
family."

Civil liberties have often been overridden in times of crisis and war -- as in
the removal of Japanese-Americans from the West Coast in World War II. Those
occasions were followed by regrets and apologies.

But how will we protect civil liberties in a war without end? The attorney
general, John Ashcroft, has given his answer. He told Congress in December that
"those who scare peace-loving people with phantoms of lost liberty . . . only
aid terrorists."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POLITICS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); DUE PROCESS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (72%); MILITARY COURTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (71%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); TRENT LOTT (78%); TOM DASCHLE (68%) LEWIS, ANTHONY;
BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); LOTT, TRENT (SEN); DASCHLE, TOM (SEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); IRAQ (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             529 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/The Geneva Conventions;
Who Is a Prisoner of War? You Could Look It Up. Maybe.

BYLINE:  By THOM SHANKER and KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1516 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE administration's detention in Cuba of 300 men it believes to be fighters
from Al Qaeda and the Taliban has frustrated allies and outraged a number of
international legal scholars. Having originally balked at applying the Geneva
Conventions to any of the prisoners, President Bush seemed to heed the criticism
last month when he decided that the conventions would indeed apply to the
conflict and to Taliban detainees. But he also took the position that neither
Taliban nor Al Qaeda would be granted prisoner-of-war status under the treaties,
leaving it unclear in what sense any of them would be protected by the
conventions.

The four related treaties, signed in 1949, are considered the essence of the
rules for modern armed conflict. The administration argues that the conventions
are unclear about whether they apply, while many international scholars say the
rules are clear and the administration is simply choosing to apply them
selectively.

All of that raises two obvious questions: Just what do the conventions say? And
how should those words be interpreted?

Here are some of the most important passages from the Third Geneva Convention,
which covers treatment of prisoners of war, with commentary by administration
officials and international legal scholars.   THOM SHANKER and KATHARINE Q.
SEELYE

The definition of who deserves prisoner-of-war protections begins:

Art. 4. A. Prisoners of war, in the sense of the present Convention, are persons
belonging to one of the following categories, who have fallen into the power of
the enemy:

(1) Members of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict, as well as members
of militias or volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces.

Doug Cassell, director of the center for international human rights at
Northwestern university School of Law, reads that provision this way:

If you are a member of the armed forces of a country or even of a government
that is not recognized by the U.S. but is the de facto government, then you are
a P.O.W., without regard to requirements for an insignia, etcetera. Those rules
apply only to certain kinds of nongovernmental armed forces and there are
additional rules to apply to people who don't fall under the umbrella.

The convention further refines the definition of exactly which other fighters
deserve prisoner-of-war status, in subsection 2:

(2) Members of other militias and members of other volunteer corps, including
those of organized resistance movements, belonging to a Party to the conflict
and operating in or outside their own territory, even if this territory is
occupied, provided that such militias or volunteer corps, including such
organized resistance movements, fulfill the following conditions:

(a) that of being commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates;

(b) that of having a fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance;

(c) that of carrying arms openly;

(d) that of conducting their operations in accordance with the laws and customs
of war.

A senior administration official asserted that the Taliban don't fit the
definition:

They fail the attributes taken together of regular armed forces. Some attributes
were closer than others, but we concluded they did not have a responsible
military command structure, that turbans aren't a recognized uniform that
distinguishes them, and although they carry arms openly, everyone in Afghanistan
carries their arms openly. They repeatedly failed to observe the customs and
laws of war. The whole idea of Geneva is that it's not just a humanitarian
treaty to treat people nice: it distinguishes those who are entitled to P.O.W.
treatment.

To support its argument that the Taliban must meet the same four criteria to
receive prisoner-of-war protections -- regardless of whether Taliban fighters
are categorized as the official army or as a militia -- the administration cites
official commentary accompanying the Third Geneva Convention. On Article 4, it
says:

The expression "members of regular armed forces" denotes armed forces which
differ from those referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in one
respect only: the authority to which they profess allegiance is not recognized
by the adversary as a Party to the conflict. These "regular armed forces" have
all the material characteristics and all the attributes of armed forces in the
sense of sub-paragraph (1): they wear uniforms, they have an organized hierarchy
and they know and respect the laws and customs of war. The delegates to the 1949
Diplomatic Conference were therefore fully justified in considering that there
was no need to specify for such armed forces the requirements stated in
sub-paragraph (2) (a), (b), (c) and (d).

But M. Cherif Bassiouni, an expert on international law who is a professor at
DePaul University, disagrees with the administration's reading:

The Taliban soldiers are regular combatants and are part of the armed forces of
that regime. They are covered by the Geneva Conventions of 1949 as lawful
combatants irrespective of whether the conflict is characterized as that of an
international or noninternational character.

The Taliban forces carried their arms in the open and, if not their dress,
surely the combination of headgear and beards made them identifiable. They were
commanded by superior officers. Whether they were willing to abide by the laws
of armed conflict is something that would have to be determined. Taliban
combatants are therefore entitled to P.O.W. status.

The convention anticipated such disagreements. Should doubt arise over who
deserves prisoner-of-war status, the convention says the question should be
decided by a tribunal, and that captives should get the benefit of the doubt
until the tribunal rules:

Art 5. The present Convention shall apply to the persons referred to in Article
4 from the time they fall into the power of the enemy and until their final
release and repatriation.

Should any doubt arise as to whether persons, having committed a belligerent act
and having fallen into the hands of the enemy, belong to any of the categories
enumerated in Article 4, such persons shall enjoy the protection of the present
Convention until such time as their status has been determined by a competent
tribunal.

Diane F. Orentlicher, professor of international law at American University,
comments:

This provision requires that persons who have committed a belligerent act and
who are captured by enemy forces enjoy the protections of P.O.W.'s until their
status has been determined by a competent tribunal when there is doubt about
their status. It is something of a legal non sequitur to say that the U.S. is
applying the Third Geneva Convention to the Taliban, but not only will it not
recognize any members of its armed forces as prisoners of war, but will not even
allow any doubt about their status to be determined by a competent tribunal. The
Third Geneva Convention at a minimum requires that, in doubtful cases,
combatants who fall into the hands of the enemy must be treated as P.O.W.'s
until a competent tribunal determines their status.

A Senior Defense Department official counters:

We are looking at the detainees individually. There are two layers of scrutiny
before Guantanamo. Not one of the detainees has shown he is entitled to
prisoner-of-war status.

Adam Roberts, who teaches international relations at Oxford University, doesn't
accept that argument:

To say they are covered by the convention but then to say they don't qualify as
P.O.W.'s, it's a bit odd not even to raise the question whether any of them
might have access to an Article 5 tribunal. Some of them are not Taliban and are
not Al Qaeda. One of the Brits went to a wedding in Pakistan in November and
disappeared without his family's knowledge and ended up in Guantanamo. It's
entirely possible he wandered into Afghanistan under some warlord's cover or
with a few individuals to fight the good fight as he saw it. It's possible he
might not have been a member of anything.

But a senior administration official says no disrespect for the conventions was
intended:

This is a new kind of war, in which the rules we followed for more than 50 years
don't necessarily apply, either as a matter of principle or by their terms, and
it would be inappropriate in practice to provide some of the privileges that are
given to P.O.W.'s to Al Qaeda. . . . They simply don't fit the definitions in
the conventions.

Alfred P. Rubin, an international law professor at the Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy, calls for a different line of reasoning:

You should apply the Geneva Conventions out of grace, because you think it is
the right thing to do. Essentially, if you want to return to peace eventually
and not be a villain; if you want to maintain moral superiority for the mothers
of your nation, for the taxpayers, and not be a villain; if you want to protect
your soldiers in future conflicts; if you want your allies to be your friends,
and not embarrass them -- then you should apply the Geneva Conventions. These
are four very good reasons, and they have nothing to with whether the other side
obeys the laws and customs of war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prisoners from Afghanistan in a holding area at Guantanamo.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (93%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(91%); TALIBAN (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW OF WAR (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); NAVIES (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); VOLUNTEERS (63%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
PRISONERS OF WAR;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  WAR AND REVOLUTION

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); PRISONERS OF WAR (83%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL
BASE (CUBA)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             530 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reaching the Next Muslim Generation

BYLINE:  By Mohamed Charfi;  Mohamed Charfi, former president of the Tunisian
Human Rights League and minister of education from 1989 to 1994, is author of
"Islam et Liberte."

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: TUNIS


Since Sept. 11, the world has come to know more about the educational systems
prevalent today in Muslim countries and their role in promoting hostility toward
the West.  The educational system of Osama bin Laden's native Saudi Arabia is
being criticized in the West, particularly in the United States. The Indian
government last December announced an effort to reform the Muslim religious
schools known as madrasas, though this is perhaps a mixed blessing given that
the same government is using the schools to promote Hinduism as part of its
nationalist program. Across the border in Pakistan, President Pervez Musharraf
is pursuing reform of his country's educational system -- a project that will be
watched by other Muslim nations. Education was a major subject of discussion in
Mr. Musharraf's meeting with President Bush last month. This was itself
something rather new.

Muslim countries entered into their rebirth and modernization in the 19th
century. The prosecution of apostasy and the use of corporal punishment fell
away; power passed, in general, from religious councils and tribunals to
parliaments and secular courts. These changes were everywhere incomplete,
hesitant, fragile -- notably because their doctrinal foundation was accepted
only grudgingly by the state and the elites, and still less by the general
public.

This was clear in the common approach to education. A great effort was made to
teach foreign languages and scientific subjects. But in teaching religion,
history, philosophy and civics, traditional approaches prevailed. Schools taught
Muslim law, the sharia, with its classic content; they presented Muslim history
in a theological fashion as though we were still living under the Umayyads or
the Abbasids. Muslim law was taught as sacred, and the idealized caliphate, the
first centuries of Islam's expansion after Muhammad's death, was offered as a
kind of heaven on earth.

The consequences of such teachings on the minds of young people in most
Muslim-majority countries have been disastrous. Students learn that, in order to
be good believers, they should be living under a caliph, that divine law makes
it necessary to stone the adulterer and forbid lending at interest . . . only to
discover, out in the street, a society directed by a civil government with a
modern penal code and an economy founded on a banking system.

Many Muslim children still learn at school the ancient ideology of a triumphant
Muslim empire, an ideology that held all non-Muslims to be in error and saw its
mission as bringing Islam's light to the world. And yet young people see their
governments working to live in peace with non-Muslim powers. Such discordant
teachings do not prepare children to live in a changing world.

Osama bin Laden, like the 15 Saudis who participated in the criminal operations
of Sept. 11, seems to have been the pure product of his schooling. While Saudi
Arabia is officially a moderate state allied with America, it has also been one
of the main supporters of Islamic fundamentalism because of its financing of
schools following the intransigent Wahhabi doctrine. Saudi-backed madrasas in
Pakistan and Afghanistan have played significant roles in the strengthening of
radical Islam in those countries.

Even in countries where religious teaching is less exalted, the general
orientation toward fundamentalist instruction is not altogether different.

Tunisia is among the rare exceptions. Since 1989, a radical reform aimed at
modernizing the entire educational system has been undertaken. In religious
matters, programs and textbooks emphasize the thinking of scholars influenced by
the best of our late-medieval thinkers, like Averroes and Avicenna. Such writers
have developed new readings of the Koran and given Islam a content that allows
for discussion of sexual equality, human rights and the development of
democracy. Tunisian history is taught so that a young Tunisian will see his
country's part in all its fullness, forgetting neither the strategy of Hannibal
nor the philosophy of St. Augustine. The science curriculum at higher grades
incorporates Darwinian evolution and big-bang theories about the origin of the
universe, neither of which is taught in traditional Islam-based programs.

Our hope is that young Tunisians, through a more secular education, can be
brought up to value individual liberty and openness to others. Combined with the
emancipation of women and universal education -- all of which were part of
President Habib Bourguiba's reforms, beginning in the late 50's -- this
educational system is already helping to form a more modern society.

Unfortunately, the political structure has not kept pace. The police are
omnipresent, the press and judiciary are controlled by the state and the country
has become hostage to a system of personal power that comes from an earlier age.
Fundamentalism is marginal in Tunisia, for the moment. But it will return if it
becomes the last refuge of the discontented.

For now, we can hope that Mr. Musharraf will learn from Tunisia's recent
mistakes -- like failing to make the political system more democratic -- as he
can learn from its progress in creating schools that can help open the minds of
a generation of students. Muslim countries today, after experiences with
fundamentalism in Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere, need
to begin a new phase of engagement with the world. Educational reform needs to
be at the heart of this effort. Tunisia, though an imperfect example, offers
important lessons in how it can be done.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (MK Mabry)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (95%); RELIGION (94%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TERRORISM (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); SCHOOL BUILDINGS (76%); FOREIGN LANGUAGE EDUCATION (73%);
CRIMINAL LAW (72%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (71%); POLITICS (70%); BANKING & FINANCE
(64%); HIJACKING (61%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  ISLAM;  EDUCATION AND
SCHOOLS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (73%) CHARFI, MOHAMED

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); TUNISIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  TUNISIA

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             534 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

John Ashcroft's Palmer Raids

BYLINE:   By Clancy Sigal;   Clancy Sigal is a screenwriter and novelist.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


The federal government is still holding hundreds of Middle Eastern and Asian men
rounded up after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11. Most are jailed on minor
immigration violations, but they are being held indefinitely, presumably as the
government looks for some connection to terrorists. Americans who object to this
tactic of indiscriminate roundups, Attorney General John Ashcroft told a Senate
committee in December, "only aid terrorists."

No one wants terrorists to operate in our country, but the consequences of this
kind of government action can be long-lasting. On this, I have family history to
look to.

In the summer of 1919 a series of dynamite bombings, carried out by anarchists,
swept over several American cities. A suicide bomber blew himself up outside the
Washington home of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. Then, on Sept. 16, 1920,
the House of Morgan in lower Manhattan was blown up, killing 33 people and
injuring 400.

The anarchist threat was terrifying, just as the terrorist threat is now. Most
Americans supported Attorney General Palmer's campaign against the "Reds" -- an
ill-defined menace that went far beyond the small group of actual anarchists and
was blamed for pretty much anything that smacked of social conflict --
including, at various times, the woman's suffrage movement, a Chicago race riot
and a wave of paralyzing industrial strikes.

My Russian-immigrant parents fit the profile. They were foreign-born, Jewish,
radical labor organizers who had actively participated in several turbulent
strikes. They had no fixed address and were living in sin. They were arrested,
jailed and almost deported during the infamous Palmer raids of 1920 and 1921.

Attorney General Palmer was an angry man on a mission of vengeance. Using
existing sedition laws, he and his chief investigating officer, a ravenously
ambitious 24-year-old named J. Edgar Hoover, ordered 500 agents of the newly
created Federal Bureau of Investigation to go after Communists, socialists,
union activists, and pacifists and arrest them without warrants or judicial
hearings. Homes were ransacked, political literature burned. Estimates vary, but
between 4,000 and l0,000 people were secretly, efficiently rounded up. Like
today's detainees, they were often held without bail, habeas corpus rights or
access to lawyers.

When I was growing up my father kept silent about the raids, but my mother told
me federal agents had beaten him on the way to jail. Both of my parents were
released to go back to their lives -- my mother after a few days and my father
after a few weeks. They had feared being deported, as some of their friends
were.

The raids were a living presence in our house. At a later time, when J. Edgar
Hoover's F.B.I. came around to question me during the cold war, my mother
politely met them at the door, invited them in for coffee and charmed them out
of their intended purpose. But she was pale and terrified when I got home. In an
understandable slip of the tongue she said: "The Palmers have been here. What
have you done?"

I wonder how many immigrant homes were like ours. The Palmer raids, though long
ago, cut deep and left scars on individuals caught up in them and on America's
views of how government could be permitted to deal with anyone dissident and
different. What scars is our government inflicting today?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 16, 2002



CORRECTION: An Op-Ed article on Wednesday inaccurately described a Sept. 16,
1920, bombing in New York's financial district. The bomb damaged, but did not
blow up, the House of Morgan, which is still standing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (92%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); MEN (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); DEPORTATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (77%); COLD WAR (77%); LAWYERS (76%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); HABEAS CORPUS (73%); BAIL (73%); LABOR UNIONS (70%);
CITY LIFE (69%); RIOTS (69%); CITIES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (65%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  RUSSIAN-AMERICANS;  DEPORTATION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION; JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SIGAL, CLANCY; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             536 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Denver Police Files Raise Rights Concerns

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: DENVER, March 13


The American Civil Liberties Union of Colorado has accused the Denver Police
Department of maintaining secret and illegal files on hundreds of groups and
people, and the mayor has asked for a review of the department's policies.

"The police have no legitimate reason to keep files on the peaceful expression
of political views and opinions," said Mark Silverstein, legal director of the
A.C.L.U. of Colorado. The organization said it had copies of some files, but Mr.
Silverstein declined to say how it had obtained them.

Groups that files were kept on include Amnesty International, the American
Friends Service Committee and End the Politics of Cruelty, a local group that
focuses on police accountability.

"Denver residents should feel free to join a peaceful protest without fear that
their names will wind up in police files," Mr. Silverstein said.

The Denver Department of Safety, which oversees the police department, met this
week with the city attorney and the assistant police chief and said there would
be a review of the policies.

"I don't think there were any rights that were violated, but even if there is a
perception of that, we want to aggressively make sure it doesn't happen," said
Ari Zavaras, manager of public safety. "I think we're over the hill on getting
this solved and it was a problem with the interpretation of the policy. What
officers did was within the policy, but overly broad."

This afternoon, Mayor Wellington Webb, who said he was unaware of the files
until the A.C.L.U. brought them to light, said that they had apparently been
kept since 1999, and covered 208 groups and roughly 3,200 individuals.

Mayor Webb said that he thought the A.C.L.U.'s concerns were legitimate and that
it was not the police department's policy to keep such files.

"No information about political, religious or social views, associations or
activities should be collected unless the information relates to a criminal
activity and the subject is suspected of criminal activity," he said.

Mayor Webb said the city's policies would be reviewed and an independent third
party would review the files. He said such files would be audited and purged
regularly.

Mr. Silverstein has asked the mayor to prohibit the police department from
sharing the files with other law enforcement agencies, to allow people named in
the files an opportunity to review them and to provide a public accounting of
the files.

The files list some individuals and groups as "criminal extremist." The Chiapas
Coalition, a loose-knit group in Denver that says it supports the rights of the
indigenous people of Chiapas, Mexico, is one of those groups. The file on the
group says that it is "dedicated to overthrow of Mexican government."

The Chiapas file, part of which was posted on the Colorado A.C.L.U.'s Web site,
includes addresses for Kerry Appel, the coalition's leader, and locations where
he had protested.

"Beyond being shocked, surprised, I was angry at what was written," Mr. Appel
said. "It's inaccurate, incompetent, inept and just wrong. It's one thing to
have a file on you, but none of us have ever been convicted of a crime and we're
not a criminal extremist group."

"People come to our activities out of sincere political and moral beliefs," Mr.
Appel added. "In 20 years, these people might apply for a visa or a teaching job
and be turned down because there is this file that says they are a criminal
extremist."

Some cities and police departments, including San Francisco, Seattle and
Portland, Ore., have ordinances or policies that prevent such information
gathering.

"This smacks of exactly what the F.B.I. was doing in the 1960's," said Alan
Schlosser, legal director for the A.C.L.U. of San Francisco. "There is a concern
in the wake of 9/11 that needs for security might lead to some elements of
thinking in law enforcement to going back to the bad old days."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); POLICE FORCES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); MISCONDUCT (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); LAWYERS
(75%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); ACCOUNTING (66%) POLICE;  SURVEILLANCE
OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);
AMERICAN FRIENDS SERVICE COMMITTEE (83%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION; AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL; AMERICAN FRIENDS SERVICE COMMITTEE; END THE POLITICS OF CRUELTY
(ORGN)

PERSON: WEBB, WELLINGTON (MAYOR)

CITY: DENVER, CO, USA (94%)

STATE: COLORADO, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (92%)

REGION: DENVER (COLO)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             538 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Seeks Unlimited Military Aid for Colombia

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


The Bush administration plans to ask Congress to lift restrictions on American
military aid to Colombia in order to help the government in Bogota fight leftist
rebels, officials said today.

If approved by lawmakers, the change would open a new front in Colombia for
American military trainers and equipment by involving the United States directly
in the fight against the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.

Until now, Congress has restricted the use of American aid to Colombia -- which
has totaled nearly $2 billion in recent years -- to the struggle against
narcotics traffickers. It has capped the number of American military personnel
in the country to 400 and linked assistance to progress by the Colombian
government in curbing human rights abuses within its armed forces.

After the collapse of peace talks last month and a series of brazen attacks by
the FARC, the government of President Andres Pastrana has clamored for
permission to use American attack helicopters and other equipment to rout rebels
from a formerly demilitarized zone.

According to a report in The Washington Post, the administration will submit its
request as early as next week. The White House did not comment tonight.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LIBERALISM (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
APPROVALS (77%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (54%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (53%);
PEACE PROCESS (52%); HELICOPTERS (51%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FOREIGN AID;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); COLOMBIA (99%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             542 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 18, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1373 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

U.S. Mideast Role Grows With Plans for Saudi's Visit
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia agreed to meet with President Bush at his
ranch in Texas this spring. Vice President Dick Cheney extended the invitation
at a meeting with the prince in Jiddah, the latest indication of the deepening
American involvement in the region.   A1

American Mediator Presses On
Two attacks in Israel and heavy gunfire in Bethlehem marked the fourth day of
Gen. Anthony C. Zinni's diplomacy, but the American envoy appeared to make
substantial headway toward brokering a cease-fire.   A10


Questions on Slain Archbishop
The killing of Isaias Duarte Cancino, an outspoken archbishop, stunned Colombia.
Archbishop Duarte had excommunicated leftist rebels and castigated drug-tainted
candidates in elections. Officials hinted that rebels were behind the killing;
church officials said drug traffickers may have been responsible.   A3

Meeting on Aid Invites Debate
President Bush and the leaders of 57 other nations are to gather in Monterrey,
Mexico, to discuss how to help developing countries speed their economic growth.
Yet Bush administration officials, European leaders and poverty experts are
deeply divided about why so many countries remain poor and whether aid helps
progress -- debates that may delay solutions.   A3

Post-Coital Pills in Britain
A decision by Britain's largest supermarket to give emergency contraceptives
known as the morning-after pills free to teenagers has sharpened a national
debate over efforts to curb youth pregnancy. Britain has the highest rate in
Western Europe.   A9

Indonesia Bans Journalist
The Indonesian government has banned Lindsay Murdoch, a prominent Australian
journalist, apparently because of articles that dealt with human rights issues.
A8

NATION CHALLENGED   A12-15

2 Americans Are Killed In Pakistan Church Attack
Five people, including two Americans, were killed and least 40 people were
wounded when two men walked into a Protestant church close to the American
Embassy in Islamabad and threw several grenades. The attack appeared to be aimed
at the Americans and at the government of President Pervez Musharraf of
Pakistan.   A1

Problems for Nuclear Sensors
Experts on nuclear terrorism say that even the latest detection technologies
face forbidding odds. Ultimately, the experts say, all detectors are likely to
encounter obstacles imposed by the laws of physics. Nonetheless, the federal
government has sharply increased support for research into sensors that could
detect nuclear weapons if they fall into the hands of terrorists.   A13

Air Patrols Are Reduced
The Bush administration has decided to stop round-the-clock patrols by fighter
jets over New York, as well as daily patrols over a rotating group of other
major cities, saying the terrorism threat on flights has been sufficiently
reduced. Scores of fighters stand ready at 30 bases nationwide, but those
numbers are likely to be reduced over the next few months, officials said.   A13


NATIONAL   A16-22

The Commander in Chief Is Still the Chief Politician
President Bush has built into his schedule a carefully planned routine in which
he regularly travels to support Republicans in House, Senate and governor's
candidates in crucial contests, many in swing states that Mr. Bush needs to win
re-election in 2004. The strategy contrasts with his post-Sept. 11 policy of
staying above partisan politics during wartime.   A1

Not in the Running
Tipper Gore decided not to enter the race for Senate in Tennessee. In a
statement, Mrs. Gore was vague about her reasons and did not rule out seeking
office in the future. Representative Bob Clement said he would hold a news
conference today to announce whether he would seek the Democratic nomination for
the seat being vacated by Senator Fred Thompson, a Republican.   A21

Primary Races in Illinois
Three Republicans are locked in a spirited fight for their party's nomination
Tuesday to succeed Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, a Republican who has been
snarled in a bribery scandal. The primary is giving Democrats hope that their
party will win the general election for the first time since the 1970's.   A20

Miami Officers Cleared
Fourteen Miami police officers facing federal corruption charges were
investigated and cleared of at least 293 accusations of misconduct in an
internal investigation. Included in the accusations were witness reports or
physical evidence of pistol whippings, broken noses and rape, The Miami Herald
reported. Critics said the investigation ignored the accusations to protect
officers.   A17

Fairness of Tests Is Issue
More than a dozen states are putting graduation exams for high school students
into effect in the next three years -- and others are requiring new tests for
promotion to the next grade. The debate has become broader and more urgent, with
some education experts predicting that new legal challenges, like one filed by
an advocacy group under federal disability laws, are inevitable.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Comptroller's Detractors Question His Donations
The donations of people who do business with the state are an issue in H. Carl
McCall's candidacy for governor. His detractors have suggested that Mr. McCall
solicits donations from people who benefited from decisions he made as the sole
trustee of the $112 billion retirement fund. He says the donations do not
influence his investment decisions as state comptroller.   B1

Good Samaritans Stay Put
Many of the good Samaritans who came to New York to volunteer after the Sept. 11
terror attacks have returned home. But one of the striking aspects of the
magnetism of ground zero and the impulses it has ignited, is that a number of
the itinerant do-gooders are still here, months after they arrived. Some intend
never to leave.   B1

Subdued Protests
The opening of a much-debated exhibition at the Jewish Museum featuring Nazi and
Holocaust imagery drew a spate of protesters throughout but was generally marked
by subdued reflection.   B2

SCIENCE/HEALTH

New Angioplasty Procedure
A study shows that a new approach to keeping heart arteries flowing smoothly
after angioplasty has had encouraging success in early testing, perhaps solving
a major shortcoming of the procedure. Doctors released the longest review of the
new weapon, the drug-coated stent. In testing on 43 patients over two years,
they found it to be 100 percent effective, a rare result.   A16

Gene Sequencing
Eugene Chan, a former Harvard medical student, has received United States patent
6,355,420 for what he says is a "totally new way of sequencing that mimics the
way that nature reads genetic information."   C2

ARTS   E1-8

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-12

Early Exits
North Carolina State rallied late to upset the University of Connecticut, 77-74,
to advance to the East Regional semifinals of the N.C.A.A. men's basketball
tournament. The University of Cincinnati, the No. 1 seed in the West, was also
upset.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

The Past Haunts Andersen
The accounting firm Arthur Andersen misread the gravity of the latest government
investigations into its business practices, perhaps because in the past it had
usually paid a fine and moved on.   A1

Just a Signature Away
The showdown between ABC and CBS over David Letterman, which was just a
signature from going in ABC's favor, included among its details a legal
misreading by CBS that it held the right to match a competing offer to Mr.
Letterman.   C1

ABC's gambit has television journalists and other industry observers again
wondering whether media conglomerates are still committed to network news and
its older audiences, and whether they are willing to allow cable networks to
become the lone proprietors of the national newscasts.   C1

A Long Read
The Atlantic Monthly plans to run the longest article it has ever published,
starting with the July/August issue.   C7

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   A23

Sylvester Weaver
A longtime innovator in television programming who created NBC's "Today" and
"Tonight" shows, he was 93.   A23

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Microsoft, back in court again; a chance to reshape the Corps;
Verlyn Klinkenborg on riding the demographic wave.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E5
TV Listings   E8
Crossword   E7
Weather   D12
Metro Diary   B2

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); RELIGION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); CONTRACEPTION (87%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (86%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (79%); ELECTIONS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (76%); POLITICAL DEBATES (74%); LIBERALISM (74%); ADOLESCENTS (74%);
ECONOMIC GROWTH (73%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); WOUNDS
& INJURIES (69%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (69%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (69%);
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (67%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (61%); PHYSICS (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); DICK CHENEY (58%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (57%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (68%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SAUDI ARABIA (95%); INDONESIA (92%); PAKISTAN
(92%); ISRAEL (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%);
WESTERN EUROPE (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             546 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone War Crimes Court to Begin Deliberations in Fall

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 20


The United Nations is pressing ahead with arrangements for a special war crimes
court in Sierra Leone that officials say will be leaner and less bureaucratic
than the tribunals that were created to prosecute war criminals in the Balkans
and Rwanda.

The United Nations signed an agreement with Sierra Leone two months ago creating
a legal framework for trying a score of defendants accused of atrocities in the
West African country's civil war.

Ralph Zacklin, the assistant secretary general for legal affairs, visited Sierra
Leone from Jan. 7 to 19 to lay the groundwork. He said today that the new court
could start operating in Sierra Leone by this fall and return its first
indictments before the end of the year.

Mr. Zacklin briefed the Security Council on the proposed court on Tuesday.
Today, he discussed some of the details.

The new court, he said, would enlist judges and lawyers in Sierra Leone as well
as prominent jurists from outside the country. Secretary General Kofi Annan
would appoint a majority of judges; the Sierra Leonean government would select
the other judges and the chief prosecutor.

The court in Sierra Leone would have a single trial chamber with three judges,
two of them foreign. The appeals chamber would have five judges, three of them
foreign.

In a report last week to the Security Council, Mr. Annan said the United Nations
mission in Sierra Leone, through its human rights section, was in a position to
provide evidence of abuses to the prosecutor.

Three weeks ago, the Bush administration's war crimes ambassador, Pierre-Richard
Prosper, criticized the tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, suggesting they
were flawed by unprofessionalism and mismanagement. United Nations officials and
other legal experts disputed Mr. Prosper's characterization.

The tribunals for Rwanda and the Balkans have annual budgets of $100 million.
The Sierra Leone special court, with a smaller staff, would get only $60 million
over three years, financed by 15 to 20 countries, including the United States,
Britain and the Netherlands. "A lot of states are looking at the special court
to see if this kind of court can work and if it can be leaner" than the other
tribunals, Mr. Zacklin said.

He cited Cambodia, which has yet to bring to justice the Khmer Rouge officials
who oversaw the killings of more than a million Cambodian civilians. "I have no
doubt whatsoever that the Cambodians are looking at what is happening in Sierra
Leone," Mr. Zacklin said.

The defendants in Sierra Leone would include the likes of Foday Sankoh, a former
army sergeant who headed the Revolutionary United Front. His insurgent group
inspired terror by hacking off limbs of thousands of civilians, raping women and
forcing children to fight. Some former rebels contend that government soldiers
also committed atrocities and should be brought to account.

The court is deemed essential for Sierra Leone's return to relative normality.
With elections planned for May 14, the government has lifted the state of
emergency to allow campaigning by political parties.

The United Nations had 17,400 troops deployed in Sierra Leone as of Jan. 31,
making it the largest peacekeeping mission. Mr. Annan asked the Security Council
to extend the mission's mandate, which expires at the end of this month, until
Sept. 30.

The secretary general said in his report that more than 47,000 combatants in
Sierra Leone have put aside their weapons.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (96%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAWYERS (75%); BUDGETS (75%);
APPOINTMENTS (69%); ARMED FORCES (60%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (83%) UNITED
NATIONS

PERSON: WREN, CHRISTOPHER S; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); RWANDA (94%); CAMBODIA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%);
WESTERN AFRICA (92%); NETHERLANDS (75%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             547 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE INTERVIEWS;
Justice Dept. Wants to Query More Foreigners

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


The Justice Department announced today that it was expanding its program of
interviewing young, mostly Muslim foreign men visiting the United States, saying
it would try to track down and speak to an additional 3,000 of them for
information about terrorism.

The announcement was immediately criticized by civil liberties and Arab-American
groups, and it came as the department disclosed that it had been able to locate
and interview fewer than half of some 4,800 young men with whom it wanted to
speak in the first round of interviews, which began last November.

In announcing the expansion of the program, Attorney General John Ashcroft
acknowledged that the government's failure to find many of the men on the
original list demonstrated "serious flaws" in its ability to keep track of
visitors to the United States. Those flaws were underscored last week with the
disclosure that the Immigration and Naturalization Service recently mailed visa
extension notices to a flight school for two of the Sept. 11 hijackers.

The original pool selected for interviews was drawn from lists of visitors who,
like the hijackers, were 18 to 33 years old, entered the United States after
January 2000 on nonimmigrant visas and held passports from or had lived in
countries where Al Qaeda had a presence.

The Justice Department said the second round of interviews would focus on 3,000
young foreign men who had entered the United States more recently than those on
the first list.

"As in the first round of interviews, these visitors to our country have been
selected for interviews because they fit the criteria of persons who might have
knowledge of foreign-based terrorists," Mr. Ashcroft said in an address to the
United States attorney's office in Alexandria, Va., outside Washington. "The
individuals to be interviewed are not suspected of any criminal activity."

Mr. Ashcroft said the interview program had generated "a significant number of
leads for investigators looking into the Sept. 11 attacks and other potential
terrorist activities." Department officials declined to discuss the leads in
detail, saying that to do so would compromise counterterrorism investigations.
But they acknowledged that the interviews had not resulted in any arrests
connected to Sept. 11.

The department said that of 2,261 young men interviewed, about 20 had been
arrested, most for immigration violations and none on charges involving
terrorism. The interviewed men are separate from the hundreds of other young
Arab and Muslim men who have been detained, mostly on immigration charges, as a
result of the Sept. 11 attacks.

The interview program, focusing almost exclusively on Arabs and Muslims, has
been denounced by some civil liberties and Arab-American groups as tantamount to
racial profiling. Those groups and their Congressional supporters stepped up the
criticism with today's announcement of additional interviews.

"While they are more than willing to contribute to the war on terrorism, the
national leadership of Arab and Muslim organizations have expressed to me their
outrage over this illegal form of racial profiling," said Representative John
Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee.

James J. Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, said the new round of
interviews meant that the Justice Department was "compounding its first error
with another one." Mr. Zogby also said Mr. Ashcroft was "being misleading when
he suggests that the first round produced valuable information, and built trust"
in Arab and Muslim communities in the United States, as the attorney general
maintained.

In a report made public today, parts of it first disclosed this morning in The
Wall Street Journal, the Justice Department said that of the 4,793 foreigners it
had sought to question in the first round of interviews, 681 were determined to
have left the United States, while 1,097 could not be located at all. The report
showed that the department was continuing to search for most of an additional
785 men, who were found to have moved within the United States from their last
known address.

The department said that of the men it had tracked down, only a small percentage
-- it did not say exactly how small, nationwide -- had refused to be questioned.
"In Oregon, it was only 1 of 69, and in Minnesota, it was 1 out of 59," the
department said. "Those numbers are representative of the experience of
districts around the country."

Mr. Ashcroft said the interview program had ensured that "potential terrorists
hiding in our communities knew that law enforcement was on the job in their
neighborhoods."

"Such a climate could cause would-be terrorists to scale back, delay or abandon
their plans altogether," he said, adding that the government's strategy "may
well have contributed to the fact that we have not suffered a substantial
terrorist attack since Sept. 11."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); TERRORISM
(90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
HIJACKING (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (85%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); RACIAL
PROFILING (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); RELIGION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (68%); ARRESTS
(67%); AIRLINES (67%); RACE & RACISM (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ARAB-AMERICANS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); AL-QAEDA (55%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: SHENON, PHILIP; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             549 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Military Tribunals Modified

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  E-mail: safire@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 718 words


Those of us who denounced the Bush executive order last year setting up military
tribunals for non-citizens -- and who were then besmeared by Attorney General
John Ashcroft for "aiding terrorists" -- now feel somewhat reassured by Defense
Secretary Don Rumsfeld's "refinement" of the hasty order.

The Pentagon rules that will be made public today give suspected terrorists the
rights (1) to the presumption of innocence; (2) to choose counsel and to see the
prosecution's evidence; (3) to trial in public -- a great human right -- though
classified information will be kept secret; and (4) to remain silent with no
adverse inference to be drawn.

The prosecution will be required to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the
standard for trials of U.S. citizens. Military judges, who can convict on only a
two-thirds majority, must be unanimous in any decision to impose the death
penalty. The president's initial order, which imperiously claimed "a final
decision by me" on the outcome of these trials, has been modified (nobody dares
say "reversed") by the Pentagon rule stating that a verdict of not guilty "shall
not be changed."

That's all to the good. So is the element of speed in the tribunal idea; if need
for information about a terror attack is urgent, a quick charge and plea bargain
could generate confessions. That is the motive behind the notion of these
tribunals: not so much to do justice as to get lifesaving "preventive
intelligence."

Here's what's less to the good:

No jury. There is none in a court-martial either, but at least the Uniform Code
of Military Justice allows the accused a say in the composition of the panel of
judges -- a buck private, for example, can demand that an enlisted man be
included, which introduces a peer in judgment. In doing justice, nothing beats a
jury of one's peers.

Hearsay is accepted as evidence. The rules of evidence are loosened to that with
"probative value to a reasonable person." Because "probative" means "tending to
prove," that means once-removed testimony and documents found in caves that have
been through several hands would be admissible. Not our usual standard, but
understandable.

Here is what is no good at all:

No civilian review. An appeal procedure is only to a panel of judges appointed
to or by the military, which means no truly independent review. The non-citizen
tried by the U.S. outside the U.S. would have no appeal to our federal courts.

Indefinite detention. Not a word is said in the Pentagon rules about that
contentious issue at all. It is not in the American system of justice to hold a
suspect in jail for long without trial.

No participation by Congress in the making of what is undoubtedly law. Bush
believes it would dilute the presidential war power to submit this alternative
judicial system to the usual lawmakers in the House and Senate. But ours is a
government of laws, not of executive fiats. The Uniform Code of Military Justice
and the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces are creations of Congress and do
not weaken the executive branch. Besides, the war on terror is supposed to be a
unified effort -- why go it contemptuously alone in setting up an extraordinary
military judiciary?

Thus, the Pentagon effort partly sets right a deeply flawed executive order.
This is not the first time this year that Bush has stepped back from the brink
of hubris; last month he coolly compromised his ill-advised "executive
privilege" confrontation with Chairman Dan Burton's House committee
investigating the F.B.I.'s three-decade coddling of criminal informants in
Boston.

In his correction of the other Ashcroft blunder on tribunals, Rumsfeld directed
the Pentagon counsel William Haynes II to draw on the wisdom of outsiders,
including William Webster, Lloyd Cutler, William Coleman, Newt Minow, Bernard
Meltzer, Ruth Wedgwood and Griffin Bell. (I'm told that Haynes was careful to
see them individually so as not to trigger the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
This shows what the administration learned from the vice president's energy
advisory panel mistake.)

Federal prosecutors recently decided not to use terrorist tribunals in trying
the "20th hijacker" or the "shoe bomber." Let's hope that means last year's
notion of circumventing the civil courts, even as refined today, will quietly be
shelved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY COURTS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); EVIDENCE (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (89%); LAWYERS (78%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); JUDGES (77%); HIJACKING (77%); ACQUITTAL (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); VERDICTS (76%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (75%);
HEARSAY (75%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (75%); TESTIMONY (75%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(75%); ARMED FORCES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (72%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC); SAFIRE, WILLIAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             550 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 22, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: THE REGION;
Jordan, Holding Off a Neighbor's Wildfire, Plays Down an Arms-Smuggling Case

BYLINE:  By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, March 20


This is a nervous little kingdom, picking a careful path through the ArabIsraeli
conflict. Just how delicate was well illustrated recently when Jordanian
intelligence thwarted a Hezbollah attempt to smuggle Katyusha rockets to the
Palestinians -- and the smugglers were then quietly allowed to go back to
Lebanon.

The blocked arms-running took place last November and in the last several weeks
the three Hezbollah men taken into custody here have been quietly sent back to
Lebanon.

Apparently, all parties concerned -- including Iran, a sponsor of the Shiite
Muslim Lebanese militia -- wanted to keep the incident quiet (Iran has recently
sought closer commercial and other ties to Jordan). But Jordan's role became
public in a speech at Friday Prayer by the Hezbollah leader Sheik Sayyed Hassan
Nasrullah in Beirut on March 8, a day when more than 40 Palestinians were killed
in clashes with the Israelis.

King Abdullah, who is to meet President Bush this week, has been working hard to
promote a Saudi peace initiative ahead of the Arab League summit meeting next
week in Beirut, warning the United States against attacking Iraq and hoping all
the time that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will not spill across the Jordan
River in the form of a vast new influx of refugees.

That fear was fueled by a recent Israeli poll indicating that 46 percent of
Israelis would support "transfer" of Palestinians out of the West Bank and Gaza
Strip.

Some 60 percent of Jordan's population counts itself Palestinian, and feelings
run high here. Every night, families in squalid refugee camps or in gaudy stone
mansions built with earnings from the Gulf emirates watch the bloodshed in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip on Al Jazeera and other Arab satellite stations.

Yet Jordan has also benefited from the peace treaty it signed with Israel in
1994 -- and there is a certain reluctance to rock the boat.

King Abdullah -- as his father, King Hussein, before him -- must balance the
American support crucial to his survival against the need not to be seen as a
mere tool of Washington.

King Hussein, for example, sat out the 1991 Persian Gulf war even though almost
every other Arab state joined the American-led alliance against Iraq.

Since the Palestinian uprising erupted against the Israelis almost 18 months
ago, authorities here have banned demonstrations supporting it, allowing only a
few small and carefully policed marches as the violence mounted in recent weeks.

The ubiquitous intelligence apparatus -- the mukhabarat -- has become
increasingly active, according to Jordanians and foreign observers.

Amnesty International has charged that new antiterrorist laws adopted after
Sept. 11 "place additional restrictions on freedom of expression and the press"
in Jordan. The State Department's recent human rights review says "the
government restricts freedom of assembly." Local journalists say there have been
more instructions as to what they can and cannot report.

In this secretive atmosphere, exact details of the smuggling incident are hard
to obtain.

It is unclear, for example, if the men mentioned by Sheik Nasrullah were in fact
the three men -- identified as two Jordanians and a Lebanese -- in a brief item
in The Jordan Times earlier this month. It said they had been detained on
suspicion of belonging to Hezbollah, investigated for four months, cleared and
released. Their attorney said that Jordan's ambassador in Beirut, Anmar
al-Hmoud, and Lebanese officials had played a "very positive role" in winning
their release.

During a trip to Beirut on Wednesday, Jordan's foreign minister, Marwan Muasher,
provided the first official confirmation of the incident, again maneuvering
carefully between opposite poles -- expressing respect for Hezbollah, but also
insisting that "we will not allow any armed group to exist in the country."

"We cannot turn a blind eye," he added, saying Jordan could not become a conduit
for Palestinian arms.

The incident may have been one of several attempts to smuggle arms to the
Palestinians through Jordan.

Five Palestinians are currently on trial -- two in absentia -- for illegal
possession of weapons and explosives and plotting terrorism. Their lawyer, Sami
Khreis, said that "they stashed the arms for six months in Jordan until they
could send them to the West Bank," and thus were not engaged in terrorism
against the kingdom.

Mr. Khreis tried, unsuccessfully, to call as a witness the interior minister,
Qaftan Majali, who in a speech in January differentiated between "terrorism" and
acts of "resistance against occupation."

Sheik Nasrullah, for his part, told a rally in Beirut that the logic of
geography dictated smuggling arms to the Palestinians through Jordan.

"Hezbollah attempted to smuggle arms via Jordan, and not from south Lebanon
because we have no borders with the West Bank or Gaza," he said. "The problem is
that we share our borders with the 1948 territories."

Mustafa B. Hamarneh, director of the Center for Strategic Studies at the
University of Jordan, said that while government officials here defended the
policy of blocking arms smuggling as protecting Jordan, the view on the street
was far different.

"This shames the Jordanian Army," he said. "These are not hoodlums and thugs.
They are patriots, trying to help Palestinians defend themselves from the
onslaught, this formidable military machine that has been unleashed.

"This is exactly how it is seen and no amount of spin will change it," said Dr.
Hamarneh, who was educated at Georgetown.

Last Friday, the Muslim Brotherhood, Jordan's main Islamic opposition party,
announced that it would hold an unauthorized march to protest Israel's actions.
The Interior Ministry said it would not permit it.

As noon approached, the main street in the Suweileh neighborhood, an Islamist
stronghold, was lined with nine armored personnel carriers with helmeted riot
police. Six more carriers waited nearby. Scores more riot police with long
batons clustered in front of the mosque.

As worshipers filed out, groups of youth in blue jeans and sneakers gathered on
the street, then fell back as a few police stamped forward. Within about 20
minutes, everybody had drifted away, and the police left too.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (92%); SMUGGLING (91%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); DESERT STORM (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (74%); PEACE PROCESS (74%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (74%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); POPULATION SIZE (70%); POLLS &
SURVEYS (67%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (62%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION
(60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) PALESTINIANS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (82%) ARAB LEAGUE;
HEZBOLLAH

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (55%) KIFNER, JOHN; ABDULLAH (KING); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%); AMMAN, JORDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (96%); JORDAN (95%);
UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); IRAQ (92%);
SAUDI ARABIA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); GULF STATES (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JORDAN;  SAUDI ARABIA;  IRAN

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             551 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Bush Looks South

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 506 words


Most Latin American nations are feeling a bit jilted these days. President Bush
came into office pledging to make them a top foreign policy priority, but has
found it hard to live up to his commitment.

The president's current trip to Mexico, Peru and El Salvador may be an effort to
show his engagement with the region, but it also underscores his failure to
advance the hemispheric agenda. Mr. Bush's friendship with President Vicente Fox
of Mexico was once again manifest yesterday in Monterrey, but Mexicans are
widely disappointed by the lack of progress on an immigration reform that would
clarify the status of millions of undocumented workers in the United States.

Similarly, even though Mr. Bush becomes the first American president ever to
visit their nation when he arrives today, Peruvians are disappointed that the
United States has failed to renew the Andean Trade Preferences Act. The law
exempts an array of exports from Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru from
duties. It is vitally important to these countries, and relatively
uncontroversial on Capitol Hill. The Senate's failure to extend it before the
president's arrival in Lima was inexcusable.

The administration's broader trade agenda, including the proposed Free Trade
Area of the Americas, suffered a severe blow earlier this month when President
Bush decided to impose new tariffs on steel imports. The president's top
economic advisers have dismissed the move as a concession to domestic political
concerns, but that will do little to alleviate simmering trade tensions with
Brazil. The administration's passivity in the face of Argentina's financial
crisis is a further signal that Washington is not overly concerned about the
region's plight. That impression only emboldens populist leaders like
Venezuela's Hugo Chavez, who appears eager to drive a wedge between the United
States and Latin America.

The fate of the Andean nations' fragile democracies is the most pressing
concern. In Peru, a terrorist bomb set off outside the United States Embassy in
Lima on Wednesday killed nine people. The attack brought back memories of Peru's
painful struggle earlier in the 90's against the Shining Path guerrilla
movement.

In neighboring Colombia, of course, the war between the state and Marxist
guerrillas is intensifying in the aftermath of the collapse of peace talks last
month. Right-wing paramilitary groups, often allied with members of the
military, are as much of a threat to that society.

This week the Bush administration asked Congress to ease restrictions on
military aid to Colombia that limits its use to the fight against drug
trafficking. The issue deserves a thorough debate. Distinguishing between
counterinsurgency and counter-narcotics is a phony exercise in the Colombian
context, but Congress ought to remain wary of any assistance that is not
conditioned on the Colombian Army's improving its human rights record.

All told, Latin America presents a distressing mosaic at the moment, one that
Washington needs to be more concerned about.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (85%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); EXPORT TRADE (78%); IMPORT TRADE (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(78%); DRUG POLICY (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (73%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (73%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (70%); ARMIES (70%); FOREIGN LABOR (70%); ECONOMIC CRISIS
(70%); TAXES & TAXATION (69%); TERRORISM (66%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (66%);
PEACE PROCESS (65%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (61%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (61%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  EDITORIALS;  PERU-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US;  MEXICO-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  EL SALVADOR-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: FREE TRADE AREA OF THE AMERICAS (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); HUGO CHAVEZ (58%); VICENTE FOX QUESADA (58%) BUSH,
GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PERU (96%); LATIN AMERICA (95%); EL SALVADOR
(94%); COLOMBIA (94%); MEXICO (94%); BOLIVIA (79%); ECUADOR (79%); ARGENTINA
(79%); BRAZIL (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%); NORTH & SOUTH
AMERICAS (51%)

REGION: LATIN AMERICA;  PERU;  MEXICO;  EL SALVADOR

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             552 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 25, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

General Musharraf's Travails

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 582 words


Few leaders have a tougher balancing act these days than Gen. Pervez Musharraf
of Pakistan. Since January, he has built an impressive record of going after
groups linked to terrorism. But because of the continuing ability of terrorists
to strike back with such actions as the recent attack on a Protestant church in
Islamabad and the murder of Daniel Pearl, General Musharraf sometimes appears
not to be doing enough. President Bush continues to support the general and
credit his efforts. For now, that backing seems justified. But the United States
must be alert to possible backsliding and keep pressure on the general to return
democracy to Pakistan.

General Musharraf's plan to try to legitimize his military rule with a
referendum this year is unacceptable and should be discouraged by Washington. He
needs to hold free and fair elections.

Since its independence and partition with India in 1947, Pakistan has been ruled
mostly by military dictatorships. As a result, its political system has never
been allowed to mature. Instead, it has been corrupted by organized criminal
groups, extremist Islamic organizations financed from overseas and a powerful
but covert military organization known as the Inter-Services Intelligence
agency, or I.S.I. In the 1980's, the United States did business with all these
groups, as the Central Intelligence Agency and Saudi Arabia poured billions of
dollars through Pakistan into the anti-Russian rebellion in neighboring
Afghanistan. In some respects, the United States is now facing deformities in
Pakistan that it helped create.

After the Russians left Afghanistan, the United States had a falling out with
Pakistan over its covert nuclear program and its willingness to harbor extremist
groups, including some that have crossed the border into India and fomented the
Islamic uprising in the northern Indian state of Kashmir. General Musharraf's
overthrow of a civilian government in 1999 did not help, but the turnaround of
the last six months has been remarkable. Without assistance from Pakistani
military intelligence, the United States would not have been able to win the war
against the Taliban as quickly as it did. General Musharraf has arrested 2,000
militants, and Pakistani and American law enforcement officials appear to be
cooperating in the investigation of the kidnapping and murder of Mr. Pearl.

Nevertheless, General Musharraf must accelerate his efforts to purge the I.S.I.
of links with militant groups operating in Afghanistan, Kashmir and within
Pakistan. Acting against these groups is likely to generate opposition to
General Musharraf within the army and, some say, could endanger his life. He has
no choice but to change the direction of his troubled nation and its military
establishment. Dissident elements of the I.S.I. have to be rooted out, and the
agency has to end its support of Islamic insurgents in Kashmir and cease
intimidating Pakistani civilian politicians.

President Bush has bolstered General Musharraf's regime by relieving Pakistan of
some debts and opening American markets for Pakistani textile exports. An urgent
order of business is to equip Pakistan's law enforcement agencies with computers
and other tools to keep track of extremists. General Musharraf should also be
encouraged to fulfill his promise to hold parliamentary elections this October.
Standing with Pakistan now is the best way for the United States to root out
terrorist groups and bring stability to the nation and the region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MILITARY RULE (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); ORGANIZED CRIME (77%); ARMIES (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (76%); REFERENDUMS (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (70%); ARRESTS (67%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (58%); MURDER
(57%); TEXTILES (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  TERRORISM;  EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
ELECTIONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  REFERENDUMS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES);
MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);
NORTH INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (94%); ASIA (93%); INDIA (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             553 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE MILITARY;
U.S. to Send Special Forces To Train Army For Kabul

BYLINE:  By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld assigned the American military a complex
new mission in Afghanistan today as he announced that Special Forces troops
would begin training the new Afghan national army within the next six weeks.

The first training phase, to last two and a half months, will prepare three
ground combat battalions, each with 600 troops, and two border patrol
battalions, each with 300 troops, senior military planners said.

Up to 150 Army Special Forces troops will be assigned at this initial stage to
the Training Task Force, with senior military officials saying they will
probably come from units not already in Afghanistan. In addition, allied nations
will be invited to contribute troops.

Thus far, however, the other nations have shown reluctance to help Afghanistan
fill a domestic security vacuum that is now the domain of powerful regional
warlords and local bandits -- and pockets of tenacious Taliban and Al Qaeda
fighters.

The United States and its allies decided not to expand the international
peacekeeping force beyond the size needed to patrol the capital, Kabul. And at
conferences in Germany and Japan to discuss post-Taliban rule and economic
development, no money was pledged to reconstruct an Afghan army, although $4.5
billion was promised for civilian projects.

Pentagon officials said one goal of Special Forces assigned to the mission would
be to train Afghans to become their own military trainers eventually. Retired
American military officers could also be contracted over time to replace the
Special Forces trainers.

The assessment on how to build an Afghan army was carried out by a 15-member
team led by Maj. Gen. Charles C. Campbell, chief of staff for the United States
Central Command. He said he had come away from talks with Hamid Karzai, the
interim Afghan leader, with a clear sense that he wants a new army "to be a
powerful symbol of national unity, stability and pride."

General Campbell said the Afghan forces would also be instructed in the highly
nuanced and vastly more complicated issues of civilian control over military
affairs, loyalty to a legitimate central government and respect for human rights
and the rules of armed combat.

Mr. Rumsfeld indicated that the United States was willing to pay some costs of
raising an Afghan force. But he said other nations must share the burden -- a
crucial point since the central government must be able to clothe, arm and, most
important, pay any soldiers it hopes to wean from warlords who now dominate much
of Afghanistan outside Kabul.

"The United States is going to work with some other countries to try to raise
some funds for the purpose of training the Afghan army," Mr. Rumsfeld said
today. "And needless to say, the pace at which it happens and the size will be
somewhat dependent on the success of that effort."

In a telephone interview today, General Campbell expressed optimism over
prospects for what he termed "a migration of power from regional-based warlords
to the central authorities."

"My sense from a number of conversations is that the notion of a national army
is one that resonates with all of the parties, including the regional leaders of
armed factions," he said. "At least right now, there is a window of opportunity
where you have warlords -- for lack of a better term -- prepared to make
available soldiers to participate in establishing a national army."

But that window of opportunity is held open by anticipation of international
support -- both in money and weaponry, said an expert in the nation's military
history, Ali A. Jalali.

Mr. Jalali, a former colonel in the Afghan Army and co-author of "The Other Side
of the Mountain: Mujahedeen Tactics in the Soviet-Afghan War," noted that for
two decades rival militaries have created the nation's political structures,
rather than a situation in which a national government controls the military.

"So unless you have a politically stabilized government, with the money to pay
for an army, the people who are controlling the provinces are not going to
dissolve their militias," said Mr. Jalali, who is now with Voice of America.

No cost figures for raising an Afghan national army were released. While
experts, including Mr. Jalali, have said that an army of 50,000 to 60,000 troops
was appropriate, Pentagon officials said final projections for the size of the
force remain the subject of consultations with the Afghan Defense Ministry.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY TRAINING (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (79%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); BORDER CONTROL (71%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (68%); AL-QAEDA (68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); JAPAN (79%); GERMANY (70%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             554 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

India Passes Antiterror Bill Over Protests About Rights

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, March 26


After caustic debates during a rare session of both its houses, the Indian
Parliament passed a broad antiterrorism measure tonight.

Leaders of the ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P.,
defended the bill, which curbs some individual rights, saying it was needed
because of a spate of terrorist attacks on Indian soil. They cited a "proxy war"
led by Pakistan over the disputed territory of Kashmir.

Opposition members, waging an impassioned fight, warned that the law, known as
the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance, or P.O.T.O., would be used against
ordinary citizens and religious minorities, but not members of the hard-line
Hindu groups that enjoy favor with the B.J.P.

"The real purpose of P.O.T.O. is to use this draconian legislation against your
own citizens," said Kapil Sibal, a Congress Party member of Parliament and
constitutional lawyer, to prolonged heckles from pro-government forces on the
floor.

The antiterrorism law authorizes police officers to detain suspects for up to 90
days without a trial and to accept testimony from unidentified witnesses. It
will also allow the police to arrest any suspected member of groups that are
defined by the government as terrorist, as well as anyone suspected of offering
support, financial and otherwise, to such groups.

The measure applies both to citizens and foreigners.

The bill was brought before a joint session of Parliament after failing last
week in the upper house, the Rajya Sabha. It had already passed in the lower
house, the Lok Sabha. The coalition government led by the B.J.P. called the
joint session, counting on the numbers to be in its favor. A joint session has
been called only twice before in this nation's 54-year history.

Tonight, after a nine-hour debate punctuated by shouts and appeals for calm from
the speaker of the house, the bill was approved, 425 to 296. For the B.J.P.,
whose coalition government was strained only last week by discontent in the
party's hard-line Hindu base, its passage was a political boon, however
temporary.

On the ground the bill may be limited in its usefulness. More than half of the
states are controlled by B.J.P. opponents, and they are unlikely to carry out
the law.

Critics maintain that the law will effectively suspend a fundamental premise of
the Indian judicial system: the presumption of innocence. Ravi Nair, executive
director of the South Asia Human Rights Documentation Center, an advocacy group
here, compared it to taking away from American citizens their Miranda
protections, the laws requiring the police to advise suspects of their
constitutional rights.

"This is a day when the bells are going to be tolling for a lot of us," Mr. Nair
said.

The law was introduced after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in the United
States, and was already in force under a presidential ordinance. Just a day ago
the head of a Kashmiri separatist group, Yasin Malik, was arrested under its
tough provisions, sparking demonstrations on the streets of Srinagar, the summer
capital of Kashmir. It was scheduled to expire on April 6 had it not been passed
by Parliament.

A similar law, the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act, lapsed in 1995, amid
widespread criticism that it had been ineffective and abusive. The new law will
be in effect for five years.

Speaking in its defense today, the home minister, L. K. Advani, argued that in
times of war certain individual rights had to be suspended. More than 61,000
Indians have been killed in terrorist attacks, he said.

"We cannot score a decisive victory against terrorism unless special laws like
this are adopted," Mr. Advani said.

Opponents repeatedly raised the situation of Gujarat, the western state racked
by more than three weeks of violence between Hindus and Muslims. Those charged
with setting ablaze a train there carrying Hindu hard-liners were charged under
the terrorism ordinance. But people arrested in connection with reprisal attacks
against Muslims were not.

After intense criticism, the state government dropped the terrorism charges late
last week, maintaining conventional criminal murder and arson charges against
the accused in the train fire.

But that did not stop opposition members from seizing on the Gujarat episode to
try to defeat the antiterrorism bill.

The measure, they said, contains only a vague definition of what constitutes a
terrorist group. Unlike the previous law, missing from the latest measure is a
clause that defines as terrorist any group that seeks to disrupt "harmony" among
different groups. Congress Party leaders said that would have applied to radical
groups that belong to the same set of Hindu nationalist organizations as the
B.J.P.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); APPROVALS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); EXECUTIVES
(73%); RELIGION (73%); TESTIMONY (73%); ARRESTS (67%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (92%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (95%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); SOUTHERN
ASIA (72%)

REGION: INDIA

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             556 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1060 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Suicide Bomb Blast in Israel As Arabs Meet in Beirut
A Palestinian blew himself up at a crowded hotel in Netanya as Israelis gathered
for Passover, killing at least 19 and wounding more than 100. The militant
Islamic group Hamas took responsibility, and Israel vowed a swift response to
the attack, which was apparently timed as a blow to Arab peace initiatives.   A1


Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia made an appeal at the Arab League summit
meeting in Beirut for a pledge by Arab states to accept Israel if it withdrew
from occupied territories, allowed for a Palestinian state with its capital in
Jerusalem and permitted refugees to return.   A1


Terror Warning in Italy
United States officials warned that Americans in four cities -- Venice,
Florence, Milan and Verona -- could face terror attacks on Easter.   A6

Chilean Questions for Kissinger
An investigating judge in Santiago has formally asked Henry A. Kissinger, the
former national security adviser and secretary of state, and Nathaniel Davis,
the American ambassador to Chile in the early 1970's, to respond to questions
about the killing of an American citizen, Charles Horman, after the military
coup that brought Gen. Augusto Pinochet to power.   A13

World Briefing   A10

NATION CHALLENGED   A14-15

Afghan Quake Death Toll May Be Lower Than Feared
Rescue workers in northeastern Afghanistan estimated that 1,000 had died after
Monday's earthquake, far fewer than initially believed. Officials said about
7,000 people were left homeless and about 13,000 homes were seriously damaged.
A14

More Security Forces Sought
Kamel Hossain, the United Nations special representative on human rights in
Afghanistan, called for a significant expansion of the international security
force in Afghanistan, warning that failure to do so could undercut efforts to
create democratic institutions there.   A14

Sept. 11 on the Mind
Researchers said tens of thousands of Manhattan residents had suffered emotional
difficulties severe enough to warrant psychiatric treatment.   A15

Death Penalty Warning to U.S.
France told Washington that it might stop assisting the investigation of
Zacarias Moussaoui, a French citizen accused of conspiracy in the Sept. 11
attacks, if the United States sought the death penalty for him.   A14

Guarding Against Future Terror
Whatever is built on the trade center site should be secure against bioterror
attacks and be no more than 60 stories tall, the nation's leading engineering
organization said.   A15

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

NATIONAL   A18-26

Bush Signs Campaign Bill Before Fund-Raising Trip
President Bush signed the campaign finance legislation without ceremony, then
left Washington on Air Force One on a trip to raise nearly $4 million for
Republicans. Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, and the N.R.A.
filed separate suits challenging the law's constitutionality.   A1

Energy Industry Influence
A review of documents made public this week by the Department of Energy found
that several recommendations from energy industry representatives were written
into the White House's national energy report and a presidential order.   A18

Legal Error Leads to Release
Arizona is freeing more than 175 prisoners because paperwork involving clemency
applications and sentences was mishandled by the staff of former Gov. Fife
Symington, who resigned in 1997 and was himself found guilty of bank fraud, a
conviction that was overturned.   A18

SCIENCE/HEALTH

$500,000 Medical Prize
Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the pioneering immunologist and director of the
infectious-disease center at the National Institutes of Health, was awarded the
nation's richest medical award, the Albany Medical Center Prize in Medicine and
Biomedical Research.   A22

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Hotel Industry Showing First Signs of Recovery
The average occupancy rate in February was 74 percent, just one percentage point
lower than in February 2001 and far above January's level, which was the worst
in seven years. The new demand has been fueled by cuts in room rates, to $202.82
in February from $232.04, and that, in turn, has led to the rehiring of 3,400 of
5,000 workers laid off after Sept. 11.   B1

New Jersey Budget Flaws Cited
State legislators and Wall Street analysts said the $23.66 billion spending plan
proposed by the new governor, James E. McGreevey, had some of the same flaws
that have plagued New Jersey budgets for years, like understating actual
spending.   B1

Police Seek Ivy League Recruits
The New York Police Department kicked off its Ivy League recruitment effort with
modest success, signing up more than 35 students at Columbia for the police
examination to be given on June 8.   B1

SPORTS   D1-8

EDUCATION

Test Scores and Race
New York State education officials, citing elementary and middle school
standardized test scores, say white and Asian students do much better than black
and Hispanic students in reading and math and that black and Hispanic students
fall farther behind as they go through school.   A1

ARTS   E1-12

CIRCUITS   G1-10

OBITUARIES   A28-29

Milton Berle
The brash comedian who became the first star of television was 93.   A1

Dudley Moore
The British actor, comedian and musician was 66.   A28

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Surge in Hospitalizations
Many hospitals are struggling to cope with surprising increases in patients,
after years in which they closed beds and laid off workers.   A1

Whither Arthur Andersen?
Partners at the wounded accounting firm engaged in fierce debate over what
strategy the firm should take, a day after the chief executive, Joseph F.
Berardino, said he would resign.   C1

Mr. Berardino discussed the reasoning behind his decision to quit.   C1

Cabinet Officer on Enron Sale
Army Secretary Thomas E. White, a former Enron executive, defended the timing of
his sale of millions of dollars in Enron stock late last year.   C1

Company Loans Linked to Stock
The Rigas family, which founded and still runs the cable television operator
Adelphia Communications, appears to have borrowed $1 billion or more in loans
guaranteed by the company and used it to buy Adelphia stock and bonds.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: One-way discussion on energy; the population slowdown; presidential
health picks; map of the fallen.

Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E9
Weather   C12
Public Lives   B2

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PASSOVER (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HAMAS (78%); COUPS (77%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (73%); CONSPIRACY
(73%); RELIGION (72%); PEACE PROCESS (72%); ENERGY & UTILITY TRADE (71%); JUDGES
(71%); EARTHQUAKES (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); DISASTER RELIEF (70%);
FUNDRAISING (70%); REFUGEES (70%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (69%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); MILITARY RULE (66%); ARMED FORCES (66%); LEGISLATION
(63%); ENGINEERING (62%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (60%); HOMELESSNESS (50%) NO
INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (58%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%); MITCH MCCONNELL (53%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (93%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); NEW
YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); LEBANON (93%); CHILE (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); ITALY
(76%); FRANCE (74%)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             557 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 28, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE 20TH HIJACKER;
France Warns It Opposes Death Penalty In Terror Trial

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


The French government has warned the United States that it might end its
cooperation in the investigation of Zacarias Moussaoui, a French citizen who is
the only person charged so far in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, if the United
States seeks the death penalty in the case, American officials said today.

A decision by the Justice Department on seeking the death penalty is imminent,
and officials say Attorney General John Ashcroft is virtually certain to approve
a request from local prosecutors to seek Mr. Moussaoui's execution. The decision
must be announced by Friday, a deadline imposed by the federal court in
Alexandria, Va., outside Washington, where Mr. Moussaoui is scheduled to be
tried this fall.

Legal scholars said a decision to seek the death penalty would be highly unusual
if not unprecedented in a case in which the defendant is charged with conspiracy
and not with direct involvement in the acts that resulted in death.

Mr. Moussaoui, 33, is accused of conspiring in the planning of the Sept. 11
attacks, but no evidence has been made public tying him directly to any of the
19 hijackers. On the day of the attacks, he was in a prison in Minnesota for
visa violations.

In a letter delivered to Mr. Ashcroft this week, officials said, the French
Justice Ministry reminded him that longstanding agreements between the two
governments allowed France to end cooperation in cases in which a French
defendant held in the United States faced the death penalty.

The ministry declined to release the letter, but in a statement in Paris on
Tuesday, Justice Minister Marylise Lebranchu said she had asked Mr. Ashcroft "to
assure that Moussaoui could benefit from a fair trial and that capital
punishment not be sought against him." France abolished the death penalty in
1981 and considers it a human rights violation.

A decision by the French to withhold evidence could be a blow to prosecutors,
since French intelligence agencies are reported to maintain a voluminous file on
Mr. Moussaoui and his ties to Al Qaeda and other militant Muslim groups.

"We'd obviously like to maintain access to it," a Justice Department official
said, "and we're continuing to talk to the French."

Prof. Joshua Dressler of the Ohio State University Law School, an authority on
the death penalty, said he was not aware of any previous case in which the
government sought the death penalty for a conspiracy charge.

One reason, Mr. Dressler said, is that juries typically are opposed to imposing
the death penalty on someone not personally involved in the taking of life. The
Moussaoui case, he acknowledged, was unique because of the nature of the Sept.
11 crimes.

"The prosecutors might well be able to get past that hurdle," he said.

But Prof. Michael Tigar of the American University Law School, who defended
Terry L. Nichols in the Oklahoma City bombing case, said there were many other
obstacles to putting Mr. Moussaoui to death.

"There's no chance at all in a death sentence for conspiracy in this case to be
upheld by the Supreme Court," Mr. Tigar said.

He said he believed that one reason the Justice Department was saying it
intended to seek the death penalty was to obtain what lawyers call a
"death-qualified jury," one in which no member has reservations about the death
penalty.

The government is seeking a death-qualified jury, Mr. Tigar said, because it is
far more likely to be favorable to the prosecution and thus amenable to the
government's conspiracy case.

In addition, he said, the federal death penalty statute provides that a
defendant may be put to death only after a jury unanimously agrees that he
"intentionally killed the victim" or "intentionally participated in an act,
contemplating that the life of a person be taken."

The Supreme Court ruled narrowly in 1987 that defendants who play a major role
in crimes in which death results may be sentenced to death if they act with
"reckless disregard for human life." That ruling cut back a 1982 case that was
widely seen as outlawing the death penalty for defendants who did not personally
kill or intend to kill.

Mr. Tigar said he believed that those cases and the statute meant that a person
could not be sentenced to death unless he participated directly in the crimes.

Professor Dressler said, however, that the mere fact that Mr. Moussaoui was in
jail at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks "would not by itself eliminate the
possibility that prosecutors could show he was a substantial actor in the plot
to kill."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (94%); TERRORISM (93%); HIJACKING (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CAPITAL CRIMES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
CONSPIRACY (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); LAWYERS (89%);
EVIDENCE (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); JURY TRIALS (75%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); APPROVALS (72%); BOMBINGS (72%); AIRLINES (69%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (65%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (64%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (61%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (50%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (58%) ;AL QAEDA
(TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SHENON, PHILIP; LEWIS, NEIL A; MOUSSAOUI, ZACARIAS; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY
GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%); OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); MINNESOTA, USA
(79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); FRANCE (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             558 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Nation Challenged: The Prisoners;
Rumsfeld Backs Plan to Hold Captives Even if Acquitted

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 671 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld today defended the Pentagon's plan to keep
some prisoners from the Afghan war in captivity in Cuba indefinitely even if
they are acquitted in military tribunals.

To release them after an acquittal so they could return to the battlefield, he
said, would be "mindless."

But he did say that some prisoners had already been released, evidently having
provided little intelligence about any future attacks.

He implied vaguely that some of those prisoners might have been released from
the United States naval station in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, but an officer in
Guantanamo said by phone that the base still had in custody the same 300
prisoners it had since Feb. 15, when the United States stopped transferring
prisoners from Aghanistan to Cuba because Guantanamo ran out of room.

Instead, officials said, the prisoners set free were released from custody in
Afghanistan, but there was no exact count of how many or under what
circumstances.

No new prisoners have been sent to a temporary camp at Guantanamo for more than
a month. The military has just hired 400 Filipino engineers and construction
workers to build a permanent prison in Cuba for the detainees. The new camp is
to be ready by April 12 and will accommodate 408 prisoners. Eventually it could
house up to 2,000 prisoners.

The Pentagon has not yet established which prisoners will face charges at a
military tribunal, nor has it settled on a location for the trials, Mr. Rumsfeld
said today at a Pentagon briefing. But he did indicate that prisoners could be
held indefinitely, not just until the end of the war in Afghanistan but until
the end of the war on terrorism -- which could last years.

Under the Geneva Conventions, prisoners are to be repatriated to their countries
at the end of a conflict. The administration has been murky about whether that
release point would be the end of the campaign in Afghanistan or the end of the
global war on terrorism. Mr. Rumsfeld said today that it was up to President
Bush to make that determination but that he thought it would be the latter.

"The way I would characterize the 'end of the conflict' is when we feel that
there are not effective global terrorist networks functioning in the world that
these people would be likely to go back" to terrorist activities, Mr. Rumsfeld
said.

The Bush administration has decided that the Geneva Conventions apply to some
extent to captured Taliban but not to members of Al Qaeda, the terrorist
network. In any case, the administration has said, none of the prisoners are
being given the status of prisoners of war and the United States is deciding on
its own when it will release them.

Top Pentagon officials said last week that even if prisoners were acquitted in a
tribunal, they might not necessarily be freed, and Mr. Rumsfeld affirmed that
today.

"In some cases it might not be possible to establish beyond a reasonable doubt
that an individual committed a particular crime, and therefore he might be
acquitted," Mr. Rumsfeld said. "However, it does not change the fact that he is
an enemy combatant."

So far, none of the prisoners -- who come from 33 different countries -- have
been charged with any crime. Six were not caught on the battlefield but in
Bosnia. And the top officer in charge of antiterror intelligence told The Miami
Herald that some of those being held in Guantanamo were essentially lost souls
who could provide scant intelligence. The officer, Maj. Gen. Michael Dunlavey,
told the newspaper that at least two were so ill mentally that they possessed no
intelligence value.

Human rights groups oppose the Pentagon's holding prisoners if they are
acquitted.

Michael Posner, executive director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights,
said: "It sends a very negative signal to the rest of the world. There are too
many countries around the world that would love to imitate that."

He added: "If this is a war that could last 50 or 100 years, there has to be
some discussion about whether there is an end point to the detention."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ACQUITTAL (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR
ON TERROR (89%); TERRORISM (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); NAVIES (79%); PRISONS
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (76%); HIJACKING (76%); ARMED FORCES (72%); CONSTRUCTION (71%); AL-QAEDA
(63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (63%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             563 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 2, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yugoslavia to Cooperate With War Tribunal

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: BUDAPEST, April 1


With tens of millions of dollars in American financial aid frozen, the Yugoslav
government pledged today to cooperate "fully" with the international war crimes
tribunal.

"This means allowing access to archives in a way that does not harm national
dignity and the arrest and transfer to The Hague of those charged with war
crimes," the Yugoslav foreign minister, Goran Svilanovic, told reporters in the
Serbian capital, Belgrade, after a special session of the Yugoslav cabinet.

Some $40 million in United States aid was automatically cut off this morning,
after Yugoslav officials failed to meet a United States deadline for greater
cooperation with the tribunal. The issue has thrown politics into turmoil,
particularly over the contentious question of handing over prominent people
indicted on war crimes charges.

Mr. Svilanovic's announcement -- expressing the federal Yugoslav cabinet's
support for the Serbian government's decision to cooperate with the tribunal --
appeared to loosen the impasse that caused the deadline to pass unmet.

The issue of cooperation continued to fuel a political fight as the Serbian
prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, called for the Yugoslav president, Vojislav
Kostunica, to demand extraditions to comply with the United States deadline.

"Kostunica is politically destabilizing the country by creating popular
resistance against The Hague court and is thus preventing the country's
integration into the international community," Mr. Djindjic told the private
Beta news agency today.

Mr. Djindjic supports greater cooperation, while Mr. Kostunica has spoken out
regularly against the tribunal as anti-Serbian and has called extraditions
illegal in the absence of a formal law on cooperation.

But human rights activists said the United States government would not accept
words alone in exchange for reinstating aid: The American law says specifically
that indicted suspects must be handed over to The Hague tribunal and that war
crimes investigators must have access to government records.

"They still have to do something," said Eric Witte, an analyst at the Coalition
for International Justice, which supports the tribunal. "Serbia has to make a
stark choice, between embracing the West and reforms and all of the hope that
goes with that, and turning its back on reforms and embracing its nationalist
past."

Just hours after the decision in Belgrade, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell's
office said that he would defer indefinitely submitting to Congress his report
certifying whether Yugoslavia was cooperating adequately.

By law, $40 million in American assistance to Yugoslavia was automatically
frozen but, in theory, Mr. Powell's report could reverse that if leaders in
Yugoslavia hand over suspects in the coming days. The United States gives a
total of $120 million in assistance, though relief programs and those aimed at
building democratic institutions are not affected by the freeze.

Under the law, the United States could not support loans and other financial
help from international financial institutions if Yugoslavia was deemed not to
be cooperating.

Speculation in the Yugoslav news media is that three former top aides to
Slobodan Milosevic -- who is himself on trial at The Hague -- are the most
likely candidates for extradition. On Sunday, the Serbian justice minister
issued warrants for their arrest.

In Bratunac, in eastern Bosnia today, NATO peacekeepers arrested Momir Nikolic,
a former Bosnian Serb military commander indicted for genocide in the massacre
of 7,000 Bosnian Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995.

George Robertson, the NATO secretary general, said, "Let today's detention serve
as a warning. There will be no hiding place for anyone accused by the tribunal
of these horrific crimes."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); EXTRADITION (91%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); POLITICS (74%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (72%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  ARCHIVES AND RECORDS;  FOREIGN AID

PERSON: SVILANOVIC, GORAN (MIN); FISHER, IAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SERBIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (94%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             564 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 3, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In the Mideast, A Widening Divide

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 85 words


To the Editor:

Re "Israelis Broaden West Bank Raids as Arabs Protest" (front page, April 2):

It would be a fine thing if the self-styled human rights activists protesting
the Israeli actions who joined Yasir Arafat in his compound could devote a
fraction of their efforts to demonstrations against Arab suicide bombers. A
human chain protecting Jewish civilian areas -- in Israel and in Europe -- would
have a powerful symbolic effect and might even save lives.

KEVIN JON WILLIAMS
Wynnewood, Pa., April 2, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); TERRORISM (86%); BOMBINGS (86%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(84%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) DEMONSTRATIONS AND
RIOTS;  TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  JEWS;  ANTI-SEMITISM;  PALESTINIANS

PERSON: WILLIAMS, KEVIN JON; ARAFAT, YASIR

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); MIDDLE EAST (88%); EUROPE (85%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             565 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: KABUL;
AFGHANS ROUND UP HUNDREDS IN PLOT AGAINST LEADERS

BYLINE:  By DEXTER FILKINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, April 3


Afghan security officials said today that they had arrested hundreds of
political opponents, thwarting a conspiracy to mount a bombing campaign whose
targets were the government of Hamid Karzai and the former king, Mohammad Zahir
Shah.

A senior adviser to Mr. Karzai, chairman of the interim Afghan government, said
that more than 700 people had been detained in the last 48 hours, and that the
plot appeared to have been aimed at toppling the government. Another security
official said the plotters had a more general aim of destabilizing Mr. Karzai's
regime.

"They were planning to explode bombs in Kabul," said Din Muhammad Jurat,
director general for security at the Interior Ministry. "They wanted to
complicate conditions for the interim government. We finally decided that we had
to arrest them."

Afghan officials said the conspiracy was linked to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a
longtime warlord known for his anti-Western views and his ruthlessness on the
battlefield.

With details of the plot so sketchy, the fact that the roundup focused on
well-known opponents of Mr. Karzai's government seems certain to prompt
suspicions that the government fabricated the threat to crush its opponents.

Many of them belong to the Pashtun ethnic group that predominates in the south.
Mr. Karzai himself is a Pashtun. But his government is dominated by Tajiks, who
formed the core of the resistance to the Taliban.

The government did not specify which of its agencies had made the arrests, but a
spokesman for the international security force in Afghanistan said it had not
been involved.

Other officials gave smaller numbers of those arrested. Mr. Jurat placed the
number at "more than 200." Lt. Col. Neal Peckham, the spokesman for the
international force providing security in the capital, said the number was
closer to 300.

Many of those arrested are said to be Pashtuns. Colonel Peckham said weapons had
been seized.

The wave of arrests illustrates the fragility of the American-backed enterprise
here, intended to foster democracy in a country with a long tradition of
cutthroat and tyrannical politics.

The Americans are providing money and advisers to Mr. Karzai's government with
the hope that he will lead the country toward nationwide elections and a
pro-Western, moderately Islamic orientation.

Afghan officials said many of those arrested had traveled recently to Pakistan
and to Iran, where Mr. Hekmatyar was last seen. Mr. Hekmatyar, whose rocket
attacks on Kabul during the 1990's were blamed for as many 50,000 civilian
deaths, was reported to have left Iran in February after vowing to expel the
Americans from Afghanistan and topple the Karzai government.

Mr. Hekmatyar does not exert his power from one established base, and his
whereabouts are not known. Recent unconfirmed reports have placed him in
southwest Afghanistan.

As the Taliban government in Kabul neared collapse last November, Mr. Hekmatyar
said he was offering secret arms caches inside Afghanistan to the Taliban. In
interviews this year, Mr. Hekmatyar, a Pashtun, has objected to the Tajiks'
dominance. When asked last week about Mr. Hekmatyar's whereabouts, Zalmay
Khalilzad, President Bush's envoy to Afghanistan, declined to comment.

Among those arrested was Wahidullah Zahabaun, the former finance minster for the
Northern Alliance and a former member of Mr. Hekmatyar's Islamic Party, which
was known for its extreme religious doctrines and its virulently anti-Western
views. A government official said that Mr. Zahabaun had been released but that
his whereabouts were unknown.

A spokesman for the American Embassy said tonight that the staff did not know
about the arrests.

Mr. Karzai's government, cobbled together during a meeting in Germany while the
fighting was still raging in Afghanistan, has been plagued by infighting since
it took office.

In February, Abdul Rahman, the civil aviation minister, was killed by a mob, and
three members of Mr. Karzai's government, including the deputy intelligence
minister, were arrested. Mr. Karzai charged that Mr. Rahman had been
assassinated as part of a conspiracy. The three men are awaiting trial.

Last month, Zahir abruptly postponed his scheduled return to the country amid
concerns about his security. A Western diplomat said the former king faced the
threat of assassination.

His trip is meant to rally support for the government.

The alleged conspiracy comes two months before the convening of the loya jirga,
a planned gathering of the nation's political and religious leaders to choose a
new government.

The maneuvering for that convention has already begun, with persistent reports
that an alliance of Islamic fundamentalists, including Mr. Hekmatyar and others,
would try to unseat Mr. Karzai and form a more strictly Islamist government.

Mr. Karzai could not be reached for comment today, but a senior adviser
suggested that he might have had little to do with the arrests, and that the
arrests might have been carried out without his approval.

Mr. Karzai's critics see him as a compromise choice, and little more than a
puppet of the Tajiks who control the Foreign Affairs, Interior and Defense
Ministries.

"This is a deeply divided government," said the Karzai adviser, who spoke on
condition of anonymity. "I am not sure that he signed off" on the arrests.

The arrests follow the decision by the Bush administration last month to oppose
the expansion of the 4,500-man international security force now patrolling the
streets of Kabul.

Mr. Karzai had urged Western governments to expand the force to other Afghan
cities, saying that without a national army, his government was powerless to
fight remnants of the Taliban or quash restless warlords.

The administration argued that the nations now supplying troops, like Britain
and France, had military commitments elsewhere and were not willing to
contribute any more. The Bush administration is cautious about the force, for
one reason because it has said it does not want to be put in the position of
having to evacuate it should fighting make that necessary.

At a ceremony in Kabul today, the Afghan government marked the graduation of the
first 600 members of the national army, a force intended to bring Afghanistan's
many ethnic groups together under a unified command.

"We will not allow groups of armed men call themselves armies," Mr. Karzai said.

Also today, the new American ambassador to Afghanistan, Robert P. Finn,
presented his credentials to Mr. Karzai at Gulkhana Palace. Mr. Finn is the
first American ambassador to serve here since Adolph Dubs was kidnapped and
murdered by leftist extremists here in 1979.

While Kabul appears relatively calm under the watchful eyes of the international
force, the scene outside of capital is markedly different. The most serious
threats have come in the north, where the private armies of Gen. Ostad Atta
Muhammad and Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, the deputy defense minister, have clashed
repeatedly in recent weeks.

Although he has pledged his loyalty to the Karzai government, General Dostum may
be preparing to challenge it. A United Nations official and members of the
interim government say General Dostum is receiving guns and money from Iran.
Gen. Dostum recently invited two former associates of Mr. Hekmatyar to set up
operations in the large areas of northern Afghanistan where the general exerts
nominal control.

Mr. Hekmatyar rose to prominence in the 1980's as a leader in the
American-backed effort to oust the invading forces of the Soviet Union. Despite
his extremist views, he received more American money than any other warlord.

After the Soviet Union withdrew in 1989 and civil war engulfed the country, Mr.
Hekmatyar's fortunes declined. Despite continued backing from Pakistan, his army
stalled outside Kabul, and his forces began a series of rocket attacks on the
city that lasted through the mid-1990's. As many as 50,000 civilians were
estimated to have been killed.

Mr. Hekmatyar met his match in the Taliban, whose forces defeated his on the
battlefield. Mr. Hekmatyar went into exile, but many of his followers joined the
Taliban.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Afghan officials say Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a warlord known for
his anti-Western views, has been linked to a plot to topple the government.
(Reuters)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); COUPS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); CONSPIRACY (90%); TALIBAN (89%); ELECTIONS (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HIJACKING (78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); ETHNICITY (51%); ETHNIC GROUPS (51%); RELIGION (50%)
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT;  ROYAL FAMILY

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (91%) KARZAI, HAMID; ZAHIR SHAH, MOHAMMED (KING);
HEKMATYAR, GULBUDDIN; FILKINS, DEXTER

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (85%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (85%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             572 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Fateful Journey to Jerusalem

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 158 words


To the Editor:

Re "Powell, in Israel, Keeps Up Pressure for a Withdrawal" (front page, April
12): I condemn the killing of innocent people on both sides. I condemn both the
suicide bombers and the Israeli Army, for they are indeed taking the lives of
innocent civilians.

Still, the death toll on the Palestinian side is much higher than the Israeli
side. Chronologically, the Israeli occupation came first, then came the suicide
bombings, followed by the attacks of the Israeli Army with tanks and jet bombers
on a civilian population.

If the United Nations and the world community forced Iraq to withdraw from
Kuwait under Security Council resolutions, why is Israel not forced to do the
same? Israeli soldiers are being accused from many sectors of human rights
abuses in the refugee camps. I will pray for the success of Secretary of State
Colin L. Powell's mission, so that the tragedy can end on both sides.

HASSAN MERRAJ
Brooklyn, April 12, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (88%); WAR &
CONFLICT (87%); ARMIES (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (71%); REFUGEES (68%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (52%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (51%)
PALESTINIANS

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (57%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (57%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (57%)

PERSON: MERRAJ, HASSAN

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (68%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (68%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); IRAQ (79%); KUWAIT
(79%); UNITED STATES (68%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             587 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Talk Tough to Pakistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 153 words


To the Editor:

You are right to warn Gen. Pervez Musharraf that America's appreciation of
Pakistan's cooperation in the antiterror war can only be undermined by his plan
for a referendum endorsing his continued illegitimate rule (editorial, April
17).

Many had feared that the United States would sacrifice its stance on democracy
and the rule of law for the exigency of securing Pakistan's help in fighting the
Taliban regime and Al Qaeda.

Now with the military operations in Afghanistan leveling off, the United States
should issue a categorical statement that it expects General Musharraf to hold a
free, multiparty election rather than a rubber-stamp referendum. This will
clearly demonstrate the importance we attach to democracy and human rights,
despite the war on terrorism.

VINCENT WEI-CHENG WANG
Richmond, Va., April 17, 2002

The writer is an associate professor of political science, University of
Richmond.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); REFERENDUMS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); RULE OF LAW (88%); TALIBAN (88%); ELECTIONS
(87%); POLITICS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); TERRORISM (69%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (67%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND (56%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (88%)

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (65%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             590 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Former President Arrested

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 81 words


Former President Pasteur Bizimungu has been arrested on charges of illegal
political activity and threats to state security, a police spokesman said.

A Hutu, Mr. Bizimungu was seen as a symbol of reconciliation after the 1994
genocide in which Hutus killed hundreds of thousands of Tutsis and some Hutus.
He resigned in 2000 and set up the Party for Democracy and Renewal but the
government immediately banned it, accusing Mr. Bizimungu and his associates of
preaching ethnic hatred.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); POLITICS (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (84%)
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: BIZIMUNGU, PASTEUR

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             604 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Split on Local Role in Terror Fight

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


In a rare disagreement, White House and Justice Department officials are divided
over whether to declare that local and state police departments have the power
to track down illegal immigrants as a new tactic in the global war on terror.

If adopted as policy, an opinion by the Office of Legal Counsel at the Justice
Department would reverse a longstanding legal tradition and allow local police
officers to make arrests for civil violations of immigration law, such as
overstaying visas.

A 1996 opinion by the legal counsel's office precluded local officers from
tracking down illegal immigrants, and a draft memorandum last November by the
same office supported that conclusion. Federal agents of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service typically handle these cases.

Many police departments have voiced concern that the new Justice Department
proposal would jeopardize their relations with immigrants, who would be less
willing to report crimes. The Mexican government and advocates for immigrants
have said the plan would encourage racial profiling.

"This is a democracy, based on freedom, and people have a right to basic human
dignity," said John R. Robertson, chief of police in Newark, Calif. "That means
they're not going to be questioned just because of their appearance."

The White House has consistently supported Attorney General John Ashcroft's
aggressive efforts to fight terrorism since the Sept. 11 attacks, even as he has
come under harsh criticism from civil liberties groups and others who accuse him
of violating fundamental rights, like the rights to due process and equal
protection under the law.

The Bush administration seemed to accept and even relish Mr. Ashcroft's role as
lightning rod on difficult criminal justice issues, and stood by him at every
turn.

But White House officials expressed concern this month when Mr. Ashcroft seemed
poised to declare the internal legal ruling as administration policy before
fully reviewing the plan and its potential fallout with White House policy and
political aides.

"Consultations need to be had on something like this so the White House knows
more about it, and to make sure it's not abused," said one administration
official, who said White House officials felt "blindsided" by news media reports
this month about the proposal.

One senior administration official said that unless modified significantly, the
proposal could lead to racial profiling and lawsuits resulting from police
abuses, strain relations with Latin American nations and alienate Hispanic
voters who Republicans are courting for the midterm elections in November. "It
is not a well-thought-out proposal," the official said.

High-level deputies from the White House, Justice Department, immigration
service and other agencies have had a flurry of meetings over the last three
weeks in an effort to tamp down the dispute and forge a consensus that can be
presented to President Bush and his top aides.

Surprised by the uproar, Justice Department officials are now proceeding more
cautiously with their plan. "It remains under consideration," Mr. Ashcroft told
reporters on April 17. "We'd want to do it in a way that respects the dignity
and needs of all the people, and also respects the resources and capacity of the
various law enforcement agencies."

Left unresolved, the dispute could jeopardize Mr. Bush's trust in his attorney
general. But top Justice Department and White House aides said they were
reviewing several options and expressed confidence that they could avert a
showdown on a decision, which could come as early as this week.

"This is a serious issue that no one is taking lightly," a senior Justice
Department official said.

Critics are also upset that Mr. Ashcroft, a former United States Senator from
Missouri, has given a conservative University of Missouri at Kansas City law
professor, Kris W. Kobach, a leading role in developing the delicate policy even
though Mr. Kobach, 36, is only a White House Fellow on temporary assignment to
the Justice Department this year.

"Kris has been doing a lot of immigration policy stuff, and has been intimately
involved in this issue," a Justice Department official said. Reached by phone at
home today, Mr. Kobach, who has degrees from Harvard, Oxford and Yale Law
School, declined to discuss details of the proposal until Mr. Ashcroft makes his
decision.

This is not the first time Mr. Ashcroft's zeal for pursuing potential terrorist
threats has put him at odds with state and local law enforcement agencies.

In the months after Sept. 11, some police chiefs resisted Mr. Ashcroft's request
that they help interview thousands of Middle Eastern men, expressing concern
that the plan seemed like racial profiling. In Portland, Ore., the acting police
chief refused to participate in the effort, saying it conflicted with state laws
that barred local police officers from questioning immigrants who were not
suspected of a crime.

The latest controversy stems from a Justice Department effort to bolster the
nation's ability to combat terrorism in America, as well as outside. The 19
hijackers on Sept. 11 were all foreign-born men living in the United States on
temporary visas, and at least two were in violation of their visa conditions.

The immigration service, which has long focused its enforcement effort at the
nation's borders, has only about 1,800 agents assigned to internal enforcement,
but it estimates that more than eight million people live in the United States
illegally.

To supplement federal immigration authorities, a wide-ranging 1996 immigration
law authorized the attorney general to enter into agreements with states and
local governments permitting them to enforce the immigration laws.

Until recently, only a few places pursued such agreements, and all were blocked
by opposition from immigrant advocates and employers or, in places like New York
City, by ordinances that prohibited local police officers from arresting
otherwise law abiding illegal immigrants.

That trend has started to shift after the September attacks, law enforcement
officials say. Florida will soon become the first state to enter into a policing
partnership with the Justice Department, the immigration service's parent.

But Justice Department officials, and some police agencies, contended more could
be done after Sept. 11. Justice officials say that many state and local law
enforcement agencies had asked the department to review the 1996 legal counsel's
opinion that restricted local officers from tracking down illegal immigrants.
Local police are already allowed to arrest immigrants for violating criminal
statutes, like crossing the border illegally.

"If these people are in violation of the law, then state, local and federal
police have an obligation to move against violators of immigration law," said
Jim Pasco, executive director of the National Fraternal Order of Police, which
represents 300,000 officers across the country.

The legal counsel's opinion says that states and localities, as "sovereign
entities," have the "inherent authority to enforce civil as well as criminal
violations of federal immigration law," according to officials who have read it.
Participation would be voluntary. But it is unclear whether the federal
government would reimburse local agencies or whether police officers would
receive training in immigration law.

These and other concerns have prompted many police chiefs to voice opposition to
the proposal, saying they were concerned about undoing the gains they had
achieved in their local communities.

"I don't think it's a good idea," said Arturo Venegas Jr., the chief of police
in Sacramento. "We've made tremendous inroads into a lot of our immigrant
communities. To get into the enforcement of immigration laws would build wedges
and walls that have taken a long time to break down."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); POLICE FORCES (92%); TERRORISM (91%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); LAWYERS
(90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); RACIAL PROFILING (89%); PUBLIC
POLICY (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); LEGISLATION
(78%); REFUGEES (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); MISCONDUCT (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (76%); CRIMINAL LAW
(76%); EQUAL PROTECTION (76%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(71%); VERDICTS (67%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (63%); VOTERS & VOTING (60%) TERRORISM;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  POLICE;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;
DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  STATES (US);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MEXICO-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  VISAS;
DISCRIMINATION;  POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF
LEGAL COUNSEL (58%) ;JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

INDUSTRY:  SIC2844 TOILET PREPARATIONS;

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) SCHMITT, ERIC; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); ASHCROFT, JOHN
(ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (93%); LATIN AMERICA (71%)

REGION: ; NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MEXICO

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             606 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Dictator's New Clothes

BYLINE:  By Brahma Chellaney;  Brahma Chellaney is professor of strategic
studies at the Center for Policy Research in New Delhi.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1050 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The move by Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's military ruler, to legitimize and
cement his grip on power through a referendum today to extend his self-declared
presidency for five years is likely to see him emerge far weaker politically and
more vulnerable on the legitimacy question. And instead of the political
consensus he needs to rally his nation behind the United States-led antiterror
war, the increased divisiveness in Pakistan over the sham referendum will
further constrain his ability to dismantle Pakistan's terrorist infrastructure.

In reneging on his pledge to return Pakistan to democracy, General Musharraf has
attacked the main political parties and their leaders but mollycoddled Islamic
groups, freeing from custody many extremists in the run-up to the vote. Also, by
alienating the very constituency that supported his bloodless coup -- the
secular civilian elites -- he has turned on the domestic allies necessary to his
regime's attempt to contain terrorism and virulent fundamentalism.

The consequences of General Musharraf's referendum for regional peace will be
equally dangerous. There is little prospect now of an early demobilization of
the nearly one million Pakistani and Indian soldiers that, for more than four
months, have been positioned and ready for war along the border.

In the past, whenever a Pakistani dictator has employed a referendum to
strengthen his rule, tensions with India have risen. The difference is that
General Musharraf is riding high internationally, having transformed his image
from a virtual pariah to an ally of the West following his post-Sept. 11
desertion of the Taliban. He has used that American-compelled turnabout in
Pakistani policy and his assistance in the antiterror war to reap major
benefits, including significant Western aid to save Pakistan from another debt
default. He has also kept Washington happy through certain concessions, like
giving permission to United States special forces to join Pakistani troops in
hunting for Taliban and Qaeda elements within Pakistan.

In turn, General Musharraf has taken advantage of the friendly attitudes of the
West not only to break his democracy pledge but also to shrink back from
promises he made in January -- under India's threat of war -- to clamp down on
Pakistani terrorist networks.

With India preoccupied internally by Hindu-Muslim clashes in Gujarat state and
the United States' attention now diverted to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis,
General Musharraf has quietly released most of the 2,000 militants he arrested
as part of his much-publicized antiterrorist crackdown. They include leaders of
two Pakistani outfits tied to Al Qaeda -- Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Muhammad,
the latter group being implicated in the murder of Daniel Pearl, the Wall Street
Journal reporter. Many of the detainees were picked up for their links with
terrorism, but they were freed on little more than their promise not to
associate themselves again with an extremist group.

The ugly fact is that Pakistan has become the main sanctuary of Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. The capture a month ago of Abu Zubaydah and some important Qaeda
members in Pakistan showed that such terrorists have moved from Pakistan's
western tribal regions to areas adjacent to India and that these groups may be
infiltrating Indian Kashmir, with the possible support of Pakistani military
intelligence.

The United States is perhaps too preoccupied with other crises to demand that
General Musharraf keep his word even while he is quietly moving backward on
terrorism. For months, he has been telling the West what it wants to hear, and
at times it seems that Washington is lulled into believing the military ruler is
a trustworthy ally. Yet he will even publicly fib, as he did on his last
American tour when he surprised his hosts by claiming India had secret plans to
conduct a nuclear test and may have been involved in Mr. Pearl's murder.

While Washington does need to work with General Musharraf, given the lack of a
credible alternative in Pakistan, United States policy also needs to realize the
long-term risks of giving General Musharraf legitimacy and support. As the
leader of the international fight against terrorism, the United States has to
make sure that it does not repeat the very mistakes of the past that have come
to trouble its security and that of the rest of the world.

General Musharraf oils his dictatorship with American aid, as did the previous
Pakistani dictator, Gen. Zia ul-Haq, who spurred on the rise of the forces of
jihad. Yet General Musharraf continues to place limits on American antiterrorist
operations, barring American forces from making independent hot-pursuit raids
from Afghanistan into Pakistan. He is willing to hand over Arab and Afghan
terrorist suspects to the United States but not Pakistani militants. Not one of
the thousands of Pakistani jihadists who returned home from Afghanistan has been
charged. And his broad releases of jailed Pakistani militants have helped banned
terrorist outfits to regroup under new names.

The backsliding is hardly unexpected. The scourge of Pakistani terrorism
emanates not so much from the mullahs as from whiskey-drinking generals who
reared the forces of jihad and fathered the Taliban. Yet by passing the blame
for their disastrous jihad policy to their mullah puppets, General Musharraf and
his fellow generals have made many outsiders believe that the key is to contain
the religious fringe, not the puppeteers.

The reality is that without the military's grip on power being loosened and the
rogue Inter-Services Intelligence agency being cut to size, there can be no
real, sustained movement in Pakistan toward democracy or against terrorism. As
for stability on the subcontinent, the only occasions when India and Pakistan
have come close to peace have been during the brief periods of democratic rule
in Islamabad.

Today's referendum will make strong antiterrorism efforts in Pakistan even less
possible. Washington needs to insist on a twofold reform process -- dismantling
the jihad structures in Pakistan and restoring democracy there -- and link aid
to progress on those fronts. A key lesson of Sept. 11 is that terrorism springs
from religious and political extremism nurtured by autocracy and the suppression
of democratic voices.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Jonathon Rosen)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); REFERENDUMS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MILITARY RULE (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); RELIGION (88%);
ELECTIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (75%); HIJACKING (75%); FUNDAMENTALISM (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); COUPS (70%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (60%) REFERENDUMS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  TERRORISM;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;
ELECTIONS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  HIJACKING

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (90%) CHELLANEY, BRAHMA (PROF); MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (86%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (86%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); GUJARAT, INDIA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (94%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             608 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan's Dubious Referendum

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 382 words


To no one's surprise, Gen. Pervez Musharraf almost certainly won a rigged
referendum in Pakistan yesterday awarding him another five years as president.
Even less surprising, the general's aides proclaimed the results a vote of
confidence. But either out of indifference or protest, most Pakistanis declined
to participate in an election that was preceded by curbs on dissent. The
balloting has actually diminished General Musharraf's stature and he must now
take aggressive steps to restore democracy with a vigorously contested
parliamentary election, due in October.

General Musharraf seized power in a military coup in 1999, ousting Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif. Since Sept. 11, he has won broad support for allying
himself with the American battle against terrorism. He helped crush the Taliban
in Afghanistan and has arrested many Islamic militants at home. In a recent sign
of possible backpedaling, however, he has released most of the 2,000 people
arrested earlier.

There can be no room for easing up on terrorism or the promised return to
democracy. The general made a grave mistake in scheduling the referendum in the
first place. He compounded the error by banning organized rallies by political
parties. The two main political parties are actually supportive of the crackdown
on militants and terrorism. Now they have been alienated by General Musharraf's
tactics. As the Pakistani commentator Husain Haqqani put it recently, it is time
for him to stop trying to be his nation's savior and become its leader. He
should be working with the parties instead of trying to freeze them out of
power.

The next big test for General Musharraf, politically speaking, is October's
parliamentary elections. The two parties in the best position to win them are
the Pakistan Muslim League of former Prime Minister Sharif, who accepted exile
when he was threatened with prosecution after his ouster, and the Pakistan
People's Party of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. At the very least,
General Musharraf needs to allow Ms. Bhutto's and Mr. Sharif's organizations to
participate fully in the election and accept the results. He carried out the
referendum to enhance his credibility on the world stage. Instead, he set in
motion a test of his credibility when the elections get under way.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFERENDUMS (92%); ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); POLITICS (90%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); COUPS (75%); MARTIAL LAW (75%); HIJACKING (75%);
MILITARY RULE (73%); ARRESTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); RELIGION (68%); ARMED
FORCES (55%) EDITORIALS;  ELECTIONS;  REFERENDUMS;  LEGISLATURES AND
PARLIAMENTS;  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER
(NYC);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (90%); NAWAZ SHARIF (78%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (58%)
MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             610 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Americas: Guatemala: Human Rights Worker Slain

BYLINE:  By David Gonzalez (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 120 words


The Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu condemned the killing of an
accountant working for her foundation, which is pursuing genocide cases against
current and former government officials.

The police said Guillermo Ovalle was shot dead on Monday by one of three heavily
armed men, apparently during a robbery at a small cafeteria. But an official
with the Rigoberta Menchu Foundation said that 10 minutes before the shooting
the group's office received telephone calls in which someone played a recording
of a funeral march. In recent weeks, forensic anthropologists working on
identifying the remains of massacre victims from the 1960-96 civil war have been
subjected to death threats.   David Gonzalez (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NOBEL PRIZES (90%); AWARDS & PRIZES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
GENOCIDE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); FORENSICS (86%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY
(85%); ROBBERY (84%)

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; MENCHU, RIGOBERTA; OVALLE, GUILLERMO

REGION: GUATEMALA

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             615 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 3, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Is Democracy Anyway?

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 721 words


If there was a form of government that produced autocrats who sponsored
terrorism, stole millions of dollars while impoverishing their citizens,
shredded public education and health, permitted child bondage, tortured
dissidents and tolerated pogroms against minorities, then we would all condemn
it. Except that in South Asia such a system is called democracy.

That's what makes this week's election in Pakistan so fascinating.

President Bush has winked as Gen. Pervez Musharraf steamrolled over a democratic
system so as to maintain the army's hold on power. Mr. Bush's stance is
hypocritical and threatens to undermine everything we stand for -- except that,
frankly, General Musharraf has done better in governing Pakistan than his
democratic predecessors have.

The Pakistan election has an importance beyond that country. That rigged
referendum -- and our complicity in it -- raise questions about what constitutes
democracy.

Without much of a sense of gritty realities in the developing world, we in the
West tend to regard "democracy" as simply elections. When trouble erupts -- in
Cambodia, Somalia, East Timor, Afghanistan, Angola -- we prescribe elections,
bless the result as democracy, and hurry off.

"We place an inordinate emphasis on elections alone," noted Sumit Ganguly, an
expert on the region at the University of Texas at Austin. He notes that
elections are only one element of a democracy; others include a free press, an
independent judiciary and respect for minorities.

Without these checks, countries can end up with elections that (as in Pakistan)
are used by drug lords as a convenient way to install their pals in important
offices. Once in place, they can use their power to steal money and murder
critics.

"When we followed the democratic path, we got only disappointment," said Arif
Ali Khan Abbasi, the former chief executive of Pakistan International Airways.
"At least there is a semblance of order when you get a benevolent dictator."

That's how Washington feels as well; as a quasi-democracy, Pakistan was pretty
close to a terrorist state. Then General Musharraf seized power in 1999,
installed himself as president in 2001 and (after 9/11, with an American gun to
his head) began to turn the country away from terror and extremism.

It's quite a task; a poll last fall found that 82 percent of urban Pakistanis
regard Osama bin Laden as a freedom fighter. Pakistan's intelligence agency is
responsible for more terrorist killings than Al Qaeda. The country has been on
the edge of bankruptcy, 55 percent of adults are illiterate, 10 percent of
children die by the age of 5, and there are more drug addicts than college
graduates.

"Prior to 9/11, all of us considered Pakistan a failing state, 5, 10 or 15 years
away from collapse in one way or another," said Marshall Bouton, an expert on
the region and president of the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations.

More broadly, South Asia as a whole is both impressive in the way it has
sustained democracies and depressing in how poorly the democracies have often
served their citizens. Indeed, in Sri Lanka elections led to the rise of
demagogues who competed for votes among the majority Sinhalese population by
pledging to discriminate against the minority Tamils. They got the votes, and
Sri Lanka got civil war.

None of this is to argue against democracy, though, because (aside from General
Musharraf) military rulers in the area have been even worse. As Najam Sethi, a
prominent Pakistani newspaper editor, puts it: "Yes, the experiments with
democracy have not been successful, but the experiments with military
dictatorship have been disastrous."

For that reason, Mr. Sethi and many others with whom I spoke are horrified by
General Musharraf's fraudulent referendum to stay in power. But I can't help
thinking that Pakistan may be better off under him -- if only he will use his
power to build credible democratic institutions, starting with the parliamentary
elections in October. One hopeful sign is that he is instituting local councils
whose members must be one-third women -- a remarkable step in a country where
women often are doormats.

If we are to wink at General Musharraf's charade, we must at least press him to
promote not just the army but also an independent judiciary, press, Parliament
and other pillars of a free society.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); COUPS (89%); TORTURE (89%); CHILDREN
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); REFERENDUMS (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%);
POLITICS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); EXECUTIVES (71%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (69%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (64%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (64%); LITERACY RATES (60%)
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  COUPS D'ETAT
AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  ELECTIONS;  LEGISLATURES
AND PARLIAMENTS;  FREEDOM OF THE PRESS;  REFERENDUMS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS (55%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)
KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

CITY: AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); ASIA (92%); SOUTHERN ASIA (90%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); CAMBODIA (79%)

REGION: PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             626 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Arrests Leader Of Militants In Islam Group

BYLINE:  By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 6


The Indonesian government has arrested a prominent Islamic militant, the first
such move here since the United States declared its war on terror.

Jaffar Umar Thalib, the leader of a paramilitary group called Laskar Jihad, was
arrested over the weekend on charges of inciting Muslims to attack Christians
near Ambon, the capital of the Maluku Islands.

The Bush administration has repeatedly urged President Megawati Sukarnoputri to
take bolder steps against Islamic extremists here in the world's most populous
Islamic country. Ms. Megawati had refrained from doing so, apparently out of
fear of upsetting Islamic groups.

Defense Minister Matori Abdul Djalil is scheduled to visit Washington next week.
Bush administration officials are weighing how to renew ties with the Indonesian
military in the face of Congressional restrictions, which were imposed after
human rights abuses by the army in East Timor as that territory moved to become
independent of Indonesia three years ago.

Aside from wanting to please Washington, Western diplomats said, the Indonesian
government was probably motivated by embarrassment over the ability of Laskar
Jihad to shatter a peace accord the government had helped arrange between
Christians and Muslims in the Malukus, an important province east of the
capital, Jakarta.

Mr. Jaffar was arrested a year ago on charges of inciting hatred but was freed
three weeks later, after a court ruled that his detention was unlawful. The
government has shown a pattern in recent corruption cases of arresting suspects
and then releasing them.

Earlier this year, the police questioned another prominent Islamic radical,
Akbar Bashir, and then freed him after a day.

Some Western diplomats expressed concern today that the government might release
Mr. Jaffar again.

There has been considerable speculation since Sept. 11 that Mr. Jaffar might
have connections to Al Qaeda, Osama bin Laden's organization, though there is
little hard evidence. Western intelligence agencies have disagreed on how close
Mr. Jaffar has been to the group.

But they do agree that he has accumulated arms, amassed a following of somewhere
between 5,000 to 10,000 supporters and operated with the blessing of powerful
elements in the Indonesian military.

The major concern of the United States, as well as countries in Southeast Asia,
is that Laskar Jihad, in conjunction with other militant groups, has the
potential to turn Indonesia from a moderate Muslim nation to an extremist one.

Mr. Jaffar, who is of Yemeni descent and fought in Afghanistan with the
mujahedeen against the Soviets, has been instrumental in stirring the fighting
between Christians and Muslims on the Malukus.

He publicly initiated his group in 1999 by sending his followers to the Malukus,
with the backing of several mainstream politicians, to battle a separatist
Christian group. Last year, he was photographed hugging Vice President Hamzah
Haz, the leader of an Islamic party, at an official reception.

Mr. Jaffar implored Muslims during a speech in late April at Al Fatah mosque in
the capital to "prepare our bombs, and ready our guns," according to a part of a
transcript published in the press here.

Two days later, on April 28, a dozen masked men with guns, grenades and daggers
attacked the village of Soya, near Ambon, torching about 30 homes and a church
and killing 14 Christians. Some reports said the attackers were armed with M-16
assault rifle, an American-made weapon used by the Indonesian military.

A senior government minister, Bambang Susilo Yudhoyono, had helped negotiate a
peace accord for the Malukus two months ago. He was reported today to be heading
back there to try to patch up the accord, which calls for the departure of
outside groups like Laskar Jihad.

The governor of the Malukus, Sale Lutconsina, was reported to have said over the
weekend that the Indonesian military had sabotaged his efforts to stop the
conflict.

Defense Minister Matori went out of his way today to stress that senior levels
of the government backed Mr. Jaffar's arrest. The cabinet discussed the matter
beforehand, he said.

Islamic groups were quick to denounce the arrest. The leader of the Justice
Party, Nur Wahid, said the government had no proof that Mr. Jaffar was "guilty
under the law" and said the arrest was motivated by a desire to please
Washington.

Others said the arrest was long overdue, and asserted that Mr. Jaffar had
received protection from the military for too long.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); RELIGION (93%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); ARMIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CORRUPTION
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  ISLAM;  TERRORISM;
INDONESIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: LASKAR JIHAD (ORGN)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); MEGAWATI SUKARNOPUTRI
(PRES); THALIB, JAFFAR UMAR

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); INDONESIA (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             627 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

240 Pounds, Persistent And Jazzercise's Equal

BYLINE:  By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 7


As a plus-size fitness instructor, Jennifer Portnick's motto has been, "Don't
change your body, change the rules." On Monday, she did.

In the first case ever resolved under San Francisco's two-year-old "fat and
short" law, Ms. Portnick, a 240-pound, 5-foot-8 aerobics teacher, reached a
settlement with Jazzercise Inc. on her complaint that she had been rejected by
the company because of her size. Granting victory to the full-figured of
America, Jazzercise said it would no longer require instructors to look trim.

"Recent studies," the company said in a statement, "document that it may be
possible for people of varying weights to be fit. Jazzercise has determined that
the value of 'fit appearance' as a standard is debatable."

The news was announced at the 10th International No Diet Day along the
waterfront, a celebration of "diversity in shape." The gathering featured Ms.
Portnick's hip-hop aerobics class, poems about hunger and rallying cries like
"Three, five, seven, nine, love your body, it's just fine."

"I'm thrilled," said Ms. Portnick, 38, who has been taking aerobics classes for
15 years and now has her own fitness business (www.feelingoodfitness.com).

"I'm very impressed Jazzercise came to the plate on this issue," she said.

Ms. Portnick filed her complaint with the city's Human Rights Commission last
September, invoking a municipal ordinance, adopted in May 2000, that bars
discrimination on the basis of weight and height. In rejecting her as a
Jazzercise franchisee because of her hefty appearance, the company's director of
franchise programs had told her in a letter: "Jazzercise sells fitness.
Consequently, a Jazzercise applicant must have a high muscle-to-fat ratio and
look leaner than the public."

To this applicant, that made no sense. "My skills were never questioned," said
Ms. Portnick, who had been doing Jazzercise for two years but has now dropped
her plans for a Jazzercise franchise. "There's the whole belly roll thing going
on, but that's just how I'm built."

San Francisco is one of four jurisdictions in the country that outlaw
weight-based discrimination. (The others are Michigan, the District of Columbia
and Santa Cruz, Calif.) Her lawyer, Sondra Solovay, who is the author of
"Tipping the Scale of Justice: Fighting Weight-Based Discrimination," said Ms.
Portnick was geographically lucky.

"On one side of a bridge you can be protected from weight-based discrimination,"
Ms. Solovay said of the Bay Bridge, between San Francisco and Oakland, "and on
the other side you're vulnerable."

"Jazzercise," she added, "is taking a leadership role in understanding people
come in all shapes and sizes."

Pat Lyons, a registered nurse in Berkeley who is co-author of "Great Shape: The
First Fitness Guide for Larger Women," said the settlement was terrific news.
"Fitness is about the pleasure of activity, she said. "The benefits go far
beyond weight loss."

Ms. Portnick, who lives with her husband, Jim, a Tower Records manager, takes
aerobics classes six times a week and teaches fitness at a local church. She is
about to begin teaching at the Y.M.C.A. of the East Bay, in Oakland, where next
Monday evening she will don her bike shorts and periwinkle bra top and do an
opening stretch to Stevie Wonder. Her philosophy is, "Fit and fat -- what a
concept!"

Randy Bolsinger, vice president for operations and programs, said California's
newest fitness celebrity would be a big boost to the Y.

"She's cardiovascularly fit and has a great personality," Mr. Bolsinger said.
"We're going after the sedentary population. This is a great opportunity."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: When Jazzercise Inc. told Jennifer Portnick that she was too
plump to get a franchise from the company, she filed a complaint. (Patrick
Tehan/San Jose Mercury News, via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXERCISE & FITNESS (92%); PHYSICAL FITNESS (90%); COACHES & TRAINERS
(90%); SPORTS INSTRUCTION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); FRANCHISING (86%);
ORDINANCES (78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); LITIGATION (76%);
FRANCHISORS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); FRANCHISEES (68%); WRITERS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (64%) EXERCISE;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  DISCRIMINATION;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  FRANCHISES;  WEIGHT

COMPANY: JAZZERCISE INC (72%)

ORGANIZATION: JAZZERCISE INC

INDUSTRY: NAICS713940 FITNESS & RECREATIONAL SPORTS CENTERS (72%); SIC7991
PHYSICAL FITNESS FACILITIES (72%); SIC5699 MISC. APPAREL & ACCESSORY STORES
(72%)  SIC7991 PHYSICAL FITNESS FACILITIES; SIC5699 MISC. APPAREL & ACCESSORY
STORES;

PERSON: PORNICK, JENNIFER; BROWN, PATRICIA LEIGH

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%);
OAKLAND, CA, USA (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: SAN FRANCISCO (CALIF)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             634 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 11, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1104 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

Israeli Debate Over Gaza; Siege Ends in Bethlehem
Israel appeared to be moving toward a limited military operation in the Gaza
Strip, as the cabinet debated a course of action and Israeli troops left
Bethlehem after ending a six-week siege of the Church of the Nativity, where
Palestinian gunmen had holed up among civilians and clergy members. Some Israeli
newspapers reported that the Gaza operation might be canceled because of "strong
American pressure." American officials said they had only counseled caution.
A1

Progress at Forum on Children
Delegates to the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on children
tentatively agreed on a declaration of goals after nearly 30 hours of bitter
negotiations.   A6


Opposition to New Global Court
The House Appropriations Committee, with strong administration support,
authorized the president to use force to rescue any American held by the new
International Criminal Court and to bar arms aid to nations that ratified the
court treaty. A vote by the full House is expected next week.   A3

Paper Challenges U.N. Court
Lawyers for The Washington Post challenged the United Nations war crimes
tribunal's issuance of a subpoena to a former reporter for the newspaper. The
Post argued that journalists who work in conflict zones should not be required
to testify about war crimes unless it was absolutely vital because it could
hamper their work and endanger their lives.   A7

A Rights Petition in Cuba
Human rights activists, acting two days before a visit by former President Jimmy
Carter, delivered an extraordinary challenge to the Communist government of
President Fidel Castro in the form of petitions signed by more than 11,000
people seeking greater freedom.   A4

U.S. Aid Missing in Colombia
The general in charge of antinarcotics efforts for the National Police was
removed after $2 million in United States funds was discovered missing from a
police account.   A5

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A10-15

Judge Delays Release Of Cardinal's Testimony
A judge granted a request by lawyers for the Boston Archdiocese and ruled that
transcripts of the questioning of Cardinal Bernard F. Law could no longer be
released until the cardinal had a chance to review and amend them. The cardinal
completed the second of three days of testimony in a deposition in a civil suit
regarding his handling of complaints of sexual abuse against a pedophile priest.
A1

DNA Rules Out Florida Girl
The police in Miami and Kansas City, Mo., said DNA tests had confirmed that the
remains of a little girl found in Missouri were not those of Rilya Wilson, a
5-year-old Florida girl who vanished more than a year ago.   A10

Ex-F.B.I. Agent Jailed for Life
Robert Hanssen was sentenced to life in prison for spying for Moscow during and
after the cold war.   A1

Casualty of Crusader Battle
The Army said it had accepted the resignation of a midlevel official, Kenneth A.
Steadman, who aggressively lobbied Congress to support the $11 billion Crusader
artillery system that Defense Secretary H. Rumsfeld was moving to cancel.   A12

Errors Delayed Pilot Maps
Thousands of new satellite photographs of Afghanistan lay idly in storage at the
height of the American military campaign last fall, as technological and
bureaucratic failings kept them out of the hands of Air Force pilots who needed
them.   A12

Student Visa Tracking System
Federal officials moved to hasten the start-up of a vast computerized system for
tracking foreign students, citing concerns about fraudulent student visas and
disarray in the immigration service since Sept. 11.   A12

Religion Journal   A15

OBITUARIES   A18

David Riesman
The sociologist whose best-selling 1950 scholarly book "The Lonely Crowd" tapped
a deep vein of self-criticism in Americans was 92.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

U.S. Dispatching Monitors For Newark Mayoral Voting
The United States attorney, citing concerns about violence and voter
irregularities, said he would dispatch federal observers to monitor polling
places during Tuesday's hotly contested mayoral election.   B1

A Shift on Work Program
New York City's employment commissioner, Betty B. Wu, told the City Council that
her department would take over a federal work force program from the city's
welfare agency, underscoring a shift from the Giuliani administration's workfare
policy.   B1

EDUCATION

Honored Guests From 9/11
A new category of commencement speaker is emerging: people who symbolize the
bravery on Sept. 11.   B1

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-18

A Physicist's Novel World View
Stephen Wolfram says in a book that natural phenomena can be explored as if they
were computer programs.   B7

A Tenor Waiting in the Wings
The Metropolitan Opera flew Salvatore Licitra from Italy to New York on a
Concorde as a possible replacement for Luciano Pavarotti, who remained undecided
about whether to take the stage for what might be his last Met performance
tonight.   B7

SCIENCE/HEALTH

AIDS Drug Tampering
The pharmaceutical giant Glaxo-SmithKline said people taking its AIDS drug
Combivir should verify that they had the right pills because four patients had
bought bottles that actually contained a different AIDS drug, Ziagen.   A14

Warning on Plasma Treatment
The F.D.A. warned doctors against giving a type of blood plasma called PlasSD or
SD plasma to people who have severe liver disease or who are receiving liver
transplants.   A10

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Turmoil in Energy Business
Reliant Resources, a big independent power producer and trader, canceled a $500
million bond sale amid questions about whether all of its trades were real. The
S.E.C. is investigating two similar sets of trades between two other energy
trading companies, CMS Energy and Dynegy.   C1

US Airways Wants U.S. Aid
US Airways said that it would seek a loan guarantee from the government, and
that it might seek bankruptcy protection if it did not get one.   C1

Andersen Recruiting Battle
The struggle over which firms will have their pick of Arthur Andersen
accountants intensified with the mass e-mailing of a BDO Seidman memo that
sought to woo Andersen partners and criticized a rival offer from Grant
Thornton.   C1

Stanley Sets New Vote on Move
Stanley Works threw out a contested shareholders vote that would have allowed it
to become a Bermuda company and said it would hold another vote. Connecticut's
attorney general had sued to block the move, saying deception was used to win
shareholder approval.   C1

Business Digest   C1

SPORTS   D1-8

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: The deepening anthrax mystery; time to draw the line; Andres
Martinez on old PC's.

Column: Frank Rich.

Bridge   B14
TV Listings   B17
Crossword   B16
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); RELIGION
(89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); TESTIMONY (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); PETITIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (79%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (79%); TRANSCRIPTS (78%); SUBPOENAS (78%); ARMIES (78%); COLD WAR (78%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); CIVIL
PROCEDURE (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); JOURNALISM
(76%); WRITERS (76%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (75%); APPROPRIATIONS (75%); JAIL
SENTENCING (74%); DEPOSITIONS (74%); LAWYERS (74%); SENTENCING (74%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (74%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
JUDGES (74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING
(73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (69%); BIOETHICS (69%); SEX OFFENSES (68%); DRUG POLICY
(68%); SEX SCANDALS (60%); DNA TESTING (60%); DNA (60%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM
NYTIMES

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (53%); FIDEL CASTRO (50%)

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (79%); KANSAS CITY, MO, USA (77%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); MISSOURI, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL
(94%); CUBA (90%); COLOMBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             637 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is It Our Right to Own Guns?

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 124 words


To the Editor:

In "More Guns for Everyone!" (column, May 9), Bob Herbert calls attention to the
danger posed by Attorney General John Ashcroft's assertion, in two briefs
submitted to the Supreme Court, of a right of individuals to own firearms.

Since Sept. 11, in the name of security, the attorney general has persuaded
Americans to sacrifice some of our fundamental human rights.

He has argued that security comes first in order to avoid another terrorist
attack.

Why is he unable to do the same when it involves guns?

How many more must die from a bullet before Mr. Ashcroft realizes that strict
gun control -- to keep guns out of the hands of the wrong people -- should be
his top security concern?

DOVE HELENA PEDLOSKY
Boston, May 9, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); FIREARMS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS (90%); GUN CONTROL (90%); LAWYERS (88%); TERRORISM (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (53%) FIREARMS;  GUN CONTROL;  TERRORISM

PERSON: ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); PEDLOSKY, DOVE HELENA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             644 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Fails in U.N. to Exempt Peacekeepers From New Court

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 17


In a harbinger of coming clashes over the new international war crimes tribunal,
the United States failed today in an effort to safeguard United Nations
peacekeepers from prosecution by international tribunals.

The American proposal was part of a Security Council resolution on peacekeeping
forces in East Timor and would have applied to peacekeepers from any nation who
were part of that mission.

But it signaled the United States' broader concerns about the ability of the new
International Criminal Court to bring action against American soldiers serving
abroad.

In the end, it became clear that the American proposal had not mustered support,
and the resolution on the United Nations peacekeepers in East Timor passed, 15
to 0, without the American amendment. The resolution reduces the peacekeeping
force in East Timor, the former Indonesian territory that is due to become
independent at midnight Sunday, and seeks to phase it out in two more years.

The United States joined the majority for the sake of consensus, an American
official said later.

The defeat of the American proposal hardly puts the issue to rest. The fate of
American soldiers under the new global court is a thorny subject for Washington
and has been cited by American officials as among the main reasons for their
opposition to the establishment of the International Criminal Court, or I.C.C.

While the United States has only about 80 civilian police officers in East
Timor, many more American soldiers and civilians have served on United Nations
peacekeeping missions in conflict zones from Bosnia to Somalia.

"It's a very real concern that the United States and our allies will be targets
of politically motivated prosecutions," an American official said today. "We
believe the I.C.C. can hamper our participation in these operations."

Between now and July 1, when the court is to begin operations, the question of
the court's authority over peacekeepers is certain to be raised again. The
United States could lobby the Council for a broader measure that shelters all
United Nations peacekeepers from prosecution. It could also insist on such
assurances every time it agreed to send peacekeepers for an individual mission.

American efforts to shield peacekeepers in East Timor from coming under the
purview of the new court were first reported this week by The Washington Post.

The Clinton administration signed the treaty that established the international
court. But last week, the Bush administration renounced that commitment and made
it clear that it would not cooperate with prosecutors from the tribunal. Critics
said that declaration was evidence of the administration's unilateralist stance
on international issues.

Of the 15 nations on the Security Council, all but China and Singapore have
signed the court treaty. As the world's first permanent war crimes tribunal, the
court is intended to try the worst human rights offenses.

Its backers, including European allies of the United States, say they believe
that it includes sufficient safeguards to make sure the court is not manipulated
for political ends. "Accusations may be made, but there are all sorts of
protections," a European official said.

To exempt peacekeepers, they say, would be to undermine the court's authority.
So far, 66 nations have ratified the court treaty.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (95%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (93%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LOBBYING
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); IMMUNITY (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (51%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (51%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (51%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (51%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (51%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (51%)

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (79%); SINGAPORE
(79%); SOMALIA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: EAST TIMOR

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             646 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rightist's Hard Line Appeals to War-Weary Colombians

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 18


He has already survived one assassination attempt this year, so Alvaro Uribe's
run for the presidency has been especially cautious, even in this war-ravaged
country. Public appearances have been minimal, mainly teleconferences with
select audiences or low-key meetings with small groups of businessmen, all
confined to this capital city.

It is not an ideal way to campaign.

But Mr. Uribe, an ultraconservative candidate whose promise to crack down on
leftist rebels has resonated with a conflict-weary populace, still holds a
commanding lead in the polls with a week to go before an election that is being
closely watched in Washington. Indeed, Mr. Uribe, a lawyer and expert horseman
from northern Colombia, is expected to receive nearly 50 percent of the vote in
next Sunday's election, 20 percentage points more than his nearest rival,
Horacio Serpa, and nearly the majority needed to avoid a June 16 runoff.

But while Mr. Uribe will almost surely become the next president, what is less
certain is what effects his policies would have on this country and what they
would mean for the United States, which has provided nearly $2 billion in mostly
military aid since 2000.

What Mr. Uribe, 49, a former governor and senator from Antioquia province
province who has completed courses at Harvard and Oxford, prescribes is a break
from the policies of the current president, Andres Pastrana. Mr. Pastrana, whose
peace talks with rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC,
collapsed earlier this year, is barred under the Constitution from seeking
re-election.

Pledging to become "the first soldier of Colombia" in a campaign against leftist
rebels, Mr. Uribe promises to double the size of the army's combat force and the
police and to organize one million villagers to serve as informants, some of
them armed. He also has cast himself as a corruption fighter who will free up
government funds for his programs.

"We are going to work hard to strengthen the capacity of the state to protect
the citizenry and control the violent ones," Mr. Uribe said recently, as his
heavily protected motorcade sped from a campaign event. "This is a country that
has suffered very much from violence and kidnapping and we are going to put a
stop to this problem."

The United States, he said, will play a central role because Colombia is
counting on military hardware and training so Colombian troops can better fight
the rebels. Currently American aid can only go toward operations to counter
drugs, but the Bush administration is pressing Congress to allow
American-trained soldiers and equipment to be used directly against the
guerrillas.

Mr. Uribe, some American lawmakers believe, is the appropriate caretaker for
that policy. "We feel that he would be an action-type president," said
Representative Cass Ballenger, a North Carolina Republican on the International
Relations Committee. "I think President Pastrana was a heck of a nice guy. He
dedicated himself to making peace, but they took advantage of him. I don't think
Uribe is that kind of guy."

Indeed, Mr. Uribe -- whose campaign slogan is "firm hand, big heart" -- is seen
as a leader tailor-made for this chaotic country. The rebels, clearly feeling
threatened, carried out a street bombing on April 14 that damaged Mr. Uribe's
passing motorcade, killing four bystanders but leaving him unscathed.

Mr. Uribe's lead in the polls is a testament to Colombian fatigue with a
grinding 38-year conflict.

Voters seem to be overlooking the fact that Mr. Uribe is an independent
candidate representing the far right in a centrist country where only Liberal or
Conservative party politicians have won national office. Mr. Uribe and his
Colombia First movement have the support of 55 of 102 senators and 97 of 165
representatives, according to a survey of Colombia's Congress by the University
of Los Andes.

Mr. Uribe has mined Colombian frustration for months, criticizing Mr. Pastrana's
peace efforts and harshly denouncing the FARC rebels for practically every
atrocity, like the May 2 rebel rocket attack on a church that killed 117
civilians. His own personal loss in the conflict -- his father was slain by the
guerrillas in 1983 -- has also struck a chord.

"This is the first time we Colombians feel there is someone who is going to give
us back what is ours," said Luis Guillermo Henao, 40, a civil engineer who plans
to vote for Mr. Uribe. "Uribe is the response to the crisis."

But Mr. Uribe's ability to deliver on his promises will not be easy.

His scheme to add 50,000 combat troops to the 55,000 the army already has, along
with doubling the size of the National Police to 200,000 officers, could cost up
to $1 billion a year -- a heavy increase in a country with an annual budget of
$27 billion.

"Aside from that business over reducing corruption, the president nearly-elect
has not said from where the money will come," Hernando Gomez Buendia, a leading
columnist at Semana magazine, wrote last week.

Mr. Uribe has also worried human rights groups, who believe that his policies
may come at a steep price for Colombia's fragile democracy.

During his governorship of Antioquia from 1995 to 1997, illegal right-wing
paramilitary groups thrived, working with some military units in their brutal
campaign against guerrillas. Two generals in the region -- Rito Alejo del Rio
and Fernando Millan -- were fired by President Pastrana for rights abuses, and
Mr. del Rio's visa to travel to the United States was canceled.

Yet, Mr. Uribe continues to support Mr. del Rio, having used him as an adviser
on military matters even though the former general is under investigation in
Colombia. In a meeting late last year with Jose Miguel Vivanco, director of
operations in Latin America for Human Rights Watch, Mr. Uribe also expressed
disagreement with Mr. Pastrana's decision to force out other high-ranking
officers who were believed to have ties to the paramilitaries.

While Mr. Uribe has incorporated into his speeches the need to battle
paramilitaries, Mr. Vivanco said he has doubts about his sincerity. "The
question is," Mr. Vivanco said, "can he convince Colombia and the international
community that he is committed to fighting right-wing paramilitary groups?"

Mr. Uribe has also faced questions about his past associations. His father was
friendly with Fabio Ochoa, the now-deceased father of three brothers who were
among Colombia's most fearsome drug traffickers a decade ago. His closest aide
during his governorship of Antioquia was Pedro Juan Moreno, who was investigated
by United States officials because his company had imported into Colombia a
suspicious shipment of chemicals that could have been used for cocaine
production.

The candidate said there was nothing inappropriate about these relationships,
noting that Mr. Moreno was never charged and that his father's friendship with
the elder Ochoa was based on mutual love of horses. "For 30 years," he said, "I
have simply been an honest politician."

Mr. Uribe -- to most voters viewed as transparent, bookish and earnest about
solving Colombia's myriad problems -- hammers home the need to end corruption
and reform government, saying that the money saved would allow for the
construction of schools and improvement of government services.

"The candidacy of Alvaro Uribe has generated enormous expectations," said
Elisabeth Ungar, a political scholar at Los Andes. "I just think it is going to
be very difficult to reach those heights, not just because of resources --
everyone knows the country's difficult situation -- but also because of the
political situation."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alvaro Uribe's campaign for president offers Colombia the slogan
"firm hand, big heart" and a promise to crack down on leftist guerrillas.
(Associated Press) Chart/Map: "Continuing Conflict"About 150,000 people have
been killed in 38 years of fighting in Colombia, 40,000 in the last decade.
CombatantsTwo leftist rebel groups have been fighting since the mid-1960's and
now number about 23,000 fighters combined: Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or FARC, is a peasant-based organization that has fueled its war
against the government with drug money. National Liberation Army is a
Cuban-inspired movement. United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, a right-wing
group battling the rebels, has grown to 10,000 fighters in the last decade. The
army has 55,000 combat-ready troops, and the National Police has 100,000
officers, many based in isolated outposts frequently attacked by the rebels.
U.S. InvolvementCongress has approved nearly $1.4 billion in military and police
aid and $363 million in economic and social programs since 2000. For 2003, the
Bush administration wants $494 million in military and police aid, plus $164
million in economic and social aid. Map of Colombia highlighting Bogota,
Medellin and Antioquia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); CONSERVATISM (76%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (71%); GOVERNORS (71%); MILITARY
TRAINING (71%); PUBLIC FINANCE (65%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (64%); PEACE PROCESS
(52%) ELECTIONS;  ELECTION ISSUES;  PUBLIC OPINION;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  FOREIGN AID;  ARMAMENT,
DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (93%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (59%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (93%) FORERO, JUAN; URIBE, ALVARO; PASTRANA, ANDRES

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%); MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             647 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fair Penalties Or Torture? U.N. at Odds With Saudis

BYLINE:  By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 18


Saudi Arabian diplomats clashed this week with the United Nations Committee
Against Torture over whether flogging and the amputation of limbs are violations
of an international treaty.

The 10-member committee urged the Saudis to end such corporal punishments,
saying they are prohibited under the 1987 Convention Against Torture. This drew
an outburst from the Saudi delegates, who said that the committee had no
jurisdiction over Shariah, the Islamic legal code derived from the Koran.

"This law has existed for 1,400 years," protested Turki al-Madi, a Saudi
diplomat based in Geneva. "And the committee wants to change it. I'm sorry, you
cannot."

Saudi Arabia signed the treaty, which forbids torture and other cruel or
degrading punishments, more than four years ago. Each of the 129 signatory
countries is required to report periodically on the steps it has taken to comply
with the convention's requirements.

Shariah law allows amputations for theft, and floggings for certain sexual
offenses and drinking alcohol. Other stringent provisions of Shariah, like
executing murderers, drug dealers and rapists, do not fall under the torture
committee's mandate.

Other Islamic countries, including Libya and Iran, have come up for review, but
Peter Thomas Burns, the committee's chairman, said Saudi Arabia was the first
country to take the position that Shariah's provisions fall outside the
committee's purview, although he added that future "conflicts in interpretation"
with other Islamic countries could be expected.

"The committee itself had no doubt that flogging in almost any case constitutes
torture," said Mr. Burns, who is also a Canadian law professor. "And amputation
of limbs, in every case, would constitute torture under our definitions."

Saudi Arabia maintained that Shariah law prohibits torture and other cruel and
degrading treatment, but the committee concluded that the gulf kingdom's
"domestic law does not expressly reflect this prohibition" and also maintains
that floggings, amputations and other corporal punishments are not torture.

The committee, ending its session on Friday, recommended that Saudi Arabia
"re-examine its imposition of corporal punishments that are in breach" of the
treaty, and that it ensure that its laws are applied equally regardless of
nationality, sex, religious affiliation or other distinctions. This addressed
complaints of discrimination against foreigners.

The Saudi delegates said their country had introduced a new criminal code and a
new code of criminal procedures, and transferred the authority for its penal
correction system to its Ministry of Justice.

But when Mr. Burns tried to discuss the imposition by Shariah courts of
floggings and amputations, summary use of force by the religious police and
charges of the mistreatment of detainees, Abdulwahab Abdulsalam Attar, the
country's ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva and one of the delegates,
refused to take part.

"Concerning the application of Islamic Shariah, some bodies have tried to
denigrate in an unacceptable way," he said. "It's a question that we refuse to
discuss."

He said Saudi Arabia had signed onto the antitorture convention with the
understanding that none of its provisions would be used to contravene Shariah
law.

Said one Saudi delegate: "You can't say cutting off a hand is so severe. It
harms only the criminal who harms society. Shariah protects society, not the
criminal."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); TORTURE (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL LAW (89%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (72%); LARCENY & THEFT (72%); DISCRIMINATION (72%); QURAN & ISLAMIC
TEXTS (71%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); JURISDICTION (71%); PRISONS (63%);
CHURCH & STATE (60%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (52%) FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
TORTURE;  CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE;
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH; BURNS, PETER THOMAS

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (98%); SWITZERLAND (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);
CANADA (78%)

REGION: SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             649 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Attitudes Altered Little By Sept. 11, Pollsters Say

BYLINE:  By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: ST. PETERSBURG BEACH, Fla. May 19


Authorities on public opinion meeting here this weekend expressed doubt that the
attacks of Sept. 11 had led to fundamental changes in American attitudes.

Even the nation's willingness to restrict civil liberties after Sept. 11
followed historical patterns, except for resistance to singling out American
Muslims, which contrasted with attitudes toward Japanese-Americans in World War
II and German-Americans in World War I.

As academic and news media pollsters discussed shifts in public opinion since
Sept. 11 at the 57th annual meeting of the American Association for Public
Opinion Research, they repeatedly reacted skeptically to the aphorism that
"everything has changed."

Tom W. Smith of the National Opinion Research Center said, "Many things changed
remarkably, but many things never changed." For example, Dr. Smith said, the
crisis did not change attitudes toward capital punishment and gun control.

G. Donald Ferree Jr. of the University of Wisconsin said that while people spoke
of religion being increasingly important to the nation after Sept. 11, their
patterns of church attendance and reports of the relevance of religion to their
own lives had not changed.

Kimberly Downing of the University of Cincinnati reported that after Sept. 11,
people polled in the Cincinnati area were able to define what they meant by
freedom more specifically. But, Dr. Downing said, only greater definition was
overlaying "a relatively stable set of attitudes."

Robert J. Blendon of the Harvard School of Public Health said at one session
that research over more than 50 years showed that "during periods of crisis,
when security against serious foreign or domestic threats becomes more
important, the public will support substantial limits on civil liberties."

"This includes limits on freedom of speech, the press, right to a fair trial and
individual privacy, even as they affect average citizens," Dr. Blendon said. But
support for such curbs is "cyclical" and declines after the threat recedes, he
added.

In that context, he said, public support for the use of military tribunals or
for eavesdropping on lawyers' conversations with clients was consistent with
curbs on liberties the public supported in World War II and at the height of the
cold war.

But the country had changed dramatically since then in terms of its attitude
toward minorities, he said, and the support for putting Japanese-Americans in
concentration camps found no parallel in attitudes toward Muslims today.

Chase Harrison of the University of Connecticut reported that polls showed the
public was scarcely readier to restrict the freedom of Muslims than of other
Americans. This was demonstrated, Mr. Harrison said, in a survey that identified
the targets of possible restrictions, like being jailed without a warrant, as
"Muslim or Arab" to half of those polled, but without any specific
identification to the other half. The percentages supporting the restrictions
were about the same in both groups, he said.

One group that has not supported new government powers is African-Americans,
said Sarah L. Dutton and Jennifer De Pinto of CBS News.

Combining data from CBS News and New York Times/CBS News Polls, the two
concluded that "blacks were much more alarmed about the possible loss" of civil
liberties than whites were, though none of the Bush administration proposals in
the survey focused on them.

George Bishop of the University of Cincinnati argued that several reported
changes in public opinion, including trust in government and approval of
President Bush's handling of his job, were not changes in attitudes.

The higher numbers expressing trust in government, Dr. Bishop said, reflected
only changes in the context in which those polled heard the question. For Mr.
Bush and "government in Washington," he contended, people were concentrated on
how he and the government were dealing with terrorism. Contrary to the
interpretations of some analysts, he said, there was no sudden affection for big
government.

Dr. Bishop's view of trust in government was supported by Gary Langer of ABC
News, who said his polls showed that when people were asked if they trusted the
government to deal with terrorism, their answers reflected the same levels of
trust as when they were asked an unspecific question about trusting government.

Dr. Bishop said pollsters had an obligation not to make too much of answers to
"the vague questions that have become our stock in trade" like "Do you approve
or disapprove of the way George Bush is handling his job as president?" He said
pollsters had an obligation to follow up and ask people "what they mean when
they say they approve or disapprove."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); RELIGION (91%); WORLD WAR I (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (89%); ASIAN AMERICANS (89%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (89%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); COLD WAR (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (77%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (68%); GUN
CONTROL (68%); MILITARY COURTS (63%) TERRORISM;  PUBLIC OPINION;  WORLD WAR I
(1914-18);  WORLD WAR II (1939-45);  MUSLIM-AMERICANS;  GERMAN-AMERICANS;
JAPANESE-AMERICANS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  PENTAGON BUILDING;
WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  DISCRIMINATION;  PUBLIC OPINION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN (56%); UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI (55%)
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR PUBLIC OPINION RESEARCH

PERSON: CLYMER, ADAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); OHIO, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);
FLORIDA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (66%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: ; WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             651 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru Rethinks Order For Arrest of Officers In '97 Rescue Raid

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 225 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 20


Peru's justice minister said today that an arrest order for 11 army officers
once hailed as heroes for helping end a 1997 hostage siege could be softened to
a summons in an investigation into whether they executed rebel hostage-takers
after the rebels surrendered.

The justice minister, Fernando Olivera, told reporters that he hoped the
prosecutor would ask a judge to change the arrest order to a summons for the
officers, adding that the Defense Ministry could vouch for their cooperation.

A 12th officer has already been arrested.

"The Defense Ministry has guaranteed that the commandos would appear,
cooperating in the search for truth," Mr. Olivera said.

The commandos were praised as heroes after they helped free 72 hostages held for
126 days by leftist rebels in the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima.

The arrest order issued last week was met with outrage in this Andean nation.

All 14 hostage-takers, members of the Marxist Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
Movement, were killed in the rescue, as were two officers and one hostage, when
commandos burst into the residence through secretly drilled underground tunnels.

The rescue, which was hailed at the time as a daring success by the government
of President Alberto Fujimori, later came under criticism amid talk that some
rebels were shot execution-style after they gave themselves up.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOSTAGE TAKING (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); LIBERALISM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  HOSTAGES;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

PERSON: OLIVERA, FERNANDO (MIN)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (89%)

COUNTRY: PERU (95%)

REGION: PERU

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             654 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Approves Aid Resumption for Yugoslavia

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 364 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The United States announced today that it was ending a freeze on economic aid to
Yugoslavia. The aid was suspended on March 31 because of Belgrade's failure to
cooperate fully with the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said that in light of increased cooperation
between Belgrade and the court, he had approved a resumption of aid. The
country, now made up of Serbia and Montenegro, has been devastated by years of
war.

At stake is $40 million in aid this year. More important is the resumption of
support for Belgrade in international lending groups, where Washington's vote is
often crucial. Only last week, for example, the United States voted in the
International Monetary Fund against a loan to Yugoslavia; the no vote was
required because of the aid freeze.

The secretary spoke to reporters after a visit from Zoran Djindjic, prime
minister of Serbia, and the Yugoslav foreign minister, Goran Svilanovic. "We
take this as an acknowledgment for what we did in the last year and a half," Mr.
Svilanovic said. "This will continue."

The two men are reformers who took office after the ouster of President Slobodan
Milosevic in 2000. He is now on trial in The Hague.

Secretary Powell said he had acted "on the basis of new laws that have been
passed in Belgrade, voluntary surrenders that have taken place and indictments
that have been issued to those who remain still outside the jurisdiction of the
tribunal."

Last month the Belgrade government told suspects wanted for atrocities in the
Balkan wars to surrender or face arrest. Six heeded the call; about 18 are at
large.

Two of those still wanted are the wartime Bosnian Serb leader, Dr. Radovan
Karadzic, and his military commander, Gen. Ratko Mladic. Their whereabouts are
not publicly known.

But Mr. Djindjic appeared optimistic that there would be further action soon.
"Now the police should do its job and find these people and transfer them to The
Hague, and I'm sure it will happen very soon," he said.

Human Rights Watch criticized the resumption of aid, saying Belgrade was still
hindering the tribunal in The Hague by failing to provide archive materials to
the prosecution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); INDICTMENTS (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); JURISDICTION (77%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(72%); APPROVALS (71%); FOREIGN LENDING (70%); LEGISLATION (69%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  FOREIGN AID;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (56%)

PERSON: POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%); MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             657 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Fronts;
Seeing Strength, Too, In an Open Society

BYLINE:  By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1074 words


THE F.B.I. Director, Robert S. Mueller III, had a stark assessment last week of
the likelihood of Palestinian-style suicide bombings on American soil:
"Inevitable."

His prediction, along with Vice President Dick Cheney's the day before that
another attack by Al Qaeda in America was "almost certain," cast a jittery pall
over the nation.

But at the same time they set off a fierce debate among terrorism experts over
just how likely it is that American towns and cities need fear resembling
Jerusalem.

Conventional wisdom has it that America's openness is its greatest weakness in
preventing and tracking terrorist attacks. But there is an alternative view --
one that sees the same openness as a source of some protection alongside the
vulnerability.

That view appears in an intelligence analysis that has recently provoked
spirited discussion within the Bush White House. The suicide bombers who have
killed in Israel are not likely to have the resources or organizational support
to bring them to America for a sustained terrorist campaign, and they have no
domestic counterparts, the analysis asserts.

On the other hand, the disadvantages of America's free-trading, free-wheeling
society are certainly now well understood. Stephen E. Flynn, a terrorism expert
in the Coast Guard, warns that less than 3 percent of the 59,000 cargo shipments
to the United States each day are inspected. In addition, some 1.3 million
people and 340,000 vehicles a day enter the country.

And Americans are not Israelis -- instinctively accustomed to scouring buses,
cafes and concert halls for abandoned packages and briefcases, trained to scan a
stranger's face to identify a potential foe.

This openness was an important factor in the Bush administration's decision to
go on a global offensive against Al Qaeda. "For a nation as porous as America,"
said an administration terrorism expert who fears that protecting the homeland
may ultimately be a futile task, "the best defense can only be a sustained,
intensive offense."

Yet some experts, while not minimizing the danger posed by Al Qaeda and other
foreign terrorists, say American vulnerability is not the whole story. While it
is certainly open to well-planned surprise attacks, they doubt the United States
will fall prey to the type of sustained suicide bombing campaign that has
gripped Israel -- thanks in large part, paradoxically, to Americans' welcoming
ways.

America's political freedom and tolerance, they argue, create political dialogue
and, hence, an alternative to violence. The atmosphere also inspires national
loyalty from the very communities from which domestic terrorists might emerge,
and in which foreign terrorists might seek cover and support.

"With 9/11, America suffered terrorism on a grand scale," said Ariel Merari, a
terrorism expert at Tel Aviv University. "But a sustained campaign, even on a
smaller scale, requires well-entrenched infrastructure."

Hamas and other militant Islamic groups that have taken root in the United
States may hate American policy toward the Middle East, he says, "but they love
living in America. Most far prefer living in Detroit, Chicago and New York than
in Amman, Riyadh or Ramallah." Like most immigrants, they like the relative
safety, freedom and prosperity of American life.

Second, he added, it has been far easier to organize, recruit and raise money
for their causes in the United States than to wage warfare here. "They don't
want to spit into the well from which they drink," he said.

Another important element in suicide attacks, he noted, is public support --
which stood at about 70 percent among Palestinians in the West Bank before
Israel's offensive there this spring. "I can't see the Arab-American community
providing this level of support for such attacks," Mr. Merari said.

Finally, he added, a sustained suicide bombing campaign requires organizational
support. A group must select, indoctrinate, equip and encourage the young
suicide striker. In the more than 100 suicide strikes in which more than 200
Israelis have died, he said, "There has not been a single case in which a lone
individual has gone out on their own to kill Israelis and themselves."

Jessica E. Stern, a terrorism expert at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School, agrees
that the Sept. 11 attacks and intelligence reports since then suggest that the
threat stems "less from our neighbors and more from outsiders."

"We don't have an internal population as angry as the Palestinians," she said.
Nor, she added, are Americans occupying territory. "In the end, our openness is
our strength."

But she, too, worries that foreign militants will take advantage of the open, or
atomized, nature of American society. Bombing manuals unearthed in Afghanistan's
militant guest houses "provide guidance about how to live and disappear in
'enemy' society," she said, "how to find apartments where people don't know one
another, or in suburbs where neighbors don't talk."

MATTHEW A. LEVITT, a former F.B.I. official and now a terrorism expert at the
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, fears that Al Qaeda and other
militant Islamic groups may shift away from spectacular operations to smaller
scale suicide bombings. He notes a disturbing new hostility in the language of
Hezbollah, Hamas and other radical Palestinian groups, all of which have
previously avoided targeting Americans inside the United States. The Bush
administration's decision to crack down on militant Palestinian fund-raising in
America, he said, may lead militant Palestinian Islamists to conclude that
Americans at home are now fair game.

Even if the groups themselves decide not to target Americans within the United
States, he argued, there is growing danger that angry, frustrated individuals
might act in concert with other like-minded domestic radical groups, or
completely alone.

"As America's war on terror expands," Mr. Levitt said, "there may well be an
ever greater threat of a rogue terrorist cell, or a rogue individual." The
greatest danger, of course, is that such a group or individual will acquire
weapons of mass destruction.

Whatever the differences between their societies, both Israelis and Americans
understand that some degree of vulnerability comes with democracy. Last week, a
delegation from the New York City police traveled to Israel to learn how their
Israeli counterparts spot and interdict suicide bombers -- a sign that Mr.
Mueller's warnings are being taken seriously.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: America's openness and political freedom may help prevent
sustained terrorism. A sign in Dearborn, Mich., in English and Arabic. (Tom
Pidgeon for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
AL-QAEDA (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%);
RELIGION (74%); ARAB AMERICANS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%) TERRORISM;  PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;
ARAB-AMERICANS;  ISLAM;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%); AL-QAEDA (58%)

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (90%); DICK CHENEY (57%) STERN, JESSICA; MILLER, JUDITH;
MERARI, ARIEL

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             658 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Germany May Extradite Islamic Militant to Turkey

BYLINE:  By DESMOND BUTLER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 350 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, May 25


German officials have been negotiating with the Turkish government to extradite
a Turk who is serving a four-year sentence in Germany for operating a terrorist
organization and calling for the murder of a rival, the German interior minister
said today.

The prisoner, Metin Kaplan, the leader of a banned terror group known as the
Caliphate, is wanted in Turkey on charges of involvement in a failed 1998 plot
to fly an airplane filled with explosives into the mausoleum of Kemal Ataturk,
the founder of the Turkish republic, in Ankara.

In a radio interview, the German interior minister, Otto Schily, said that
Germany had been holding "detailed conversations" with the Turkish government on
the extradition. Mr. Schily said that Germany would like to carry out the
extradition on completion of Mr. Kaplan's current sentence on condition that he
not face the death penalty in Turkey and that he be treated according to
appropriate human rights standards.

Mr. Kaplan's organization, which once had 12,000 members in Germany, has
advocated the killing of non-Muslims. According to an annual report recently
published by the German government on national security, Mr. Kaplan's group
seeks world domination of Islam led by the caliph, a position he would assume.

It quotes a Kaplan newsletter from last June as stating: "Democracy is a system
of ignorance. For this reason democracy is not possible in an Islamic country."

Until recently, the Caliphate operated a satellite television station, which
broadcast antigovernment propaganda into Turkey. The group was one of the
religious organizations banned in December under antiterror laws passed in
Germany after Sept. 11.

Though the Caliphate has not been linked explicitly to Al Qaeda, German
authorities have said that the group sent a delegation to meet with Osama bin
Laden in Afghanistan the year before their planned attack on Ataturk's
mausoleum.

Mr. Kaplan was arrested in 1999 after the authorities found videotapes on which
he called for the death of Halil Ibrahim Sofu, the leader of a rival group. Mr.
Sofu was killed in his home in 1997.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); EXTRADITION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); JAIL
SENTENCING (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); ANNUAL REPORTS
(78%); SENTENCING (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(73%); ARRESTS (71%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (64%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (64%);
MURDER (58%) EXTRADITION;  ISLAM;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: CALIPHATE (ISLAMIC ORGN)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%) ATATURK, KEMAL (1881-1938); KAPLAN, METIN

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); ANKARA, TURKEY (58%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (98%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%); GERMANY (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: TURKEY;  GERMANY

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             662 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Rightists Back Talks With Marxists

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 341 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 30


Alvaro Uribe Velez's offer to hold peace talks with Marxist rebels as long as
the Marxists first agree to a cease-fire.

Mr. Uribe, a former regional governor, won election by a landslide on Sunday on
promises to crack down on the leftist rebels, who have been fighting a civil war
for 38 years.

He told guerrilla commanders in a victory speech that peace was possible only if
they agreed to a cease-fire and stopped "terrorism."

He also said he would seek United Nations mediation to end the war, which claims
3,500 lives a year.

"We are optimistic that another chance for peace is opening up with the
announcement made by the new president that he is willing to negotiate with
guerrillas if they hold a cease-fire and end terrorism," Carlos Castano,
political commander of the Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, or A.U.C., wrote on
the rightist group's Web site.

"Under such a commitment, AUC would understand the convenience of having the
government start a serious negotiation with the FARC," Mr. Castano said,
referring to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, Colombia's oldest and
most powerful rebel army.

Until then, he said, his men will continue fighting FARC.

The growing 10,000-strong paramilitaries, financed in part by wealthy cattle
ranchers, were staunch critics of the peace talks held with FARC by the
departing president, Andres Pastrana, which took place with no cease-fire in
place.

Those talks failed.

Frustration among war-weary Colombians propelled Mr. Uribe to the presidency. He
takes office Aug. 7.

Mr. Uribe has also held out the possibility of including A.U.C. in peace talks
under the same conditions. Suggestions of talks with A.U.C. have long been a
political taboo here. The group is blamed for some of the worst human rights
violations in the drug-fueled war, and the Marxists have said they will never
sit at the table with them.

FARC has not commented on Mr. Uribe's election.

Both the Marxists and the rightists finance their armies with cocaine money and
have been branded terrorists by the United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); NARCOTERRORISM
(89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); GOVERNORS (77%); ARMED
FORCES (76%); TERRORISM (75%); COCAINE (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (82%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (90%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             667 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Le Pen Accused of Torturing Prisoners During Algerian War

BYLINE:  By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 3


Less than a week before a French parliamentary election that is regarded as a
critical gauge of right-wing sentiment, a major newspaper today published what
it said were new allegations by four witnesses that the far-right leader
Jean-Marie Le Pen tortured people he accused of hiding weapons during the
Algerian war of independence.

The charges in Le Monde, which were fiercely denied by Mr. Le Pen, reopened a
debate about his past as a lieutenant in a paratroop regiment that has swirled
through France for years.

Mr. Le Pen's anti-immigrant and xenophobic National Front party caused a major
upset in the French presidential election in April and May, when he edged out
the prime minister, Lionel Jospin, for the runoff for president. His party is
hoping to send a similar shock wave through the parliamentary vote, on June 9
and 16. The accusations published today could clearly harden mainstream opinion
against his candidates, forecast by polls to win around 14 percent of the vote.

On Sunday, Mr. Le Pen tried to pre-empt Le Monde's disclosures, accusing the
paper in a television interview of seeking to manipulate public opinion. He also
threatened to take legal action against the paper.

Le Monde published what it said were excerpts from interviews with four men now
in their 60's or 70's who had been members or supporters of Algeria's insurgent
National Liberation Front in its battle against the French Army. The torture was
said to have occurred in February 1957, when Mr. Le Pen, then 28 and a
legislator, spent three months as a volunteer in Algeria.

Mr. Le Pen, now 73, was quoted in the Le Monde article as saying: "These witness
statements are lies. Perhaps these people were persuaded to talk. Someone said
to them: 'You know the guy you saw? That was Le Pen.' But how would they have
known? It's ridiculous."

The article quoted one of the men, identified as Abdelkader Ammour, now 64 and a
retired economics teacher, as saying Mr. Le Pen was among 20 French soldiers who
burst into his home in the Algiers casbah ostensibly looking for weapons.

In the interview, Mr. Ammour said Mr. Le Pen had interrogated him and three
other men, one after the other. He was forced to lie naked on the floor with his
hands bound. "Then, they connected up electric wires directly to the plug and
moved them about all over on my body," he said. "I was screaming. They took
dirty water from the toilets and made me swallow it through a floor cloth held
over my face. Le Pen was sitting on me. He held the cloth while someone else
poured the water."

Another of the people Le Monde identified as a witness, Mustapha Merouane, made
similar accusations of being tortured at home, and a third, Muhammad Abdellaoui,
now 72, said he had been tortured with electric shocks.

In denying the allegations, Mr. Le Pen told Le Monde, "I do not know if these
people suffered what they say they did, but they certainly didn't because of any
action of mine."

In a 1962 edition of a magazine called Combat, however, Mr. Le Pen said: "I have
nothing to hide. I tortured because it was necessary. When someone is brought to
you who has planted 20 bombs that could explode at any moment and who will not
talk, you use all the methods at your disposal to make him talk."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%);
VOTERS & VOTING (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES
(78%); POLITICS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ARMIES (77%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); WITNESSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); POWS & MIAS
(76%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); ARMED FORCES (70%) LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS;
ELECTIONS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  TORTURE;  ELECTION ISSUES

ORGANIZATION: MONDE (FRENCH NEWSPAPER)

PERSON: JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (92%) COWELL, ALAN; LE PEN, JEAN-MARIE

CITY: ALGIERS, ALGERIA (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (73%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (95%); FRANCE (94%)

REGION: FRANCE;  ALGERIA

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             669 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: IMMIGRATION;
U.S. Will Seek To Fingerprint Visas' Holders

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


The Justice Department will propose new regulations this week requiring tens of
thousands of Muslim and Middle Eastern visa holders to register with the
government and be fingerprinted, administration officials said today.

The initiative, the subject of intense debate within the administration, is
designed for "individuals from countries who pose the highest risk to our
security," including most visa holders from Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and many
other Muslim nations, officials said. More than 100,000 foreigners, including
students, workers, researchers and tourists, all foreigners from designated
countries who do not hold green cards, would probably be covered by the plan, an
official said.

Antiterrorism teams made up of federal, state and local officers that have been
formed in most larger cities since the Sept. 11 attacks would help immigration
officials register visa holders already living here, using procedures similar to
those employed to find 5,000 mainly Middle Eastern men who were sought for
interviews after the attacks.

New arrivals from the designated countries would be fingerprinted at airports or
seaports and be required to register with the Immigration and Naturalization
Service after 30 days in the country, officials said.

Violators could be fined, refused re-entry into the United States or possibly
deported, officials said.

The plan will be published in the Federal Register. After a comment period, it
will become a Justice Department regulation.

The proposal ignited a raging debate in the Bush administration. White House
officials supported the Justice proposal, but the State Department lodged
objections, fearing diplomatic repercussions with allies in the war on terror,
administration officials said.

A Justice Department spokeswoman, Susan Dryden, declined to comment on the
proposal.

Immigration specialists, meantime, are warning of new backlogs at airports if
already understaffed immigration service inspectors are required to fingerprint
and process a new category of visitors.

But some civil liberties and Arab-American groups expressed outrage at the
proposed requirements, arguing that such a policy was a blatant example of
racial and ethnic profiling.

"What's the logic of this?" said Jeanne Butterfield, executive director of the
American Immigration Lawyers Association. "Anyone who's truly dangerous is not
going to show up to be registered."

James J. Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, a policy organization,
said the registration plan would be "an overtly discriminatory, inefficient and
ineffective way to deal with the problem."

"This is targeting a group of people, the overwhelming majority of whom are
innocent, but whose lives will be turned upside down," Mr. Zogby added. "The
message it sends is that we're becoming like the Soviet Union, with people
registering at police stations."

The authority for proposing the new registration requirements rests in a
long-dormant provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952,
administration officials said.

A section of that law requires all foreign visa holders to register with the
government if they remain in the United States for 30 days or longer. The law
also required the fingerprinting of virtually all foreigners who were not
permanent residents, except for diplomats.

The law remained on the books, but enforcement fell off in the early 1980's when
the volume of visa holders climbed rapidly and the immigration service's budget
and staffing dropped.

"By the early 1980's, the sheer volume of the effort combined with a lack of
funding resulted in the practice being discontinued," said one administration
official.

In 1979, the same year as the beginning of the Iranian hostage crisis, Iranian
students were required to register with the government. After the attacks last
year, most visa holders from Iran, Iraq, Sudan and Libya were fingerprinted as
they entered the United States.

But the terrorist attacks had given fresh impetus to a much broader program. One
administration official said the new registration proposal, which Justice
officials planned to brief to Congress on Wednesday and announce later this
week, would give the government a leg up on identifying the highest-risk foreign
visitors now living in the United States.

Congress has required that the Immigration and Naturalization Service establish
a system to monitor the entry and departure of all immigrants, beginning in
2003.

But other officials said the contentious proposal broke free from an internal
administration debate only amid the recent recriminations over what intelligence
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency and other
federal agencies possessed before Sept. 11 about the possibilities of a
terrorist attack.

One of the leaders of the interagency discussion on the alien registration
proposal is a conservative University of Missouri at Kansas City law professor,
Kris W. Kobach, officials said.

Although Mr. Kobach, 36, is only a White House fellow on temporary assignment to
the Justice Department, he also played a central role in another contentious
proposal to give state and local police departments the power to track down
illegal immigrants as a new tactic in the global war on terror.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); FINGERPRINTING (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); AIRPORTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ARAB
AMERICANS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); RACIAL PROFILING
(78%); WAGE & HOUR LAWS (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); POLICE FORCES (77%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); ETHNICITY (75%); INTERVIEWS
(75%); EXECUTIVES (74%); REFUGEES (74%); HIJACKING (74%); FINES & PENALTIES
(73%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); AIRLINES
(67%) TERRORISM;  FINGERPRINTING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  TRAVEL AND VACATIONS;
FOREIGN LABOR;  FOREIGN STUDY, TEACHING AND TRAVEL;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  AIRPORTS;  DELAYS (TRANSPORTATION);  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
ARAB-AMERICANS;  DISCRIMINATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%) ;JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; STATE
DEPARTMENT

PERSON: ;SCHMITT, ERIC; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%); MIDDLE EAST
(93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SAUDI ARABIA;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             670 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2002 Wednesday
                            5opdLate Edition - Final

The Land of Denial

BYLINE:  By Thomas L. Friedman

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 741 words


I read in yesterday's Times that Egypt's president, Hosni Mubarak, says he
warned the U.S. of a plot by Al Qaeda before 9/11 and that he has a new plan for
a Palestinian state. I suppose that's all to the good, but frankly, none of it
leaves me feeling reassured, for one simple reason: We don't need Egypt to be
our policeman, we need it to be our progressive.

What I mean is that we need Egypt to play the role that it played in Arab
politics in the 19th and early 20th centuries -- the role that history assigned
it and for which it has no replacement: to lead the Arab-Muslim world into
modernity with an ideological message that is rooted in Arab and Muslim
tradition but is progressive, pluralistic and democratic. That is the most
important thing Egypt can do for us, and that is precisely what it has not been
doing for decades now.

Let me be blunt. Egypt is the center of gravity of the Arab world. It has the
biggest middle class, the best-educated population and the people with the most
potential. Egypt should be the Taiwan of the Mediterranean. But it is a country
that has been stagnating, to a degree that smaller Arab countries are now
passing it by.

Jordan was the first Arab country to secure a free-trade agreement with America;
Bahrain is the Arab country doing the most innovative experiments with
democracy; Qatar was the pioneer of free satellite television, with al-Jazeera;
and Tunisia, despite its authoritarian regime, has led the way in economic
liberalization and in forging closer ties with the E.U.

All these innovations should have come from Egypt, and had they, they would have
had a modernizing effect on the entire Arab world, particularly its other big
stagnating countries -- Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia. But they are not
happening. Egypt, which in the last century produced such towering Arab
intellectuals as Naguib Mahfouz, Taha Hussein and Tawfik al-Hakim, has produced
no successors to them. The intellectual air has gone stale in Egypt from too
many years of controlled press and authoritarian politics.

President Mubarak says, "We have all kinds of democracy." Really? All kinds but
genuine democracy, because a genuine democracy wouldn't be putting on trial an
Egyptian democracy expert, Saad Eddin Ibrahim, for wanting the right to speak
freely, press for social change and question official policy.

In the mid-1990's Mr. Mubarak seemed to realize that Egypt needed to reform and
privatize its economy, to keep pace with a population that will double in 20
years. But after a little reform produced a little boomlet, he backed off doing
the really hard stuff. Since 2000, Egypt's economic growth has been anemic; it
has seemed unable to attract much foreign or domestic investment. Costa Rica,
with 4 million people, exports more than Egypt, with 68 million; and Thailand,
with the same population as Egypt, exports 10 times as much.

Yes, Egypt has been threatened by Al Qaeda too. But Egypt's way of cracking down
has been to either arrest or expel radical Islamic leaders and then leave an
ideological vacuum in their wake. The reason a psychopath like Osama bin Laden
-- with his Arab, Islamic but backward-looking message -- could gain such
currency is because no one in the Arab world, particularly Egypt, has
articulated an Arab, Islamic, progressive, democratic alternative to counter
him.

The Bush team wants to spend money on TV or advertisements to broadcast our
message in Arabic to the Arab world. Frankly, there is no modern, progressive
message we could broadcast in Arabic that would begin to compare in influence to
one that would come from Egypt. But it's not coming.

Look, Hosni Mubarak is not our enemy. He is authentically pro-American and a
bulwark against another Arab-Israeli war. But if he really wants to help us, and
we really want his help, we don't need to talk to him about Al Qaeda or Israel.
We need to talk to him about Egypt.

If we've learned one thing since 9/11, it's that terrorism is not produced by
the poverty of money. It's produced by the poverty of dignity. It is about young
middle-class Arabs and Muslims feeling trapped in countries with too few good
jobs and too few opportunities to realize their potential or shape their own
future -- and blaming America for it. We have to break that cycle, and no one
could help us do it more effectively than the Egyptians. Does President Bush
dare say that, or are we going to keep lying to ourselves and to them?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); POLITICS (89%); HIJACKING (79%);
EMERGING MARKETS (78%); PRIVATIZATION (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); RELIGION
(74%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (69%);
ECONOMIC POLICY (68%); ECONOMIC NEWS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); TRADE TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (67%); TRENDS (65%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (64%); SATELLITE TELEVISION
(64%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (64%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;  ISLAM;  FREEDOM OF THE PRESS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (89%); THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (59%) FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L;
MUBARAK, HOSNI (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); JORDAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); MEDITERRANEAN
(79%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: EGYPT;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             677 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: PALESTINIANS;
At Checkpoint in Gaza, Travelers Wait and Wait

BYLINE:  By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: ABU HOULI CHECKPOINT, Gaza Strip, June 5


The trucks and cars wait in a chaotic, mile-long line, their Palestinian drivers
jostling for any small space that opens in front of them.

The other people just wait: packed four across in the back seats of their taxis,
crouched in the precious shade of the trucks or standing stubbornly in the
baking sun, savoring their cigarettes and pumpkin seeds as slowly as they can.

The worn two-lane road on which they sit is the main highway of the Gaza Strip,
running from Israel in the north to Egypt in the south. There was a time not
long ago when that drive took less than an hour.

Now it can take an entire day, or even longer. Just how long is impossible to
predict.

"Sometimes you wait until 2 in the afternoon, sometimes until 4," said Looy
al-Loh, 31, a Palestinian nurse who lives in a village just north of the
checkpoint and commutes to work at a clinic just south of it. "Sometimes you get
stuck here all night. Or you stay so you can be near the front of the line if
they open it in the morning."

Since the Palestinian uprising began in September 2000, the Israeli Army has
clamped down steadily on the movement of Palestinians within and outside the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Israeli officials describe the Palestinians'
hardships as unfortunate but say they are unavoidable in the effort to protect
Israeli citizens and soldiers from attacks, including suicide bombings, that
have taken hundreds of lives.

In the West Bank, some Palestinian cities and towns have become isolated
enclaves, surrounded by troops and tanks. But the restrictions are nowhere felt
more sharply than by the 1.3 million people of the Gaza Strip, which has been
effectively cut in half and sometimes into thirds by checkpoints set up in large
part to safeguard the travel of Gaza's 7,100 Jewish settlers.

"This is a way for them to demonstrate hour by hour that they are masters over
our lives," said a leading human rights advocate in Gaza, Raji Sourani. "People
think of Gaza as liberated. But the Israelis can make our lives as miserable as
ever."

To spend a hot, dusty day at the Abu Houli checkpoint is to hear of endless
problems it has brought -- families divided and jobs lost, sick people kept from
their doctors and fish rotting on its way to market.

It is also to witness how the demands of Israeli settlers, concerns for Israeli
security and a sense of humiliation among Palestinians feed the Middle East
conflict day by day.

The newest symbol of the struggle in Gaza is a bridge that opened two weeks ago
between Abu Houli and a second checkpoint that blocks traffic coming from the
south.

The bridge, which has high concrete walls and reinforced pillboxes at either
end, was built to give Israeli settlers safe passage over the Gaza highway while
allowing the Palestinians to move freely under them.

But leaders of the settlements campaigned forcefully against the bridge, and
they say they have not given up yet. They contend that the structure is unsafe,
and as proof of the dangers they cite shooting attacks by Palestinians and the
bombing of a school bus on a Gaza road that killed two adults and maimed three
children in November 2000.

So while the bridge is now open and the army insists that it is perfectly safe,
the settlers are demanding that they be allowed to continue driving on the road
beneath it. The Palestinian traffic is still backed up, and the military
commander responsible for Gaza, Maj. Gen. Doron Almog, said he did not expect it
to move freely in the forseeable future.

"I can collect intelligence about this convoy, a lot of intelligence," General
Almog said in an interview, referring to the Palestinian vehicles waiting at the
checkpoint. "And we must take every measure to stop terrorism."

The security advantages the checkpoints might afford are lost on the thousands
of Gazans who line up each day at Abu Houli and the others. To them, the
equation is painfully simple: the settlers zip back and forth in their
late-model cars while the Palestinians wait.

Standing on the new bridge, looking down through field glasses on the traffic
backed up at Abu Houli, General Almog seemed to have no trouble making out the
anger and despair festering below.

"The Palestinian citizens suffer very much from this situation," General Almog
said as he stood in a flak jacket, flanked by a pair of army snipers. "They are
imprisoned. But there must be a balance between the factors that affect the
Palestinian population and the security of the Israeli citizens."

That balance seemed to be especially hard to discern from behind the checkpoint.

"Everyone waits," said Fawzi Qishtah, 39. "They think, 'Maybe tomorrow it will
be better; maybe tomorrow it will be peaceful.' So no one goes to work. No one
does anything."

College students from southern towns told of having to choose between missing
their classes in Gaza City and moving away from home to continue their studies.
Grandparents told of not seeing their grandchildren. Men told of Muslim women at
the checkpoint who were humiliated in front of their children because there were
no bathrooms for miles around.

Toward the back of the line, Abed el-Frangy, 54, the heavyset manager of an
investment bank in Gaza City, plodded slowly ahead with a small black valise. He
had been sent to Cairo for heart surgery, but the Israelis were no longer
allowing Palestinian ambulances to cross the checkpoint freely, so he was
walking with his brother, who was lugging the bigger suitcase.

"Maybe it will be 12 hours, maybe 15," the banker said grimly. "Maybe I will die
here."

Not far away, Ahmed M. El Haleme, a 30-year-old ophthalmic surgeon, did not
discount the man's concern. Ten days earlier, he said, he tended to another man
in the line who suffered a heart attack on his way for similar treatment. Unable
to cross, the patient died on his way to a nearby clinic, the doctor said.

"Everyone here is in critical condition," said Dr. Haleme, who lives in Gaza
City but often operates at a hospital near Khan Yunis, just south of the Abu
Houli checkpoint. "No one travels anymore just because they want to go
somewhere. It has to be some kind of emergency."

As the afternoon dragged on, tempers began to flare. Arguments broke out and
people began smoking more cigarettes if they had them left. Two boys started
pelting each other with stones, and others rushed forward to calm them,
shouting: "Khalas! Khalas!" -- enough.

The line kept growing. Finally, about 5 o'clock, the Israeli soldiers dragged
the razor wire aside and began letting some cars pass. At the front of the line
a green stoplight turned on and off, opening the road like a spigot.

"They don't like the Arabs one bit," Shoqna Ghanaam, who sat packed with several
elderly people in the bed of a pickup truck, said of the Israelis. "Since I was
a child it has been like this."

Mrs. Ghanaam said she was now 60, and a reporter told her she looked younger
than that. She smiled just a little.

"Imagine how I would look," she said, "if there were peace."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Palestinians line up at the Abu Houli crossing, waiting to go
from the northern to the southern part of Gaza. (Ruth Fremson/The New York
Times)(pg. A1); Palestinians at the Abu Houli checkpoint in the Gaza Strip
yesterday found a patch of shade behind a truck to wait in a long line of
vehicles.; Travelers sat in their car at the Abu Houli crossing and waited for
Israeli soldiers who were looking for terrorists to allow them to pass.
(Photographs by Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (86%); MOTOR VEHICLES (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (72%); BOMBINGS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (70%);
ARMIES (69%); NURSES & NURSING (68%); CITY LIFE (64%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (61%) PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  ROADS AND TRAFFIC;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES

PERSON: GOLDEN, TIM

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (98%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
EGYPT (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  GAZA STRIP;  WEST BANK

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             684 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 14, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Uphill Fight in Macedonia to Fend Off Chaos

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: TETOVO, Macedonia


That NATO now regards a man it once called a murderous thug as one of
Macedonia's most dependable politicians speaks volumes about this troubled
country's leaders.

The politician, Ali Ahmeti, almost provoked a civil war last year by leading a
guerrilla rebellion to demand greater rights for Macedonia's Albanian minority.
Now, nine months after his National Liberation Army handed over a token arsenal
to NATO in return for amnesty and civil rights reforms, Mr. Ahmeti has formed a
fringe opposition party, the Democratic Union for Integration. He said it is
dedicated to fighting organized crime, which is corrupting politics on both
sides of Macedonia's ethnic divide.

"We want to establish new values in our society for everyone, regardless of
ethnic background," Mr. Ahmeti said after addressing an almost exclusively male
crowd packed with his former fighters in Tetovo, a town of crumbling concrete
tower blocks that serves as the large Albanian minority's unofficial capital.

If only bringing stability to Macedonia were that simple, say members of a small
corps of Western peacekeepers. Many of them worry that the tiny former Yugoslav
republic is growing dependent on their presence while politicians abdicate
responsibility for a peace deal they signed.

The greatest source of frustration to the Westerners is Prime Minister Ljubco
Georgievski, a former student revolutionary who advocates partition of the
country down ethnic lines and speaks darkly of Western plots to support
Albanians that have made this necessary.

"The prime minister is a disaster," one senior diplomat said. "At least whenever
Ahmeti promises something, he delivers."

The current uncertainties, however, do not diminish the success of the decisive
intervention last year of NATO and the European Union, backed by Russia. A
handful of foreigners dispatched to the Macedonian capital, Skopje, with
cellphones and considerable latitude to negotiate a cease-fire agreement managed
to stop a potentially explosive conflict after it had claimed 200 lives.

To do so, they had to work with Mr. Ahmeti's guerrilla movement, which their
superiors in Brussels and Washington had earlier denounced as terrorists. The
Westerners also had to contend with the Macedonian leadership, which was
incensed that Mr. Ahmeti's army was apparently being armed from neighboring
Kosovo under the noses of 40,000 NATO-led peacekeepers.

The resulting peace deal will only exist on paper unless Macedonian politicians
can agree to implement reforms that they are as reluctant as ever to grant an
emboldened Albanian minority.

"The system that allowed the war to happen is still in place," conceded one
Western diplomat.

Alain Le Roy, the European Union envoy charged with bringing Macedonia's divided
politicians together, described it as an uphill struggle. "When I'm away for a
week, everything stops," he said.

Although an election set for this fall will inflame nationalist sentiment on
both sides, Mr. Le Roy said, he hopes it will produce a less intransigent
government and allow crucial legislation to be passed and Western personnel to
withdraw.

There is no guarantee, however, that the Social Democrats, a mainstream
Macedonian party in the opposition, would offer minorities any more than it did
when in power during the 1990's. And campaign violence could create new problems
that Macedonian security forces are ill equipped to deal with.

Simmering inter-Albanian rivalries stoked by the National Liberation Army's
success have resulted in shootouts around Tetovo. Diplomats said they fear that
Macedonian hardliners, who claim to be defending the Orthodox Christian majority
from what they call separatist Muslim terrorists, could use the feuding as a
pretext to declare a state of emergency and postpone the vote.

Even if the vote goes through, the Macedonian and Albanian parties that have
governed in a coalition since 1998 are likely to intimidate their own
communities with hired thugs in an effort to retain power, Western officials
said.

"Of course it will not be fair," one senior European diplomat said, stressing
that the 700 foreign monitors scheduled to oversee the ballot would not be
running it.

The ruling party trails in opinion polls. But its bellicose interior minister,
Ljube Boskovski, who controls a ragtag special police unit that has stirred up
trouble in the past, calls it "the most powerful party in the Balkans."

Its coalition partner, the Democratic Party of Albanians, is equally bullish,
brushing aside suggestions that Mr. Ahmeti's popularity will cut into its
support when elections come around.

Both of the ruling parties deny allegations that they profit from smuggling
drugs and cigarettes and from other illicit operations, including pocketing the
proceeds from privatizations. But they have failed to convince voters or foreign
observers of their innocence, which may well hurt their election chances in a
country where the average wage is about $150 a month.

"The people apparently on opposing sides of the ethnic divide are actually hand
in glove -- in criminality," one Western diplomat said. "It's hard to see any
stability emerging from such poverty and corruption."

The 700 NATO soldiers who remain from last year's disarmament force can do
little to combat such threats. They have been more successful in helping to
resettle many of the 125,000 people who fled fighting in the northern and
western hills where the National Liberation Army popped up last spring.

These days in Umin Dol, a Macedonian village northeast of the capital, Lenca
Petkovski no longer tills the land with her neighbors from the next village, a
former liberation army stronghold.

"We used to share a field with Albanians," Ms. Petkovski said. "Now we're afraid
and so are they."

There is little appetite for a fight that few wanted in the first place, having
watched the rest of Yugoslavia tear itself apart on the battlefield while this
republic gained independence in 1991 without a shot fired. But the country
remains awash with weapons. When a Skopje women's handball team won the European
championship last month, thousands took to the streets for a celebration
accompanied by heavy automatic gunfire.

Western powers are eager to leave Macedonia's two million people to fend for
themselves as soon as possible, hoping that the incentive of eventual European
Union membership will force their leaders to take greater responsibility for
reform.

"We can't hang around until this becomes a model society," one senior envoy
said. "There's not much more we could do short of occupying the country and
taking it over."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ali Ahmeti, a former guerrilla, now heads the Democratic Union
for Integration in Macedonia. (Andrew Testa for The New York Times) Map of
Macedonia highlighting Tetovo: Tetovo is the unofficial capital of Macedonia's
Albanian minority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%);
PEACE PROCESS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%);
ORGANIZED CRIME (75%); ETHICS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ETHNICITY (69%); MOBILE
& CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS (68%); TERRORISM (50%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES
(50%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  ORGANIZED CRIME;  ETHICS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION

PERSON: SIMPSON, DANIEL; GEORGIEVSKI, LJUBCO (PRIME MIN); AHMETI, ALI

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%); SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

COUNTRY: MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (97%); ALBANIA (95%); EUROPE
(92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); KOSOVO (79%);
BELGIUM (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: MACEDONIA (FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC);  TETOVO (MACEDONIA)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             686 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 17, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Isn't Democracy Worth It?

BYLINE:  By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 683 words


Donna Newman can talk to me, but she can't talk to her client.

Ms. Newman is an attorney who was assigned to represent Jose Padilla, the former
Chicago gang member accused of participating in a Qaeda plot to detonate a
radioactive bomb in the United States.

I have no trouble believing that Mr. Padilla, who now calls himself Abdullah
al-Muhajir, is a dangerous man. He may well be. But given the way his case has
been handled by the Bush administration, we have no way of knowing how much of a
terror threat he really was, and no prospect of finding out anytime soon.

Mr. Padilla, an American citizen, has been sucked into a procedural black hole
in which he no longer has any legal rights. This is a new and dangerous region
that is outside the public's view and, for the time being at least, beyond the
reach of the Constitution.

If left unchecked, this contempt for the law and due process could pose more of
a threat to our way of life than Al Qaeda.

Mr. Padilla is locked in a Navy brig in South Carolina. He has not been charged
with any crime. He is not allowed to speak with Ms. Newman. The government has
no plans to present a case against him, and no plans to let him go. Officials
have said, in essence: We've got him, and you can forget about due process.

The K.G.B. was very good at this sort of thing. And it's chillingly ironic that
Mr. Padilla's arrest was announced from Moscow by Attorney General John
Ashcroft, who happened to be in Russia on an unrelated matter.

"We have captured a known terrorist who was exploring a plan to build and
explode a radiological dispersion device, or 'dirty bomb,' in the United
States," said Mr. Ashcroft.

It is now believed that Mr. Ashcroft may have overstated the case somewhat. But
if, as most people suspect, Mr. Padilla really was involved in some sort of
terror conspiracy, it is almost impossible to believe that the combined efforts
of the C.I.A. and F.B.I. have failed to come up with enough evidence to hold him
legitimately on some charge.

But the government won't produce the evidence. Mr. Padilla has been slapped with
the legally dubious designation of "enemy combatant," and in the
administration's view that is enough of a basis for holding him until the
cessation of hostilities in the war against terror. That is tantamount to a life
sentence.

"He's been tried and convicted by the executive branch," said Ms. Newman. Her
voice conveyed the frustration she feels at being assigned to represent Mr.
Padilla but not being permitted to do so in any way that might be effective.

In the United States, as opposed to the many tyrannical societies we've known
and are coming to know, the government is not permitted to hustle its citizens
into prison without offering a legally sound reason for their incarceration, and
without giving the accused an opportunity to challenge their loss of liberty.

Today it may be Padilla. Tomorrow it might be you.

I believe the government has the goods on Mr. Padilla, but for whatever reasons
finds the due process route to be inconvenient. That kind of arrogance of power
has no place in the U.S., where the rule of law is supposed to be something very
special.

Freedom comes with a heavy price tag. Ben Franklin said in 1755, "Those who
would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety deserve
neither liberty nor safety."

You don't abandon the rule of law and due process simply because the populace is
angry and frightened. The United States is strong enough to handle the likes of
Jose Padilla within the precious boundaries of the law and the Constitution.

If new rules are needed for the processing and detention of terror suspects,
then by all means establish new rules. But you don't abandon all rules while
waiting for new ones to be promulgated.

The war against terror is not merely a fight for survival. It's a fight for the
survival of a free and democratic way of life. If that's not the case, then
we're just blowing stale smoke rings of hypocrisy when we place our hands over
our hearts and recite pledges about liberty and justice, or sing about the free
and the brave.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DUE PROCESS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); DIRTY BOMBS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); WAR ON
TERROR (75%); AL-QAEDA (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); SENTENCING (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (71%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (66%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (50%) TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  RADIATION;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: PADILLA, JOSE (ABDULLAH AL-MUHAJIR); HERBERT, BOB; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (54%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             696 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 27, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Belgium: Sharon War-Crimes Suit Dismissed

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 99 words


A court dismissed a suit filed by 23 Palestinians accusing Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon of Israel of war crimes for his role in the massacre of Palestinians by
Christian militias allied with Israel at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in
Lebanon in 1982, when he was Israel's defense minister. The group hoped to use a
law that enables Belgian courts to try grave human rights abuses regardless of
where they were committed, but the court ruled the case could not proceed
because Mr. Sharon was not in Belgium. Lawyers said they would take the case to
the Supreme Court.   Marlise Simons (NYT)




URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (92%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(92%); LITIGATION (92%); REFUGEES (90%); VERDICTS (88%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(88%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (88%); LAWYERS (87%); PRIME MINISTERS (86%); SUPREME
COURTS (86%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
IMMIGRATION (84%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  PALESTINIANS;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); LEBANON (94%);
BELGIUM (93%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  LEBANON;  SHATILA CAMP (LEBANON);  SABRA CAMP (LEBANON);
BELGIUM

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             701 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FRONT LINES

BYLINE:  By ANDREA KANNAPELL

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 785 words


MIDEAST -- With Israeli forces flooding into the West Bank, President Bush made
his much-delayed announcement of a new Mideast policy. He turned U.S. policy on
its head, directly demanding the ouster of Yasir Arafat while holding out the
possibility -- without specific guidelines -- of a Palestinian state within
three years.

The position coalesced suddenly out of the administration's slow, painstaking
debate about the terms and timing of a Palestinian state. The tough line
emerged, senior officials said, after Mr. Bush read intelligence reports showing
that even as Mr. Arafat was denouncing suicide attacks, he was financing Al Aksa
Martyrs Brigades, the group that has claimed responsibility for several such
attacks. Later in the week, Mr. Bush said that if Palestinians did not embrace
the measures he suggested, the U.S. might cut off aid.

Israelis hailed the speech, the first time the U.S. had sided with Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon on removing Mr. Arafat. Palestinians, who had hoped the
speech would suggest a timetable for Israeli withdrawal, were stunned. Leaders
of Arab nations offered muted reactions. Many chose to focus on the promise of a
Palestinian state rather than the challenge to Mr. Arafat. What if the U.S.
fomented democracy? Page 1.

As the week ended, Israeli troops were maintaining round-the-clock curfews in
most of the population centers of the West Bank: Ramallah, Hebron, Nablus,
Jenin, Tulkarm, Qalqilya and Bethlehem. Israeli soldiers stormed the Palestinian
Authority headquarters in Hebron. Only Jericho remained without a curfew.

AL QAEDA -- Al Jazeera, the Arab-language satellite channel, broadcast an
audiotape of a spokesman for Al Qaeda saying that Osama bin Laden and his top
lieutenant, Ayman al-Zawahiri, were alive. The spokesman also said Al Qaeda was
behind the fuel-tanker explosion at a Tunisian synagogue that killed 17 people.
Al Jazeera said the recording came from a Kuwaiti journalist who downloaded it
from two Internet sites.

The recent arrest of a Qaeda operative in Indonesia has strengthened the Bush
administration's determination to re-engage with Indonesia's army, despite its
long history of human rights abuses. The Pentagon has begun to push Congress to
provide financing for a unit of the Indonesian Army that would take on
peacekeeping tasks. The suspect, Omar al-Faruq, a Kuwaiti, is being held by the
U.S. at an undisclosed location.

AFGHANISTAN -- In the hills and mountains just east of Aghanistan's border,
hundreds of Pakistani soldiers searched for some 35 suspected Al Qaeda fighters
who killed 10 Pakistanis on Wednesday. A firefight erupted after the soldiers
surrounded a tribal elder's house, trapping the fighters inside. By week's end,
none had been found, and there were reports that the fighters had slipped back
across the border into Afghanistan. Pakistan said that a joint operation with
the U.S. would begin in the area shortly.

In Kabul, President Hamid Karzai swore in 29 new government ministers and five
vice presidents, all carefully selected to represent different ethnic groups and
to give powerful regional leaders responsibility over sectors of the
administration. No one has yet been named minister of justice or of women's
affairs.

Mr. Karzai sees a strong central government and a national army as key to
rebuilding the country. Two warlords who have long resisted centralization
declined efforts to include them in the new government: Ismail Khan in the west
and Abdul Rashid Dostum in the north.

A series of explosions overnight Thursday in a munitions depot in a border town
in southern Afghanistan killed at least 19 people. A local Afghan commander said
the blasts had been set off by a rocket attack. The town, Spinbaldak, is a
reentry point for Afghan refugees from Pakistan. The incident may delay the flow
of returnees.

DOMESTICALLY -- In a show of just how unified Washington has become on defense,
Congress passed two bills representing the largest increases in military
spending in decades. The Senate voted 97 to 2 to adopt a $393 billion Pentagon
spending outline for the year beginning Oct. 1, almost $50 billion more than
last year. And the House passed, 413 to 18, a $355 billion appropriations bill,
almost $34 billion more than last year.

PRISONERS -- The Pentagon said that "foreign government delegations have had
access to Guantanamo for law enforcement and intelligence purposes since
January." It did not name them, but, according to foreign officials, Morocco,
Britain, Spain and Sweden were among those that sent interrogators to question
prisoners from their own countries. Information from the interviews, the
Pentagon said, was shared with U.S. investigators.   ANDREA KANNAPELL

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A poster in the Gaza Strip. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); JOURNALISM
(75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); PEACEKEEPING (72%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); CURFEW (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%);
SATELLITE TELEVISION (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (50%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (53%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-AQSA MARTYRS BRIGADES (57%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (53%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (53%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (59%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES (97%); ISRAEL
(96%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); INDONESIA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 2, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE IMMIGRANTS;
A Frustrated A.C.L.U. Tries to Guide Consulates Through a Thicket

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1164 words


When it arrived at Pakistan's consulate in New York recently, the letter offered
welcome help to officials worn out by desperate calls from Pakistanis in
detention. It said it was "to offer our assistance" to people who have been held
by the American government since Sept. 11.

"We are particularly interested," the letter continued, "in highlighting
instances of abuse by our government and in developing systematic litigation to
challenge its unconstitutional practices."

It was from the American Civil Liberties Union, a group so reviled and revered
that even the mention of its name could create a furor, which in a way helped
smooth the reception at the consulate.

"I had heard of this civil liberties group in many TV shows and talk shows,"
said Mohammad Hafeez, the consul general. "But they become more relevant when
you confront the situation when your nationals are under detention."

The letter was sent in December by the civil liberties union to the consulates
of the 10 countries with the most citizens among those detained, including
Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Morocco and Yemen.

The story of the letter -- and the responses to it -- shows the frustrations of
civil liberties advocates in trying to challenge the government's terrorism
crackdown when even the names of many people in detention are still secret.

It also shows how ill-equipped many of the consular officials are at maneuvering
in the American legal system. Officials of several consulates said they were
still unsure how many of their citizens were in detention or what they could do
for those who were. The government has detained these people for various reasons
during the terror investigation and is holding them on immigration charges.

The consulates seemed confused by the letter from an American organization
offering to challenge its own government in court and were uncertain whether
that was permissible in this country. Mahmoud Allam, the consul general of
Egypt, said he did not know of the American Civil Liberties Union.

"Is it banned here?" he asked.

The A.C.L.U. has championed the causes of immigrants since its founding 81 years
ago during the Palmer Raids, an earlier reaction to terrorism that officials
said was tied to immigrants. But people at the organization said they could
recall no similar systematic effort to mount a legal challenge against the
American government through contacts with foreign diplomats.

Several people at the group said the decision to write the letters was not
controversial internally.

The civil liberties union, like many other organizations that have been critical
of the government since Sept. 11, has been busy for months. Its lobbyists and
lawyers have been critiquing the government's antiterrorism measures. Its
Washington office has answered more than 4,000 calls from reporters.

But Anthony D. Romero, the organization's executive director, said critics might
lose their momentum with the public because of government secrecy.

"What's important right now is to paint a human face," Mr. Romero said. "If we
keep it in abstractions -- 'checks and balances,' 'due process' -- it will not
bring it home to the ordinary American."

One way to do that, he said, is to find the innocent people and bring their
stories to the attention of the courts and the public.

Which explains something of how his letter-writing campaign began. For Mr.
Romero, 36, the stakes are particularly high. On Sept. 4, a week before the
terror attacks, he became executive director of the civil liberties union after
the 23-year reign of Ira Glasser, whose name became synonymous with the
organization.

It is an important job not only because of the high-profile but also because the
group has become a large institution that raises about $50 million a year
nationally.

Expectations were high for Mr. Romero, a former Ford Foundation executive who is
the child of Puerto Rican immigrants and a graduate of Princeton University and
Stanford Law School. He has been trying to make his mark quickly.

In October, as anger about the detentions grew among critics, Mr. Romero asked
for a meeting with Robert S. Mueller III, the director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. On Oct. 26, Mr. Romero and members of his staff peppered Mr.
Mueller with questions about who was being detained, why, and what legal right
the government had to keep their names secret.

They did not get far.

"We came away from that meeting totally frustrated," said Laura W. Murphy, the
director of the group's Washington office.

The meeting, Mr. Romero said, convinced him that the group needed to adopt a
more aggressive strategy.

"If the government is not going to provide us with the names of the people who
are being detained," he said, "we had to do it on our own."

The group began collecting what was publicly known about the detainees and
increased contacts with Arab, Muslim and Sikh groups and lawyers. It published a
brochure telling immigrants about their rights, in English, Spanish and Arabic.
A version in Punjabi is in preparation.

In early December, the A.C.L.U. joined with other groups in a suit against the
government seeking information about the detainees under the Freedom of
Information Act.

Mr. Romero said his letters were an important part of the strategy. In the
letter, he emphasized his group's view that American rights extend to all people
in this country, including immigrants.

"We are quite concerned," he wrote, "that current efforts to combat terrorism
may undermine the basic freedoms and liberties that are the foundation of our
democracy."

Responses are just beginning to come in. The Indian Consulate wrote a warm reply
promising a follow-up.

Pakistan's vice consul, Irfan Ahmed, supplied the names of about a dozen
Pakistanis who, he said, had been approved for voluntary departure by American
immigration officials but were still being held.

The agreement to voluntary departure, Mr. Ahmed said, shows that the officials
have concluded that those people are not terrorists.

Civil liberties union lawyers say they are analyzing the legal strategies to use
for the cases.

Mr. Ahmed said he was delighted by the offer of help from the civil liberties
union because the consulate received at least 10 telephone calls a day from
detained people or their relatives.

"We are baffled at where to begin," he said.

The civil liberties group, he said, "might be able to make it very clear to the
courts that these people are not being treated according to American law."

But some consular officials were cautious. Mohamed Karmoune, the deputy consul
for Morocco in New York, said he was not sure what the civil liberties group
could do because the consulate did not know how many Moroccans were in custody
or who most of them were.

The Turkish consul, Sedat Onal, seemed confused about what the civil liberties
union was.

"I am not sure about their intention," Mr. Onal said, "or their position in the
United States."

He said he was considering how to respond to the group's offer of help.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Anthony D. Romero, above, head of the American Civil Liberties
Union, has offered to help immigrants in the terrorism crackdown. Some
officials, like Mohammad Hafeez of Pakistan, have been receptive. Brochures,
including those in English and Arabic, are part of the campaign. (Nicole
Bengiveno/The New York Times); (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
IMMIGRATION (88%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); LOBBYING
(77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAWYERS (72%); LITIGATION (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); MOROCCO (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
EGYPT (79%); LEBANON (79%); JORDAN (75%)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             707 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 4, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. War Crimes Court to Try 20 Suspects in Sierra Leone

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 3


Secretary General Kofi Annan authorized a war crimes tribunal today to be set up
in Sierra Leone despite a big shortfall in financial pledges from the member
nations of the United Nations.

Mr. Annan said a United Nations planning mission would go to Sierra Leone on
Monday to start the process of arranging headquarters for the special court,
hiring local staff members and beginning investigations.

The tribunal's task would be to prosecute about 20 people accused of being
ringleaders of the West African nation's decade-long civil war, which appears to
be winding down. In 2000, the Security Council voted to set up the tribunal to
try people charged with crimes against humanity, war crimes and other serious
violations of international law.

Sierra Leone's representative at the United Nations, Allieu Ibrahim Kanu, said
the court could be ready to begin trying cases in about a year.

The war pitted government forces and militias against rebels of the
Revolutionary United Front who seized control of the country's diamond-mining
areas and became notorious for hacking off the limbs of women and children, and
for enlisting thousands of child soldiers in their cause.

The rebels fueled the fighting by selling diamonds they mined for arms.

But after a disarmament agreement was reached in May, the United Nations
deployed its biggest peacekeeping operation across the country and collected the
weapons of more than 40,000 fighters.

The United Nations mission would remain in the country through Jan. 18 and
culminate in the signing of an agreement between the United Nations and Sierra
Leone establishing a legal framework for the tribunal's operations, Mr. Annan
said in a letter to the Security Council.

While United Nations members have donated nearly enough money to finance the
first year of the tribunal's operations, pledges for its second and third years
have fallen well short of the amounts required, Mr. Annan reported. So the
United Nations may have to request extra payments from members to make up any
shortfalls, he said.

The world body has already slashed the court's budget to $57 million from an
original estimate of $114 million for three years because of problems raising
the funds.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); BUDGETS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); MINES & MINING (72%); DIAMOND
MINING (72%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (70%); ARMED FORCES (66%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (95%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             708 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tribunals' Jurisdiction

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 203 words


To the Editor:

Contrary to "How to Try a Terrorist" (editorial, Dec. 29), trying Al Qaeda
leaders for violating the laws of armed conflict would not legitimize their
attack on America as warfare. Article 2 of all the Geneva Conventions carefully
states that the conventions apply in "any armed conflict," and that application
of the conventions imports nothing about whether the underlying conflict is
lawful, or even war at all.

Moreover, military tribunals need not limit themselves to "military" offenses.
An Al Qaeda leader who plotted the Sept. 11 attacks could be tried for crimes
against humanity, conspiracy and first-degree murder in a military tribunal.

In the 1942 German U-boat case, charges of sabotage and espionage, both triable
in civil courts, were brought against the German infiltrators, and President
Bush's order of Nov. 13 authorizes commissions to try "any and all offenses
triable by military commission," not only violations of the laws of armed
conflict. That breadth of jurisdiction, in fact, is one reason that the
commissions stir apprehension in their critics.

ALLAN A. RYAN JR.
Boston, Dec. 29, 2001

The writer was director, Office of Special Investigations, Department of
Justice, 1980-83.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); LAW OF WAR (91%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); HIJACKING (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%);
WRITERS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%);
MURDER (58%); ESPIONAGE (53%) TERRORISM;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: RYAN, ALLAN A JR

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             710 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trials for Enemies

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 163 words


To the Editor:

Ruth Wedgwood (Op-Ed, Dec. 31) argues that Al Qaeda members should not receive
the extraordinary protections provided in domestic trials. But curbing the rule
of law will not serve America's long-range interests.

Following existing precedents, an ad hoc international criminal court could
quickly be established by the United Nations Security Council to try Osama bin
Laden and other Al Qaeda leaders for crimes against humanity. No security
secrets need be revealed to justify convictions. Lesser offenders can face
national tribunals or summary proceedings, as was done after World War II. The
permanent international criminal court soon to be established offers a good
model.

The verdict of impartial international jurists is more likely to deter
atrocities than secret American military proceedings. Law must apply equally to
everyone -- even our enemies.

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
Delray Beach, Fla., Dec. 31, 2001

The writer was a Nuremberg war crimes prosecutor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); RULE OF
LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); VERDICTS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); HIJACKING
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(69%); WORLD WAR II (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (55%) AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (73%) FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B; WEDGWOOD, RUTH (PROF)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             712 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gul Agha Gets His Province Back

BYLINE:  By Peter Maass; Peter Maass is the author of "Love Thy Neighbor: A
Story of War," his memoir of the conflict in Bosnia. He has been writing for the
magazine from Afghanistan and Pakistan since September.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 3505 words


Gul Agha Shirzai was the governor of Kandahar Province in the early 1990's, an
infamous period filled with anarchy that was shocking even by Afghan standards.
Gul Agha was personally acquainted with the ethos of those times. In 1989, his
father, who had joined the jihad after the Soviet invasion in 1979 and became a
respected commander and Pashtun tribal leader, was murdered by a cook who
slipped arsenic into his lunch. Avenging the crime, Gul Agha tied the cook to a
tree, shot him with a Kalashnikov and hung his shredded corpse from a branch for
a week.

When the United States government went shopping last fall for someone to lead an
army into the Taliban stronghold of Kandahar, Gul Agha re-emerged as America's
go-to warlord. He had spent seven years in luxurious exile in Pakistan, waiting
for a chance to get rid of the black-turbaned Taliban mullahs who'd gotten rid
of him. In early November, he slipped into Afghanistan with a ragtag army of
1,500 Afghan fighters and joined up in the border village of Shinarai with a
honed unit of a dozen or so American Special Forces soldiers who arrived in
helicopters at night. In the days that followed, weapons arrived after dark,
too, falling to earth in wood crates shoved from the bellies of American
military aircraft. The crates, attached to parachutes, contained Kalashnikov
assault rifles, serrated steel bayonets and rocket-propelled grenades, and they
were collected outside Shinarai by the Special Forces troops who gave them to
Gul Agha.

A day before his march on Kandahar began, Gul Agha assembled his newly
weaponized fighters by a stream outside Shinarai. The first speeches were
delivered by local mullahs who urged a just war that would bring freedom to the
Pashtun-dominated southern chunk of Afghanistan still held by the Taliban. Gul
Agha, the last to speak, ordered his men not to take revenge on Taliban soldiers
who surrendered -- they were mostly Pashtuns, too, after all. But Arab and
Pakistani fighters of Al Qaeda should receive no mercy, he said, because they
brought ruin to the nation.

He wasn't finished.

"If I find somebody who takes revenge on Afghans, or who indulges in looting or
something illegal," he added, "I promise you that in times of war I get very
excited, and I will shoot you."

He turned to the mullahs at his side.

"If I shoot soldiers violating my rules, would that be sinful?"

The mullahs could not respond quick enough.

"Shoot them, shoot them on sight," they advised.

It is unwise to believe everything, or anything, a warlord tells you in
Afghanistan, but when Gul Agha threatens violence, he is a man of his word. One
of his commanders recited for me a variety of insults Gul Agha shouts at
soldiers who do not please him, but the curses are just a warmup.

"When he's really angry," the commander smiled, "he doesn't say much. He just
punches."

This is a key difference between Gul Agha and Hamid Karzai, the interim prime
minister of Afghanistan. The United States government, seeking a Westernized
Pashtun to boot the Taliban from Kandahar, assigned a larger number of Special
Forces soldiers to Karzai, and far earlier, than to Gul Agha; Karzai was even
whisked into the country in an American helicopter, whisked out again when he
got into trouble, then whisked back in. But Karzai, a former deputy foreign
minister who speaks fluent English, had never commanded anything grander than a
government driver, and he rarely visited the front lines. His troops, based
north of Kandahar, never reached the city.

Today it may appear, from titles alone, that Hamid Karzai is the leader of
Afghanistan. Actually, he is a figurehead, chosen at the behest of United States
officials. Afghan delegates at the conference in Bonn that selected the
government have told reporters they voted for Karzai only because American
officials instructed them to. Karzai's largest following is in Washington, not
Afghanistan.

That's why, after the fall of the Taliban, Afghanistan is in the callused hands
of men like Gul Agha -- veteran warlords who know and care more about power and
money than about human rights or civil society. Abdul Rashid Dostum, a warlord
who switched sides so many times in the past decades that he gave betrayal a bad
name, is back in power in Mazar-i-Sharif and has shown little regard for Karzai.
Ismail Khan, another pre-Taliban leader, has returned to Herat and does not wake
up in the morning waiting for orders from Kabul. Other regions are divvied up
among smaller warlords, and most are doing what Gul Agha is doing -- mouthing
politically correct words of fealty to Karzai but treating him as little more
than a delivery boy for aid checks the United States and its allies have pledged
to write.

"Is lunch ready?"

Gul Agha is hungry. After a monthlong march on Kandahar, he has captured the
Taliban's spiritual capital, and now, a few days after he entered the city in a
Toyota Land Cruiser, it is time for his midday meal.

"Not yet," replies a bodyguard in military fatigues.

"Then go and prepare it," Gul Agha orders. "We must have lunch."

The new governor of Kandahar Province is a large man of large appetites, not
just for food, but for battle and laughter and power. He speaks in a rough
growl, as if his mouth is full, which it often is, but even when it isn't, his
words are slurred, like Marlon Brando in "The Godfather." The absence of a front
tooth or two only partly explains matters.

He sits cross-legged on a patio at a military barracks opposite the governor's
office building that people call the "palace" -- a palace he has vacated for the
day because several hundred anti-tank mines and tank shells are being removed
from its roof. The fleeing Taliban planned to detonate the munitions once he
moved in, but an informer blew up the plot to blow up the new governor.

Today's luncheon involves 20-odd merchants and elders, gathered alongside and
opposite Gul Agha. I am seated on his left. We are soon served chicken in
mustard sauce, as well as rice and nan, the oblong Afghan bread, all of which we
eat with our fingers, as is customary. Hefty and ravenous, Gul Agha does not cut
a pretty sight while feeding.

A man walks up, looking for a spot on the floor. Gul Agha eyes him and says,
"Take off your shoes," and addresses him with an insult to him and his mother.

The shoes vanish in a split-second shuffle, and everyone laughs, including Gul
Agha, who uses profanity as a way of saying hello. With his audience assembled
and warmed up, it is time to talk about his favorite subject: war.

"When the enemy attacks," Gul Agha begins, "I fight them face to face. I do not
hide behind my soldiers. When I came into the Kandahar airport, we were in four
cars, and I was in the first car. The Arabs came at us. I told my soldiers that
anyone who runs is a see insult above . I took out my Kalashnikov and killed
three Arabs. When my soldiers saw that I killed three Arabs, they were
encouraged and jumped from their cars and ran at the Arabs. We killed 18 Arabs
at the gate of the airport."

His version of events may not be precisely true; perhaps he killed only one
Arab, perhaps none. But the essence of what he says is correct. I talked with
dozens of his commanders and soldiers, and all said admiringly that Gul Agha
leads from the front, not the rear. They also spoke admiringly of his bullying;
Afghan fighters may have a tough reputation, but in truth they are not reliable
and are prone to fighting among themselves or preying upon civilians, especially
if they are thrown together as hastily as Gul Agha's army. Without a commander
willing to kill his own men, battles cannot be won in Afghanistan.

Khalid Pashtun, who lived in the United States for more than 20 years and is Gul
Agha's chief adviser, says he believes that the man he serves is a great warrior
and that perhaps the man Gul Agha is supposed to serve is not. "Mr. Karzai was
in Uruzgan Province for two months," Pashtun explained to me. Uruzgan Province
lies just north of Kandahar Province. "But he didn't have the guts to get close
to Kandahar."

So in Kandahar, as in the rest of Afghanistan, the Taliban are gone and the
warlords are back, and the last time they were in charge the country slipped
into a horrid civil war to which the hand-chopping, head-chopping Taliban were
the puritanical solution. And right now the biggest warlord of them all is
sitting at my side, blowing his nose into the tail of his turban. Gul Agha is
ready to tell another story.

"Mullah Omar said, 'I want to fight Gul Agha once because I have heard about him
a lot, and I want to see if he is a good fighter.' I said, 'I will give you a
knife, and I will have a knife, and we will be alone, face to face, and we'll
see which that expletive, again will shout first" -- and once more, the insult
involving one's mother.

The Special Forces soldiers who were with Gul Agha had two tasks: coordinate
airdrops of supplies and coordinate airstrikes. The second task was more
crucial, because without the firepower of the United States Air Force, Gul Agha
and his soldiers would not have gotten out of Shinarai.

The Americans lived and worked closely with Gul Agha, according to several
senior commanders of his who used, in separate interviews, the same phrase --
shoulder to shoulder." The soldiers pitched their tents next to Gul Agha's tent,
or shared rooms in the same compound, and frequently ate with him. The
campaign's military strategy was dictated by the Americans -- Gul Agha's troops
would probe forward, drawing Taliban fire, then retreat so that American fighter
jets could attack the newly revealed Taliban positions.

Initially, Gul Agha was nervous about the Americans -- how would his troops
react to foreigners in their midst? Might that cause trouble? As things turned
out, according to Yusuf Pashtun, a senior adviser to Gul Agha, the opposite was
true -- whenever the Americans slipped from view, as happened when they went to
the front lines or met a helicopter bringing supplies or new personnel, the
rank-and-file would get nervous that the Americans were abandoning the fight.

"Our soldiers became so enthusiastic about the Americans, they would say, when
they weren't around, 'Where are the Americans?"' Pashtun explained. "We told
them they were resting, that it was not fighting time."

There were three key battles -- at the Kandahar airport, at the strategic town
of Takhteh Pol and at a village called Potaki. The battle at Potaki was the
first, and it occurred because Gul Agha was double-crossed.

It is acceptable in Afghan warfare for commanders to switch sides for the right
price, and after an appropriate payment was made to secure the loyalty of
several hundred Taliban troops near Potaki, they fell in line behind Gul Agha's
men -- and promptly opened fire on them.

Gul Agha, along with his Special Forces friends, was encircled: mountains on
either side, Taliban in front and back. The terrain was typical of southern
Afghanistan -- dusty, arid, nothing for an army to hide behind. But the Special
Forces team knew what to do: they quickly called in airstrikes on the Taliban
positions, which were shredded by American fighter jets.

The precision and devastation of the attack was magic to Daro Khan, another of
Gul Agha's commanders. (In Gul Agha's army, there are only the ranks of
commander and soldier.) I met Khan at a Kandahar medical school where his 100
soldiers were billeted; judging from the distinct aroma in the room, some of his
men had been smoking hashish, which is the equivalent, among Gul Agha's
fighters, to G.I.'s downing a beer at the end of the day.

"Without the bombing we would have been finished," Khan recalled. "But when the
Americans bombed we were able to counterattack and break free. We killed many
Arabs and Talibs."

Khan, who has a full beard and a bald head and a loose tongue (he talked about
killing captured Arabs), evoked the enthusiasm of a child with a new toy when he
described looking through night-vision goggles for the first time; an American
soldier had asked him to figure out whether a vehicle in the distance was
friendly. (It was.) "I didn't know these things existed," Khan said.

As much as he admires Gul Agha, he credits the fall of Kandahar to a greater
power.

"Give me 50 soldiers, and with the help of American bombing I could capture all
of Afghanistan in a week," he said.

But in Afghanistan you need more than smart bombs to win a war; you need cash.
You need to pay fighters so they won't loot, you need to buy food so they won't
steal it and you need to purchase gas for their 4-by-4's. Most crucially, you
need cash to entice enemy commanders and soldiers to switch sides, as Gul Agha
thought he had done at Potaki.

The going rate last fall was several thousand dollars for a midlevel commander
and as little as $30 a head for soldiers, in Pakistani rupees. Also, Gul Agha
did not imprison surrendering Afghans; he gave them pocket money and told them
to go home.

Muhammad Anwar seemed a good bet to know where the money was coming from. Anwar
is a commander in Gul Agha's army and one of his best friends; in calm moments
during the march on Kandahar, the two men indulged in their favorite form of
tension reduction -- wrestling each other.

I met Anwar at his headquarters in Kandahar -- a two-story building without
windows, carpets, chairs, lights or decorations of any sort, except for mold on
the walls and crates of grenades on the floor. He would not tell me how much
cash Gul Agha spent, or who supplied it -- no prizes for guessing that one --
but he said Gul Agha had the foresight to bring rupees rather than dollars, the
currency with which the hapless Hamid Karzai paid his inch-a-day men, even
though merchants in rural Uruzgan Province would not accept greenbacks.

"We brought a car of cash with us," Anwar said. "It was a Land Cruiser, full of
money. I think it was resupplied too."

During the march on Kandahar, Gul Agha's wallet was a Toyota.

After the battle of Takhteh Pol, which cut a crucial road between Kandahar and
Pakistan, Gul Agha moved on Kandahar's airport; capture that, and you have the
city in your hands. The airport, however, was defended by several hundred Arab
and Pakistani fighters of Al Qaeda who could not be seduced by Toyota money.

The battle was fierce and involved heavy American airstrikes that were
coordinated by the Special Forces troops. When journalists first asked
questions, Gul Agha's commanders confirmed that they were under orders from Gul
Agha to execute Al Qaeda fighters who surrendered at the airport, and had done
so. Once they realized it is not acceptable for soldiers who are fighting
alongside the Special Forces to engage in such behavior or, at least, to tell
journalists about it, the commanders and Gul Agha insisted they didn't harm
P.O.W.'s at the airport.

It was at the airport that Gul Agha had his Hollywood moment. The fighting was
nearly finished; just a few pops of gunfire here and there, a whoosh or two of
rocket-propelled grenades in the distance. Gul Agha, as usual, had been at the
front line all the time, rushing from commander to commander, making sure
everyone was doing his job, which was killing. As the battle died down, he stood
near the battered terminal building, surrounded by more than 20 Arab corpses
heaped on the ground like bloody rag dolls, and, according to several
commanders, savored his success.

"Look!" he shouted happily to his fighters, like a real-estate agent drawing
attention to a great view. "Look at the Arabs now. They controlled our country
but now they are destroyed. Look at them!" It was like Robert Duvall, in
"Apocalypse Now," loving the smell of napalm in the morning.

With the airport in Gul Agha's hands, the Taliban needed to flee Kandahar. They
made a hasty deal to surrender the city to Mullah Naqib Ullah, a onetime
commander who was on friendly terms with them. Mullah Naqib Ullah, in turn,
would support Karzai. It's not clear whether Gul Agha was part of the deal or
whether he was being cut out, or what role the United States might have played,
but Gul Agha's forces rushed from the airport to the dusty city and captured it
without firing a shot on Dec. 7. The Taliban were finished; Gul Agha was the
victor.

A few days later, Gul Agha was in sultan mode, enthroned on a plastic chair in
the reception hall of the governor's office building, which is in the center of
a city built, principally, of mud. Above him, there were vaulted ceilings and
murals that had been whitewashed by the Taliban because they portrayed famous
Afghan leaders of the past; Gul Agha's men had un-whitewashed the murals. The
floor was covered by new carpets (the old ones vanished with the Taliban) upon
which legions of supplicants inched forward, waiting to pay their respects to
the man who booted Mullah Muhammad Omar out of town. Gul Agha sat behind a
knee-high table that held an assortment of nuts, raisins and cookies, and behind
him were two bodyguards in military fatigues; at least a dozen more wandered
through the crowd.

Gul Agha was multitasking, shaking one man's hand as his other hand was being
kissed by someone else, and during this he spoke to a third man and might have
embraced a fourth. Everyone wanted to see him, touch him, hear him, but most of
all, I suspect, they wanted the cash that was inside the envelopes he was
handing out. At times, a warlord must be an A.T.M.

"You are all like thieves," he growled, warmly. "You always want something from
me."

A man came along, tapped him on the shoulder and whispered, "I have some special
news," and Gul Agha walked off to a corner of the room with him. He returned and
pulled out a pack of Benson & Hedges for a cigarette break. The commotion
continued. An old man approached and leaned forward to hug him; a soldier
marched forward in large goose steps and saluted him; a man in a wheelchair
rolled front and center. The healthy, the lame, the young, the old -- the
gathering was biblical in its scope, and in the end, it was too much for Gul
Agha, who began sobbing.

"This is my happiest day," he said between tears that were wiped away with a
handkerchief. "I am with my people. I will never have such a day again. For
seven years I was in Pakistan. I could not come to my country. Now I will do
everything for the nation. I will work for the people."

It is impossible to enter into another person's mind, especially if that person
is an Afghan warlord, but I think Gul Agha meant what he said -- or at the
least, he meant it at the moment he said it. His emotions are as large as his
girth, and sadness and generosity are not foreign lands to him. But how long
will his determination to do good last?

If he becomes a decent leader, it would be a surprising twist in a life full of
surprises. He was born into poverty, like most Afghans; his father, who ran a
restaurant outside Kandahar, named him Shafeeq. He was not a good student,
though he did show an early aptitude for violence. He always carried a knife,
according to one of his classmates.

When Gul Agha began fighting under his father he took on his current name, which
means "flower." When his father was poisoned, Gul Agha took on greater
responsibilities and added a new name -- Shirzai, which means "son of lion."

But what is on the mind of the lion's offspring? The United States military
would seem to be interested in that question. Special Forces soldiers are never
far from Gul Agha's side -- you glimpse them, from time to time, meeting him in
back rooms of the palace. And he appears to enjoy their proximity, because
America is all-powerful in Afghanistan, at least for now.

Following the American line, Gul Agha says he favors a United Nations
peacekeeping force and supports the notion of disarmament, though it is clear he
would prefer that weapons be seized from soldiers who are not his own. He knows
that there are too many armed men in Afghanistan and that something needs to be
done, soon, to prevent a return of pre-Taliban chaos.

That night at the palace, after the tears and the crowd had subsided, I asked
Gul Agha why anyone should believe that his new rule will be any less bloody and
corrupt than it was the last time, between 1992 and 1994.

"It will never happen again," he said. "The people of Afghanistan need to
reconstruct their country for the future. We will never do what we did in 1992.
All my commanders have promised me on the Holy Koran that they will never do
evil again. They will work together."

But the country is already falling apart. The roads between Kandahar and Kabul
and Herat are dangerous once again; there are robberies and killings that, under
the Taliban, had ceased. Discipline among soldiers is eroding; when I visited a
small unit of Gul Agha's fighters one day, and their commander was away, the
fighters demanded money, and I sensed violence in their illiterate minds. I made
a quick retreat. Across Afghanistan, bored fighters are a payday away from
pillaging.

The destruction of the Taliban has made the United States a safer country, but
the same cannot be said for Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gul Agha, center, celebrating his return to power in Kandahar.
"When the enemy attacks, I fight them face to face," he says. "When my soldiers
saw that I killed three Arabs, they were encouraged."; His "happiest day": Gul
Agha, right, among his people. (Lynsey Addario/Corbis Saba, for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); RELIGION (89%); AL-QAEDA (77%); TERRORISM (77%); MURDER (76%);
SHOOTINGS (76%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HELICOPTERS (66%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (65%);
FIREARMS (65%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             713 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Troops 'Eyeball to Eyeball' On the Indian-Pakistani Line

BYLINE:  By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: CHAKOTHI, Pakistan, Jan. 5


As the leaders of Pakistan and India exchanged a stiff handshake today in Nepal,
their troops pointed machine guns at each other across a rugged ravine here, in
the disputed region of Kashmir.

Diplomatic nuances mean little to the soldiers who patrol this jittery outpost
along the Line of Control, a cease-fire line that serves as a de facto border
between the Indian and Pakistani-controlled parts of Kashmir.

"When you've got two armies standing eyeball to eyeball, even a little accident
can lead to a chain reaction that nobody can control," said Brig. Muhammad
Yaqub, the Pakistani Army's commander in this region.

"Every day, we are getting closer to a situation that nobody can control,"
Brigadier Yaqub said, squinting across the ravine.

Bullets have whistled across this line almost every night since Dec. 13, when
gunmen attacked the Indian Parliament in New Dehli, resulting in 14 deaths,
including those of the 5 assailants. India blamed Pakistan-backed militants for
the attack, and the two nations have edged perilously close to war.

If there is a conflict, it is likely to start here, in the mountain canyons of
Kashmir. Machine-gun nests and artillery batteries nestle among the fir trees,
beneath snow-capped peaks.

They are controlled by soldiers who sometimes behave as though war has already
broken out.

The Indian army said today that Pakistani forces fired rockets and mortar shells
at its positions. Indian troops returned fire with shells, destroying eight
Pakistani bunkers, according to an army spokesman.

On Friday, less than a mile from this post, Indian troops fired several shots at
their Pakistani counterparts, Brigadier Yaqub said. He said that his soldiers
had not returned fire and that he did not know the motive for the attack. More
often, the Pakistanis do fire back, causing casualties on both sides.

"We are taking all the defensive measures required to defend our country," said
Brigadier Yaqub, who spoke at a news briefing here that was organized by the
military for foreign journalists.

Pakistan's goal in taking journalists to the Line of Control seemed to be to
correct a perceived disadvantage in its public relations campaign about Kashmir.
India's government attributes the violence in the region to terrorist groups,
which it says are financed and armed by Pakistan's intelligence service.

Pakistan denies this, though it acknowledges giving moral support to the
insurgents. It refers to them as freedom fighters.

"There are no terrorist groups on our side," Brigadier Yaqub said. "There are
people in Kashmir who were given a pledge of a plebiscite. They have launched a
highly spirited and indigenously motivated armed struggle."

In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks -- and the deep roots that
many militant Islamic groups have in Pakistan -- such assertions are being
greeted with increasing skepticism in the West. People here say India is
exploiting the campaign against terrorism to distort the Kashmir dispute.

In his briefing, Brigadier Yaqub said human rights groups had accused Indian
troops in Kashmir of a catalog of abuses, ranging from rape and sexual
mutilation to murder. He also said 50,000 people had been forced out of their
homes since 1998 by Indian harassment along the border.

At one refugee camp near Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-administered
Kashmir, some residents expressed frustration that the dispute over Kashmir
seemed further from resolution than ever.

"I am angry at the Indian government and the whole world," said Chawdry Mirza,
60, who fled his home in 1994 because of the violence. "Kashmir is a very old
issue, but the world hasn't done anything to solve it."

The farmers in this village, however, do not seem fazed by the standoff
occurring a stone's throw from their homes. Relatively few have fled to refugee
camps, unlike people in the southern part of the region.

Today, farmers could be seen tending their fields, terraced green plots that
step down to a fast-moving river. Across the water, the helmets of Indian
soldiers peeked over the stone walls of their lookout posts.

Neither side is retreating from its positions, and those have not changed much
in decades. Indeed, in some ways, the Line of Control itself seems like a relic
of the cold war.

For instance, Indian and Pakistani troops maintain a telephone hot line that
crosses the border here. The line, which was instituted to head off an
accidental confrontation, has never been used. But once a month, it is checked
by soldiers from each side, Brigadier Yaqub said.

After a date is set by both sides, Indian and Pakistani soldiers raise white
flags and march cautiously to the middle of a wooden footbridge that spans the
border. There, Brigadier Yaqub said, "they check the line, exchange a cup of
tea, talk about cricket and movies, and then go back."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pakistani troops patrolling the Line of Control at Chakothi.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORISM (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); JOURNALISM (66%); MOUNTAINS (66%); RELIGION (50%);
PUBLIC RELATIONS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

STATE: KASHMIR (96%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (96%); PAKISTAN (95%); INDIA (94%); NEPAL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             714 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The A.C.L.U.'s Crusade

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 102 words


To the Editor:

"A Frustrated A.C.L.U. Tries to Guide Consulates Through a Thicket" (news
article, Jan. 2) reports that Anthony D. Romero, the new executive director of
the American Civil Liberties Union, is challenging the government's pursuit of
the war on terrorism.

This is a good way to get publicity, but is it a good way to support the war on
terrorism? I am convinced that an overwhelming majority of Americans support our
government as it carries out this unpleasant and difficult task of trying to
identify who is a terrorist or who may know a terrorist.

THOMAS VAN ARSDALE
Flushing, Queens, Jan. 2, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (88%);
REFUGEES (87%); HIJACKING (87%); MISSING PERSONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION

PERSON: VAN ARSDALE, THOMAS

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (64%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  AFGHANISTAN;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             715 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: STRATEGY;
U.S. SEES BATTLES IN LAWLESS AREAS AFTER AFGHAN WAR

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1394 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


The war on terrorism after Afghanistan could focus on denying terrorist groups
sanctuary in places like Somalia, Yemen, Indonesia and the Philippines,
countries where they have sometimes operated freely, Deputy Secretary of Defense
Paul D. Wolfowitz said today.

Mr. Wolfowitz's remarks, in an interview, provided one of the clearest outlines
of the military's strategy for destroying terrorist networks.

While Mr. Wolfowitz has a reputation as one of the more aggressive members of
President Bush's war council, his statements suggested that the Pentagon could
opt to put off the bigger and politically more difficult targets in the war on
terrorism like Iraq, and therefore avoid conflict with some of its most
important Arab and European allies, which have been leery about taking on
Baghdad.

Instead, Mr. Wolfowitz said, the military is now engaged with friendly countries
like the Philippines that would welcome American help in ridding themselves of
terrorist networks. The Pentagon is also looking hard at possible terror bases
in countries like Somalia and Yemen that are weakly governed and ill equipped to
uproot them.

Mr. Wolfowitz stressed that he was not providing an explicit forecast for the
next step in the war on terrorism and that the Pentagon had not ruled out
imminent military action against any country.

But he has been one of the leading advocates in the Bush administration for
ousting President Saddam Hussein. And he seemed to signal to Iraq and other
state sponsors of terrorism that unless they stopped harboring terrorists, they
could face increased diplomatic, financial and, if necessary, military pressure
from the United States.

He asserted that America's devastating air campaign in Afghanistan had already
induced many nations that have supported terrorism to change their ways, and
that it would serve as a powerful deterrent against future acts of terrorism.

"I'd say almost everywhere one has seen progress," he said. "A lot of that
progress is motivated by the sense of American seriousness and the fear of
getting on the wrong side of us."

"To the extent that's the motivation," Mr. Wolfowitz continued, "then obviously
you don't want to issue a report card on those people and have them let up,
because they're not doing it out of the goodness of their heart."

Iraq, however, has shown no signs of opposing terrorism, Mr. Wolfowitz said.
While President Saddam Hussein "is keeping his head down these days," Mr.
Wolfowitz said, "that should not leave the impression that he doesn't continue
to do a bunch of things that concern us." Those things include firing at
American warplanes patrolling the no-flight zones in southern and northern Iraq.

He also asserted that the Pentagon's main focus remained Afghanistan, which he
described as being "at least as treacherous and dangerous now as it was a month
or two ago." Last week, a Special Forces soldier was killed in an ambush near
the Pakistan border, an attack that a Pentagon spokesman today called "a setup."
Remnants of Taliban and Al Qaeda forces continue to operate in southern and
eastern Afghanistan.

Pentagon officials said today that American B-52 and B-1 bombers had continued
attacking one terrorist enclave near the Pakistan border in an attempt to
destroy heavily armed Al Qaeda forces that have been trying to regroup. The
bombers struck the base at Zawar Kili, near the town of Khost, on Sunday for the
third time in a week, destroying tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery
and other heavy weapons that had been piled up there by American troops who
searched the compound, officials said.

"One of the most difficult things in the next few months is going to be
establishing which of our allies of convenience in the early stages of this war
can become real allies over the longer term, and which ones are going to be
major troublemakers, and which ones are going to just switch sides," Mr.
Wolfowitz said in the interview.

So far, Hamid Karzai, the leader of the interim government in Kabul, has "proven
to be an impressive man," Mr. Wolfowitz said. "Whether he's up to the formidable
job he has is a different question."

While careful not to identify countries where America might next aim its
military might, Mr. Wolfowitz said Somalia, perhaps more than any other place,
fitted the bill of a lawless state that draws terrorists like a magnet. The
administration has identified Al Itihaad, a militant religious group based in
Somalia, as a terrorist organization with ties to Al Qaeda. The United States
has also shut down Somalia's major money-transfer company and stepped up
reconnaissance flights off its coast.

"Obviously Somalia comes up as a possible candidate for Al Qaeda people to flee
to precisely because the government is weak or nonexistent," Mr. Wolfowitz said.

But he acknowledged that American options were limited in Somalia, where, he
said, "by definition you don't have a government you can work with." The Central
Intelligence Agency, he added, is "looking for exactly those sorts of people"
that the United States can use as proxy forces, as it did with anti-Taliban
groups in Afghanistan.

In the Philippines, he said the government was eager to quell a rebellion by
hundreds of Muslim militants from the Abu Sayyaf group who have been linked to
Al Qaeda and have been battling government forces on Basilan Island, in the
southern part of the country. American officials have already begun training the
country's forces in counterterrorist and Special Operations activities.

American involvement "might include direct support of Philippine military
operations," he said. "There's no question that we believe that if they could
clear the Abu Sayyaf group out of Basilan Island, that would be a small blow
against the extended Al Qaeda network."

But he added that the Manila government was "very anxious to do it themselves,"
adding: "That's the crucial standard for them. They're very willing to take help
within the framework of helping them help themselves."

In Indonesia, Islamic militants have fought with Christians on Sulawesi Island
and in Maluku Province, areas where the government "is extremely weak," Mr.
Wolfowitz said.

"You see the potential for Muslim extremists and Muslim terrorists to link up
with those Muslim groups in Indonesia and find a little corner for themselves in
a country that's otherwise quite unfriendly to terrorism," he said. "In the case
of Sulawesi, the concern is there isn't enough military to protect the local
population or to create the kinds of stable conditions that keep terrorism
down."

He said that while Indonesia had expressed a willingness to crack down on
terrorists, the government there was fearful of causing a violent backlash among
its large Muslim population. He also said the United States was prepared to
provide assistance, though the Pentagon was under restrictions about conducting
certain joint exercises with the Indonesian military, which has been accused of
human rights abuses. Those restrictions, Mr. Wolfowitz said, "really need to be
reviewed in the light of Sept. 11."

He said it was unlikely, however, that the United States would consider direct
military action in Indonesia, "because it's such a big and disparate place."

Yemen also has pockets or regions of lawlessness that lie outside the control of
the central government, he said. "There are very significant back regions of
Yemen," he said. "That's a case of an ungoverned piece of a country."

In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, the United States put pressure on
Yemen to crack down on suspected Al Qaeda cells in the country. Three months
later, Yemeni special operations troops exchanged fire with tribesmen in remote
parts of the country's central region, as the troops tried to capture suspected
members of the terrorist network.
 --------------------

Canada to Send Troops

OTTAWA, Jan. 7 (AP) -- Canada will send 750 troops to Afghanistan, where they
will join United States forces in the Kandahar region, Canada's defense minister
said today.

The minister, Art Eggleton, said the troops would head to Afghanistan in
mid-February. The Canadians will be under the command of American forces and
will work with an American battalion.

"They will carry out a range of activities including potential combat to destroy
residual and combative Al Qaeda pockets," Mr. Eggleton said. "This mission is
not without risks."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, in an interview
yesterday, outlined the military's strategy for the war on terrorism. (Carol T.
Powers for The New York Times)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); INTERVIEWS
(90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); HIJACKING (78%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%);
AIRLINES (60%) TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%) DAO, JAMES; SCHMITT, ERIC; WOLFOWITZ, PAUL D
(DEPUTY SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); PHILIPPINES (94%);
INDONESIA (93%); EUROPE (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: IRAQ;  AFGHANISTAN;  IRAQ;  YEMEN;  SOMALIA;  INDONESIA;  PHILIPPINES;
EUROPE;  MIDDLE EAST;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             716 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1264 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Captain of Seized Ship Says Cargo Was for Palestinians
The captain of a ship seized last week by Israel as it carried tons of weapons
said in jail-house interviews that he had taken his orders from a weapons agent
of Yasir Arafat's Palestinian Authority and that his cargo was meant to arm
Palestinians.   A1

Pakistan Leader's Uncertainty
President Pervez Musharraf became so concerned last week that tensions with
India over Kashmir would spill into war that he called the American ambassador
in Pakistan to ask where Washington intended to draw the line in supporting
India.   A1


President Bush said the standoff between India and Pakistan remained serious and
volatile, and he called on President Musharraf, Pakistan's military ruler, to
make a clear pledge to crack down on terrorism. India blames groups based in
Pakistan for the attack on India's Parliament last month and for other attacks.
A10

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain met in Islamabad with President Musharraf,
who restated his opposition to terrorism.   A10

Bosnia Asks U.S. for Ex-Envoy
The Bosnian authorities have asked the United States to extradite the country's
former United Nations ambassador, Muhamed Sacirbey, so that he can face criminal
charges at home. Mr. Sacirbey is accused of embezzling $610,980 from Bosnia's
mission to the United Nations.   A4

Protesters Detained in Moscow
Four protesters were briefly held after a protest on behalf of Grigory Pasko, a
journalist whose work on the Russian Navy's handling of nuclear waste led to a
treason conviction. Mr. Pasko was found guilty of high treason and sentenced to
four years. Human rights organizers have denounced the verdict, and Mr. Pasko's
lawyers intend to appeal.   A8

World Briefing   A6

NATION CHALLENGED   A12-13

Looking Beyond Afghanistan In U.S. Hunt for Terrorists
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz said the Pentagon was turning its
attention to lawless swaths inside nations like Indonesia, the Philippines,
Somalia and Yemen where terror groups have thrived.   A1

Arrests in Singapore
A group of men arrested in Singapore on suspicion of being terrorists were
planning to bomb the American Embassy and American businesses in that small
city-state, a Singaporean official said.   A12

Terror Seen as Still a Threat
The foreign ministers of China, Russia and four Central Asian countries said
that the fall of the Taliban did not end the terror threat and that their
governments would continue to work together against "terrorism, separatism and
extremism," a reference to sometimes controversial efforts to suppress Islamic
militants.   A12

Standardized Driver Licenses
Officials in the states are proposing unified standards for driver's licenses
that would make the licenses more consistent in appearance and information and
would require states to take the same security measures before issuing them.
A13

Prosecutor's View on Tribunals
Mary Jo White, the departing United States attorney in Manhattan, said the
proposed military tribunals for suspected terrorists ought to have "nearly all
of the safeguards that are built into civilian criminal trials."   A13

Wariness on Anthrax Vaccine
Fewer than 2 percent of the 10,000 people who may have been exposed to anthrax
during recent bioterror attacks have taken the anthrax vaccine, reflecting the
reluctance of postal workers to enroll in a medical experiment, federal
officials said.   A13

Effort on Military Health
The Defense Department will improve medical monitoring of its personnel to avoid
lingering health problems for troops sent overseas.   A13

NATIONAL   A14-17

Regulators Urge Bush To Ease Clean-Air Rules
Top federal regulators informally recommended that the White House relax one of
the most contentious air pollution regulations, a provision requiring power
plants to upgrade pollution control equipment when they upgrade their
operations.   A1

Labor Notice Rule Struck Down
A federal judge voided a Bush executive order requiring federal contractors to
post notices telling workers they did not have to join unions. The Labor
Department will appeal.   A14

Sharp Rise in Health Spending
National health spending shot up 6.9 percent to $1.3 trillion in 2000, the
largest one-year percentage increase since President Bill Clinton proposed to
guarantee health insurance for all Americans in 1993.   A14

Bush Foresees Deficit Budget
President Bush said he might not propose a balanced budget this year, which
would be the first time since 1997 that the government would spend more than it
took in.   A16

Domestic Abuse Ruling
A Kentucky judge has decided to hold two women in contempt of court for
returning to men who had been ordered to stay away from them. Advocates for
battered women said they would appeal.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Court Orders 2 Retried In '91 Crown Heights Case
A federal appeals court ordered a new trial for two black men, Lemrick Nelson
Jr., left, and Charles Price, convicted in 1997 of civil rights violations in
the killing of a Hasidic Jew during the Crown Heights disturbances in 1991. The
court said the judge had improperly manipulated jury selection.   A1

Lack of Faith in a Witness
The United States attorney Mary Jo White decided not to seek charges against
Senator Robert G. Torricelli after concluding that the chief witness in the
campaign finance inquiry had too many credibility problems, people in the
inquiry said.   B1

Front-Runner for Speaker
A. Gifford Miller, a Democratic councilman from the Upper East Side, emerged as
the likely winner in maneuvering to become the second-most powerful official in
the city.   B1

Fare Increase Approved
New Jersey Transit approved a 10 percent fare rise for train and bus riders on
April 1.   B1

Neediest Cases   B4

FASHION   B8

Fashion Icon Retiring
Yves Saint Laurent announced his retirement in Paris, after more than 40 years
in which he helped revolutionize the way women dress.   A1

ARTS   E1-10

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Health & Fitness   F7

OBITUARIES   B7

SPORTS   D1-7

Jets to Face Raiders in Playoffs
Baltimore beat Minnesota, 19-3, to complete the N.F.L. playoff picture. The Jets
will play the Raiders Saturday in Oakland.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Teenager Runs Afoul of S.E.C.
Cole Bartiromo, 17, of California, who raised more than $1 million from
investors last fall by guaranteeing returns of up to 2,500 percent, agreed to
return any of his profits from the fraud to investors. But he and the S.E.C.
have still to agree on how much money he will ultimately have to return or
whether he will face fines or other civil penalties.   C1

AOL Taking Big Charge
AOL Time Warner, the world's biggest media company, said it would take a charge
of up to $60 billion partly because of a change in accounting rules that took
effect on Jan. 1.   C1

Shuffle at ABC Entertainment
ABC, which suffered a steep falloff in prime-time ratings this season, removed
Stu Bloomberg as co-chairman of its entertainment division and effectively
replaced him with Susan Lyne, who was named the president of entertainment.   C1


Lucent Ends Search for C.E.O.
Lucent Technologies chose Patricia F. Russo, who was a top executive there
before leaving in 2000.   C1

A Different Kind of iMac
Apple introduced an unorthodox version of its iMac personal computer, seeking to
refresh its once-popular three-year-old consumer model.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: Deficit politics returns; smuggled arms in the Mideast; a chilling
aerial suicide; mapping New York's political future.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E10
TV Listings   E9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); ARRESTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); TREASON (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (87%); VERDICTS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(79%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); NAVIES (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (77%); SENTENCING (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); TALIBAN
(76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); EXTRADITION (72%); MILITARY RULE (71%); TRANSPORTATION
LAW (68%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (67%); EMBEZZLEMENT (65%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(65%); LICENSES & PERMITS (62%); DRIVERS LICENSES (62%); RELIGION (50%); NUCLEAR
WASTE (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (87%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%); TONY BLAIR (52%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (76%)

STATE: KASHMIR (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); PAKISTAN (94%);
UNITED STATES (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%); SINGAPORE (92%); ISRAEL (92%); CHINA (79%); ASIA (79%);
CENTRAL ASIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); INDONESIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             717 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE INDIA-PAKISTAN TENSION: DIPLOMACY;
Musharraf Sees Blair and Plans to Announce Steps Against Extremists

BYLINE:  By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 7


Urging restraint on India and Pakistan, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain
flew here today from New Delhi and met with President Pervez Musharraf, who said
Pakistan "rejects terrorism in all its forms and manifestations."

General Musharraf said he would spell out the steps Pakistan planned to take to
fight violent extremists in a speech in the next few days.

Those steps, in addition to further restrictions on militant groups, may include
bans on hate speech at Muslim schools and an end to open fund-raising for
Islamic militants, officials said.

Western diplomats and Pakistani officials expressed hope that the speech, which
could be delivered as early as Wednesday or Thursday, would provide a basis for
scaling down the precarious buildup of military forces along the border and
starting talks aimed at ending the crisis between the nuclear-armed rivals that
began on Dec. 13 with an attack on India's Parliament.

But even after the visit by Mr. Blair, India's government again rejected calls
for dialogue, charging that Pakistan had not yet proved its sincerity in
cracking down on the Islamic militant groups that India blamed for the attack.

"There's no question of any dialogue with Pakistan when there is no change in
its attitude," India's foreign minister, Jaswant Singh, told reporters after a
cabinet security meeting today attended by Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee.

Today the two sides continued shelling each other in divided Kashmir, the
predominantly Muslim border region they both claim, and about 20 people were
reported killed there in shootouts. Large numbers of troops remained on high
alert along the entire 1,800-mile border.

Officials said General Musharraf would meet with senior political and military
advisers beginning on Tuesday to agree on measures to be announced in his
speech.

The general will have to tread a delicate line between persuading foreign
countries of his determination to curb Islamic militancy and not appearing to
jettison the cause of Kashmir, which has been so vital to Pakistanis since the
country's inception in 1947.

General Musharraf, who often speaks in English, is considering delivering the
speech in Urdu, advisers said, underscoring his need to convince a restive
public that curbing religious fanaticism is vital to Pakistan's future.

"We have a plan for checking extremism in our society," General Musharraf said
tonight at a news conference with Mr. Blair, emphasizing that he had initiated
measures to halt terrorists and slash the number of guns in the country even
before the attacks on the United States on Sept. 11.

In the last year, the general started a campaign to collect illegal automatic
weapons, which swamped the country during successive wars in neighboring
Afghanistan, and in August he banned the military wings of two Muslim sectarian
groups that were involved in growing violence and assassinations inside
Pakistan.

In recent weeks, under the shadow of India's military buildup and at the urging
of Western countries, General Musharraf has intensified that campaign, arresting
the leaders of two groups dedicated to jihad, or Islamic holy war, in Kashmir
and detaining several hundred followers of those and other militant religious
organizations.

Vans are no longer been permitted to drive through Pakistan's towns and cities
openly seeking recruits to holy war.

Pakistani officials say they have been frustrated by India's vague, increasing
demands and its refusal to acknowledge the genuine and politically difficult
steps General Musharraf has already taken to rein in the militants.

India, taking a cue from Washington and its unyielding military campaign in
Afghanistan, has used the specter of war to push for all the concessions it can
get from Pakistan over an issue that strikes deep emotional chords in both
countries.

Pakistani political experts warn, though, that an effort by India to humiliate
General Musharraf may backfire. "No Pakistani government can be seen to be
caving in to Indian dictates," said Pervais Iqbal Cheema, president of the
Islamabad Policy Research Institute, an autonomous study center.

After Sept. 11 and the formation of an international coalition to destroy the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, General Musharraf made a wrenching change in policy,
ending years of Pakistani support for the Taliban and joining in the
American-led campaign.

But two egregious acts on Indian territory -- a suicide bombing on Oct. 1 at the
state legislature in Srinagar, in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, that killed 40
and the attack on the Parliament in New Delhi on Dec. 13, in which 14 people
including the five attackers died -- threw the spotlight on fervent Muslim
groups that have waged an increasingly violent struggle to end Indian rule in
the southern part of Kashmir.

India charges, and Western diplomats agree, that Pakistan has aided such groups
in the past. Pakistan makes the case, in turn, that India has been brutal and
violated human rights in its effort to suppress a legitimate political movement.

In recent days, despite the evidence of a crackdown in Pakistan, Indian
officials have said they are unconvinced. In part that is because Pakistani
officials still talk about the struggle for liberation in Kashmir and in part
because they have felt betrayed by General Musharraf in the past, when friendly
meetings were followed by new attacks in the territory.

Indian officials also charge that Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency,
which funneled support to the Taliban and to Kashmir fighters in the past, may
not be fully within the general's control -- a charge that he firmly denies.

General Musharraf has changed the director of the agency and quietly transferred
many of its hard-liners to different jobs.

The Kashmir dispute has alarmed Washington and London, which fear a splintering
of the global war on terror as well as the danger of a cataclysmic war.

Mr. Blair, after three days in India and a day in Pakistan, did not appear to
have achieved any breakthrough. But he said tonight that he felt both sides
understood that the crisis could abate only if two principles were followed:
that Pakistan unequivocally renounce terrorist violence and that both sides pull
back troops and engage in dialogue.

Mr. Blair, who later flew on to Afghanistan, noted the material benefits that
Pakistan had gained by joining with the global coalition against the Taliban and
Al Qaeda -- including debt rescheduling, trade concessions and promises of
economic and military aid -- and praised General Musharraf for his vision.

The American ambassador here, Wendy J. Chamberlin, said the United States
planned to support Pakistan's crackdown through aid in three areas: improving an
education system that too often breeds religious extremism, improving the
quality of the police and law enforcement and boosting trade and investment.

"I really believe that creating jobs in this country is a way to protect
American lives," she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, left, and Gen. Pervez
Musharraf of Pakistan met yesterday in Islamabad. (Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (91%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ASSASSINATION
(78%); SHOOTINGS (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (75%);
FUNDRAISING (75%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (74%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (71%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (70%); ARMED FORCES (69%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (63%) TERRORISM;  ISLAM;
GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-INDIA;  GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-PAKISTAN

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (92%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (92%) BLAIR, TONY (PRIME MIN);
MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN); ECKHOLM, ERIK

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (93%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (93%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (97%); PAKISTAN (95%); ASIA (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: INDIA;  GREAT BRITAIN;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA);  ISLAMABAD
(PAKISTAN);  NEW DELHI (INDIA)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             719 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 9, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan May Be Unable to Calm Kashmir

BYLINE:  By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR, India, Jan. 8


Pakistan's president says he is taking steps to crack down on Islamic militants
who use his country as a base to drive India from Kashmir. But it seems that
word has yet to trickle down to this Himalayan border region, where the
countries have fought on and off for 50 years.

There are still fresh killings here every day, by militants and Indian security
forces alike, and Indian security officials say more than half of the militants
still active in the Kashmir valley are foreigners, mostly Pakistanis and
Afghans.

Today the Indian Army shot dead two gunmen who had opened fire in front of an
army base northwest of here, killing one soldier. India said the gunmen were
Pakistanis and members of a Pakistan-based militant group called
Lashkar-e-Taiba.

In a late-night raid last Friday, the army gunned down three men it said were
members of Jaish-e-Muhammad, another group based across the border. One of them
was a Pakistani, the Indians said.

And two days before that, in the southern portion of the valley, Indian security
forces killed two men they described as Pakistanis, also Lashkar-e-Taiba
members.

Pakistani leaders are increasingly wary now that any one of the violent
incidents that occur daily may become the spark for a full-scale war between the
nuclear rivals, who have staged a huge buildup of military forces along their
1,800-mile border.

The latest batch of foreigners, Indian officials say, infiltrated through the
Pakistani-held part of Kashmir a few days after the armed attack on India's
Parliament on Dec. 13 that set off the current heightening of tensions.

Even if foreign fighters stop entering, many militants among the local
population in Jammu and Kashmir, India's only predominantly Muslim state, say
they will continue the fight against India on their own.

There is no way to independently confirm the nationalities of the slain
militants. But India says the incidents show that Pakistan, despite of the
pledges by its president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, continues to dispatch
terrorists into the Indian-held portion of Kashmir.

The two groups -- Lashkar-e-Taiba, whose name means the Army of God in Urdu, and
Jaish-e-Muhammad, or the Army of Muhammad -- dominate the armed insurgency in
Kashmir, Indian officials say, and India holds both groups responsible for the
attack on its Parliament.

Pakistan arrested several leaders of the groups in recent days, and General
Musharraf is said to have ordered a suspension of support to both.

But Indian officials, who after all are none too eager to give credit to General
Musharraf, say his latest declarations have brought no respite to Kashmir. Nor,
they say, do they expect peace here anytime soon.

Even if General Musharraf is sincere about wanting to crack down on the groups,
it is not clear whether he can exert full control over them or whether the
militants will continue to receive the backing of parts of Pakistan's
intelligence service who hold the Kashmiri cause dear.

"These militant groups don't want it to be thought they are under pressure," R.
S. Bhullar, the deputy inspector general of the Border Security Force in
Kashmir, said in an interview.

The public statements of at least one such group bear out his view. Last week,
immediately after General Musharraf ordered the arrest of its leaders,
Jaish-e-Muhammad seemed to dismiss the gesture.

"We are in possession of more deadly and sophisticated weapons," the group
declared in a statement published in Kashmiri newspapers, "and they will be
fully used against the military and paramilitary forces of India in the coming
days."

Indian security officials say that Jaish and Lashkar, manned mostly by
Pakistanis from the Punjab and Sind regions, are the best financed, most
disciplined and best armed groups operating in the Kashmir valley.

With their penchant for suicide attacks and their sophisticated weaponry, they
have in recent years sidelined the much larger groups made up of local
Kashmiris, chief among them Hizbul Mujahedeen, that are also fighting to wrest
the region from Indian control.

But while the Indian authorities blamed Lashkar-e-Taiba for the attack on the
army base today, another Kashmiri group, Jamiat-ul-Mujahedeen, based in the
Pakistani side of Kashmir, claimed responsibility.

Some Kashmiri groups welcome the Pakistani crackdown on groups like Jaish and
Lashkar. To rid the valley of those outsiders, they say, would only aid their
movement, in large part because it would defang the Indian contention that the
fighting in Kashmir is nothing more than a Pakistani plot.

Kashmiris took up arms long before the Pakistani-based guerrillas arrived, these
local groups say, and they will carry on long after they leave, so long as India
denies them a chance to decide their own fate -- independence or allegiance to
India or Pakistan.

"For Kashmir it is a right decision," said Yasin Malik, the leader of the Jammu
and Kashmir Liberation Front, a onetime armed insurgent group that harbors equal
enmity for Pakistan and India and advocates independence. "It is an indigenous
movement. It should remain in the hands of the Kashmiri people."

Others insist that no matter the pressure on General Musharraf, Pakistan will
continue to aid the Kashmiri fight against Indian rule. This is the view of Syed
Ali Shah Geelani, who heads the local political wing of the Jamaat-i-Islami, an
Islamic party that is a staunch ally of Pakistan.

Groups like Jaish and Lashkar, he says, operate inside Kashmir with the support
of local people. "They are supporting a suppressed nation," he said of the
Pakistani-based groups.

Group affiliation seems to matter little to the people of Sonarkalipora, a
village just west of here. On Monday the village buried three men. A large,
fiery crowd of people from there and beyond paraded down the twisting dirt
roads, carrying the dead on their shoulders and filling the air with shouts for
freedom.

One of the dead, Nazir Ahmed Khan, 18, was from the village, about an hour's
drive west of Srinagar. Without a word to his family, he had run off just over a
week ago to join the Islamic fighters. Of the others, one was from near Jammu,
in the southern portion of this state. The last was a Pakistani, Indian
officials said. All three, they said, were members of Jaish-e-Muhammad.

The teenager from the village ran off and joined Jaish-e-Muhammad after his
father and older brother were arrested and tortured by the police, something
that human rights groups say happens with alarming frequency.

His father, Abdul Sattar Khan, said his son had left without any explanation.
Had he known, the father said, he would have talked him out of it. "He was my
right arm," he said, his face cracked with the ravines of age. "I never expected
him to join the mujahedeen."

The army discovered the boy and the two men holed up in a nearby village,
Kawoosa, its residents said. A gun battle went on in the wee hours of the night,
they recalled. When it ended, three bodies were hauled out.

For several days Kawoosa remained under lockdown. An army tank designed to
withstand land mines stood sentry at the top of the road leading to the village,
along with heavily armed soldiers. No one was allowed to pass through while the
army continued its operation inside. No one could say how long it would go on.

The three who died, local and foreigner alike, got a martyr's funeral in
Sonarkalipora, a tinderbox procession of rage and grief. "Martyrs, we salute
you," the women sang. Little boys, skinny as twigs, squeaked "Jaish" and
"Lashkar" and giggled. Shouts of "Pakistan" mixed with shouts for freedom.

Young men declared that they, too, were ready to sign up with the militants --
any militants -- foreign, domestic, it did not matter.

"For us it's one and the same," said a young man, who like the rest declined to
give his name for fear of his life. "Jaish or Hizbul. Whoever is fighting for
jihad, we don't make a distinction."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the village of Sonarkalipora, a funeral procession was held
for three militants killed by the Indian Army. (Somini Sengupta/The New York
Times) Chart: "KEEPING TRACK -- Moving Military Forces"The Pentagon confirmed
that India was moving troops west toward its border with Pakistan, as Pakistan
was moving troops east away from its border with Afghanistan, pulling forces
from the hunt for Al Qaeda. Below, a look at the military strength of each
country. INDIATROOPS Army: 1,100,000Air Force: 110,000Navy: 53,000 ARTILLERY
WEAPONS5,271 COMBAT AIRCRAFT869 PAKISTANTROOPS Army: 550,000Air Force:
45,000Navy: 25,000 ARTILLERY WEAPONS1,752 ARMORED VEHICLES3,450 COMBAT
AIRCRAFT387 Numbers are estimates.Both countries tested nuclear weapons, but the
number of warheads each country may hold remains unclear.(Source: Center for
Strategic and International Studies) Map of India and Pakistan highlighting
Jammu and Kashmir.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
SHOOTINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (90%); TERRORISM (78%); RELIGION (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); CIVIL WAR (75%); ARMED FORCES (70%)
TERRORISM;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: LASHKAR E TAYYABA (83%); AL-QAEDA (59%); JAISH-E-MOHAMMED (56%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (89%) SENGUPTA, SOMINI; MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

STATE: KASHMIR (99%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (99%); ASIA (99%); PAKISTAN (97%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: INDIA;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA);  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             723 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Rules Detention Law Unconstitutional

BYLINE:  By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 591 words


In the second such ruling in three weeks, a federal appeals court said yesterday
that the 1996 law requiring mandatory detention without bail of certain
immigrants who have committed crimes was unconstitutional.

The case, decided by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit,
in California, involved a Korean man who came to the United States in 1984 and
became a lawful permanent resident two years later. In 1997, at age 18, the man,
Hyung Joon Kim, was convicted of burglary; the next year, he was convicted of
petty theft and sentenced to three years in prison.

The day after his release from state prison, the Immigration and Naturalization
Service detained Mr. Kim on the ground that his criminal record made him
deportable, triggering mandatory detention under the Illegal Immigration Reform
and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, which went into effect in 1998.

Mr. Kim filed a petition of habeas corpus, and, after six months in detention,
won a district court ruling that the mandatory detention provision was
unconstitutional.

The immigration service then released him on a $5,000 bond, but the litigation
continued.

In yesterday's ruling, the appeals court said that while the agency had the
right to detain a lawful permanent resident before deportation, due process
required that it hold a bail hearing "with reasonable promptness" to determine
whether the particular immigrant posed a flight risk or a danger to the
community.

The issue of mandatory and indefinite detention has been challenged in many
courts.

Last summer, the United States Supreme Court, in Zadvydas v. Davis, said it was
a violation of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to keep immigrants
who had been ordered deported in indefinite detention, if no country would
accept them.

And just last month, in Patel v. Zemski, the United States Court of Appeals for
the Third Circuit, in Pennsylvania, said mandatory detention without an
individualized bail hearing was also unconstitutional for those undergoing
deportation proceedings.

While none of the rulings has any direct impact on those detained since the
Sept. 11 terror attacks, yesterday's opinion does take note of the nation's
increasing concerns about terrorism. It pointed out, however, that there is no
contention that Mr. Kim is a terrorist and that he is facing deportation
proceedings because of "rather ordinary crimes."

"No responsible court will leave an unprotected spot in the nation's armor, and
our decision does not do so," said the opinion, which was written by Judge
William A. Fletcher.

Judy Rabinowitz, of the American Civil Liberties Union's Immigrants Rights
Project, who argued both the Ninth Circuit and Third Circuit cases -- and has
five other appeals cases pending on the issue -- said the latest decision
indicated the need for a re-thinking of detention policies.

"It's significant, at a time when we have the I.N.S. locking people up based on
all kinds of presumptions, that we have two courts in the last month saying that
due process requires that there be individualized determinations of who poses a
risk of flight or a danger to the community," Ms. Rabinowitz said.

Even the immigration service has expressed some doubts about the law on
mandatory detention.

"We haven't seen the Ninth Circuit ruling, so we will have to review it," said
Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for the agency. "Our job is to enforce the law as
written. But we have advocated, in the past, for immigration judges to have some
discretion regarding mandatory detention."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (96%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); PRISONS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); BAIL (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); LARCENY & THEFT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); DUE PROCESS (89%); TERRORISM (85%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HABEAS CORPUS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); BURGLARY (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
MISDEMEANORS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); PETITIONS (73%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (61%) CRIME AND CRIMINALS;
DEPORTATION;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  BAIL;  ROBBERIES AND THEFTS

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (54%) IMMIGRATION AND
NATURALIZATION SERVICE

PERSON: WILLIAM A FLETCHER (79%) LEWIN, TAMAR; KIM, JYUNG JOON

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             724 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Freedom and Security

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 158 words


To the Editor:

In a Jan. 3 news article, you quote Richard T. Foltin of the American Jewish
Committee as saying a 10-point statement issued by the American Civil Liberties
Union and other groups soon after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks did not
recognize the need to protect the national security.

In fact, the statement, which was signed by 170 organizations from across the
political spectrum, clearly stated the government's obligation to protect us
from further attack.

Point 5, for example, says, "We can, as we have in the past, in times of war and
of peace, reconcile the requirements of security with the demands of liberty."

In news releases, analyses and testimony before Congress, the A.C.L.U. has
repeatedly recommended that our elected leaders weigh every proposal to ensure
that it maximizes our security while minimizing the impact on liberty.

ANTHONY D. ROMERO
Executive Director
American Civil Liberties Union
New York, Jan. 7, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (88%); TERRORISM (87%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(87%); HIJACKING (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); EXECUTIVES (66%) TERRORISM;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%); AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE
(84%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: ROMERO, ANTHONY D

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (71%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             726 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Cyrus R. Vance, a Confidant Of Presidents, Is Dead at 84

BYLINE:    By MARILYN BERGER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2934 words


Cyrus R. Vance, who after two decades in public service was appointed secretary
of state, and who then took the rare step of resigning from the nation's highest
cabinet post on a matter of principle, died yesterday afternoon at Mount Sinai
Medical Center in New York. He was 84.

The cause was pneumonia and other complications, said Elva Murphy, his longtime
secretary.

Mr. Vance was secretary of state from 1977 until 1980, when he resigned in
protest over President Jimmy Carter's decision to try a military rescue of
American hostages in Iran, an action that he considered ill advised and futile.
He was soon proved right.

After more than 20 years in and out of government, during which he served
several presidents, Mr. Vance submitted his resignation with what he called "a
heavy heart." His doubts that the elaborate rescue would succeed, and his fears
that it would sabotage diplomatic efforts to free the 52 American hostages,
brought him to what he called "one of the most painful days of my life."

His opposition to the rescue mission was the immediate cause of his resignation,
but he had already come to see that President Carter was increasingly rejecting
his advice in favor of that of his national security adviser, Zbigniew
Brzezinski.

As it turned out the rescue attempt failed. Of the eight American helicopters
sent on the mission, three broke down in the first stage of the operation. It
was decided to abandon the mission, but there was more humiliation ahead for the
United States. One of the remaining helicopters collided on the ground with a
transport plane and both craft burned. Eight servicemen died in the fire and the
rest fled.

The failed mission became an issue in the 1980 political campaign in which Mr.
Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan. The hostages were not released until the
day of Mr. Reagan's inauguration, 444 days after they were taken captive.

Mr. Vance said in 1999 that he had watched from the sidelines with "frustration
and sadness" as relations between the United States and Iran "plunged into
increasing hostility, mistrust, name calling and mutual recrimination." In an
address at the Asia Society, Mr. Vance called for the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations with Iran.

Mr. Vance -- who had decided to leave office whether the rescue succeeded or
failed -- was only the second secretary of state in the history of the United
States to resign on a matter of principle, joining what another secretary of
state, Dean Acheson, called "the most exclusive club in America." William
Jennings Bryan, the only other secretary of state to resign, was a pacifist who
resigned in 1915 over policies by Woodrow Wilson that he thought might lead to
war.

An Obligation to Serve

That Mr. Vance allowed principle to get in the way of his career came as no
surprise to the people who knew him best. To them, Cyrus Vance, the tall, lanky,
patrician lawyer with the open face of a prep school boy was Mr. Integrity, Mr.
Honesty. He was the epitome of the American establishment, that small group of
men who moved seamlessly from the prep schools of New England and the Ivy League
colleges of the East to the law firms of Wall Street, with time out for service
in government. Then they would return again to private practice, bringing with
them the old values of family, work and public service.

After his return to private practice, Mr. Vance was repeatedly called back to
the public arena to use his quiet negotiating skills on some of the bloodiest
conflicts of the 1980's and 1990's: in the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute between
Azerbaijan and Armenia; in South Africa; and in a disintegrating Yugoslavia.
There, he successfully negotiated a cease-fire in Croatia to allow a United
Nations peacekeeping force to enter and disarm warring militias.

In accepting one assignment after another, Mr. Vance was only doing what he
believed was expected of him. He said, "A lot of us were raised in families
where we were taught that we were very fortunate, that we were going to have a
good education, and that we had the responsibility to return to the community
some of the benefits and blessings we had, and that there was an obligation to
participate in government service at the local, state and national level."

This, in a nutshell, was the unself-conscious voice of the establishment -- the
one that Jimmy Carter ran against so vigorously that his campaign manager,
Hamilton Jordan, once said: "If, after the inauguration, you find a Cy Vance as
secretary of state and Zbigniew Brzezinski as head of national security, then I
would say we failed. And I'd quit."

Mr. Vance was Mr. Carter's first appointee, followed soon after by Mr.
Brzezinski. Mr. Jordan did not quit.

In both his personal approach to the job and his overall philosophy, Mr. Vance
presented a striking contrast to his flamboyant predecessor, Henry A. Kissinger.
A calm, publicity-shy diplomat who was more a mediator than a policy maker, Mr.
Vance was one of the most modest and unpretentious men ever to hold the post. He
was a popular figure around the State Department as he loped through the
hallways in his pinstripes or tweeds, occasionally rumpled but always well
tailored.

When he took office, Mr. Vance vowed to limit his travel abroad and eschew Mr.
Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy -- a pledge that quickly fell by the wayside. But
while he adopted some of Mr. Kissinger's tactics, he harbored doubts about his
strategy. Mr. Vance was deeply skeptical that any master plan could provide
answers for individual foreign policy problems. He did not think in terms of a
Soviet grand design to encircle and undo the West any more than he thought about
a grand design for American foreign policy. His method was "to slog it out,"
putting together solutions to individual problems.

Prof. Norman A. Graebner, a historian of American diplomacy at the University of
Virginia, said, "The general attitude toward the acceptance of the Soviet
position in the world and the fact that revolutionary pressures in the third
world were genuine and that it was America's task to live with those realities
was most pronounced during those first Carter years."

The president and his secretary of state pursued a moderate course,
characterized by the strategic arms negotiations, the Panama Canal Treaties, the
normalization of relations with China and the settlement that brought majority
rule to Zimbabwe, the former British colony that had been known as Rhodesia.
During the historic talks at Camp David in 1979, Mr. Vance developed an
effective working relationship with two of the Israeli negotiators, Foreign
Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman. It became crucial in
working out the landmark agreement that established peace between Egypt and
Israel.

Mr. Vance shared with Mr. Carter the conviction that the advancement of human
rights around the world was in America's national interest. And from his years
in the Pentagon, Mr. Vance knew the limits of the use of military force to solve
nonmilitary problems. He was secretary of the Army in 1962 when the Army was
called in to open the doors of the University of Mississippi to blacks. The
walkie-talkies failed, providing a lesson that he still carried years later when
he heard of the plan to rescue the hostages in Tehran. If a problem like that
could occur in Mississippi, he wondered how a complicated mission in a country
in the throes of revolution half a world away could succeed.

On the Outside, Looking In

But the Carter administration had been rocked by a series of events in 1979: the
fall of the shah of Iran, the appearance of a Soviet brigade in Cuba, the fall
of the Somoza regime in Nicaragua, the taking of American hostages in Tehran
and, finally, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. "All these were attributed to
a failure of will and courage on the part of President Carter," Professor
Graebner said, and that is when Mr. Carter "went ideological with behavior that
became extremely appealing to the right wing. The effort to rescue the hostages
was part of that, and at that point, Vance found himself increasingly on the
outside looking in."

To Mr. Brzezinski, Mr. Vance was not hardheaded enough about world realities. In
his book "Power and Principle," Mr. Brzezinski wrote that Mr. Vance, "as a
member of both the legal profession and the once-dominant WASP elite, operated
according to their values and rules, but those values and rules were of
declining relevance not only in terms of domestic American politics but
particularly in terms of global conditions."

Paul C. Warnke, an admirer of Mr. Vance's, who served as his chief arms control
adviser, said Mr. Vance suffered from the vice of his own virtue. "He thought he
could work with Zbig," Mr. Warnke said. "But Zbig not only used guerrilla
tactics, he was in closer proximity to the president."

Mr. Vance was always circumspect about his relationship with Mr. Brzezinski, but
years later, in an interview for this article, he reluctantly acknowledged that
he had probably been mistaken when he agreed to Mr. Brzezinski's appointment. "I
had some reservations about him," he said, "but I knew the president wanted him
very badly. I now realize my instinctive feeling on that was right."

When Mr. Carter gave the order to rescue the hostages in Iran, it was clear that
Mr. Brzezinski had won the contest, and Mr. Vance decided to resign. He recorded
some of this story in his 1983 book, "Hard Choices."

His son, Cyrus Vance Jr., said last night that the family was proud of him when
he stepped down, because he had acted on his principles. "I don't think he ever
failed to follow those principles in his entire professional life," he said.

Mr. Vance came to the Carter cabinet with impeccable credentials. In 1957,
Lyndon B. Johnson, then the majority leader of the Senate, asked Mr. Vance, then
40 years old, to leave his Wall Street law firm to serve as counsel for a Senate
armed services subcommittee on preparedness. The Soviet Union had launched the
world's first man-made satellite, Sputnik, and the United States was trying to
catch up in the race for space. Mr. Johnson was to call on Mr. Vance repeatedly;
the younger man helped draft the act establishing the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration in 1958, and served as counsel for Senate investigations of
missile and space satellite programs and Defense Department budgeting.

Mr. Vance knew the Pentagon inside and out when Robert S. McNamara, John F.
Kennedy's secretary of defense, asked him to come to work. He rose from general
counsel in 1961 to secretary of the Army and finally to deputy secretary of
defense in charge of running the Pentagon. He helped Mr. McNamara impose a
reorganization of defense management practices intended to make the services
work with one another.

President Johnson sent him to Panama as part of a peacemaking team in 1964,
after student riots in the Canal Zone had been put down at a cost of 27 lives.
Almost 15 years later, Mr. Vance presided over the successful negotiations and
Senate ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties, under which the United States
agreed to cede control of the canal to Panama by 2000.

By 1967, a painful back ailment forced Mr. Vance back into civilian life, but he
was repeatedly called back for delicate assignments. Mr. McNamara asked him to
go to Detroit when riots broke out there in 1967. Although Mr. Vance was
criticized in some quarters for being slow to call in federal troops, he won
praise from black leaders for easing the crisis.

That same year, Mr. Vance was credited with forestalling a war between Greece
and Turkey over Cyprus. "Cyrus Settles Cyprus" was the headline carried in The
Economist. In 1968 President Johnson sent Mr. Vance to South Korea to reassure
President Park Chung Hee of Washington's support after North Korea had breached
the armistice agreement and seized the Pueblo, an American
intelligence-gathering ship.

Although Mr. Vance was not one of the formulators of the Johnson
administration's policies in Vietnam, he had supported the war effort. But in
1968, as a member of the group of so-called Wise Men assembled to review the war
effort, he joined others to call for an end to the bombing and a negotiated
settlement.

He was sent to Paris in 1968 as deputy to W. Averell Harriman, the chief United
States negotiator, who was trying to work out a settlement with the North
Vietnamese. Mr. Vance was forced to devote much of his time to such fine points
as the shape of the negotiating table. When the furniture was finally arranged,
however, South Vietnam, encouraged to expect a Republican victory in the
election and a better deal from Richard M. Nixon, refused to negotiate. "In my
mind," Mr. Vance recorded in an oral history for the Lyndon B. Johnson Library,
"this was one of the great tragedies in history, that the South Vietnamese
double-crossed the United States, which I clearly feel they did."

That kind of language was uncharacteristically strong for him. Outwardly he was
so mild that he was once called "a man who leaves no footprints." Because of
that reputation, he surprised his State Department colleagues with the force of
his advocacy and the clarity of his goals, chiefly to bring the nuclear menace
under control and to improve relations with the Soviet Union.

He fought when he had to, as he did early on as secretary of state when he
vigorously supported the appointment of Mr. Warnke to head the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency. He knew Mr. Warnke would be opposed by Senator Henry Jackson
of Washington and other hard-liners, but he believed the agency needed to be led
by a firm advocate of arms control. "He went to the wall for Paul," one former
State Department official said. He won.

An Early Interest in Law

Cyrus Roberts Vance was born in Clarksburg, W. Va., on March 27, 1917, the
second son of John Carl and Amy Roberts Vance. His father was an insurance
broker and landowner who worked in a government agency during World War I. His
mother came from a Philadelphia Main Line family and was active in civic
affairs.

Cyrus was only 5 years old when his father died. In the ensuing years, the boy
developed an exceptionally close relationship with his first cousin, best friend
and mentor, John W. Davis, who had been a member of Congress, ambassador to
Britain and Democratic candidate for president in 1924. It was through Mr. Davis
that Mr. Vance said he developed an early interest in the law.

As a student at the Kent School in Connecticut, Cyrus served as senior prefect,
played football and hockey, and rowed on the 1934 crew that made the Henley
Regatta. He went on to Yale, where he found among his classmates R. Sargent
Shriver, William Scranton, Stanley Resor and William Bundy. He would serve in
government with all of them.

At Yale he was remembered as a hard-working and conscientious economics major.
He received a bachelor's degree in 1939 and graduated from Yale Law School with
honors in 1942. In later years he was to win more than a dozen honorary degrees,
and in 1969 President Johnson bestowed on him the Medal of Freedom, the
government's top civilian award.

From the Navy to a Career

Mr. Vance served in the Navy during World War II and saw action on destroyers at
Bougainville, Tarawa, the Philippines, Saipan and Guam. He was discharged in
1946 with the rank of lieutenant, senior grade. After a year at the Mead
Corporation, he was admitted to the New York bar in 1947 and joined Simpson
Thacher & Bartlett, where he was to remain for his entire legal career.

On Feb. 15, 1947, he married Grace Elsie Sloane, a Bryn Mawr graduate and
daughter of the board chairman of the W. & J. Sloane furniture company. Mr.
Vance is survived by his wife, their five children, Cyrus R. Jr., Elsie, Amy,
and twins, Grace Roberts and Camilla; and by two grandchildren, Simon and Clare.
His funeral will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, Jan. 19 at Heavenly Rest
Church, on Fifth Avenue and 90th Street in Manhattan.

Over the years Mr. Vance served on the boards of directors of corporations,
among them I.B.M., Pan American Airways, Manufacturers Hanover Trust, U.S. Steel
and The New York Times.

He also served as a trustee of the New York Presbyterian Hospital, the Yale
Urban Institute and the Yale Corporation, and was chairman of the board of the
Rockefeller Foundation. He was vice chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations
until 1987, and a member of the United Nations Association and the Trilateral
Commission. From 1970 to 1972, he served on a committee to investigate police
corruption in New York City, and in 1987 he was named to the New York Commission
on Government Integrity, established to investigate corruption at all levels of
government in the state. From 1988 to 1990, Mr. Vance was chairman of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

As president of the New York City Bar Association in 1975 and 1976, he made a
stubborn but not too successful effort to persuade the lawyers to devote
Saturdays to providing the city's needy with free legal advice.

To those, like Mr. Brzezinski, who referred occasionally to the "once-dominant
WASP elite," Mr. Vance said: "The establishment is still alive and reasonably
healthy. I think you'll find the establishment, with its moral force and
integrity, will be playing a larger role in the future."

Mr. Vance never dwelled on his own legacy, but when asked at 70 how he wanted to
be remembered, he said, "I hope for being a reasonably decent, honest person who
tried to do some things for the country that might have lasting effect and
create a better life for a large number of people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Cyrus R. Vance

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 2002



CORRECTION: A credit in some copies on Sunday with the obituary of Cyrus R.
Vance misspelled the name of a picture agency. It is Corbis-Bettmann, not
Corbis-Bettman.

The obituary of former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance on Jan. 14 (and in late
editions on Jan. 13) misstated the rarity of resignations from that post over
matters of principle. Historians generally agree that there were three, not two.
Besides Mr. Vance, who objected in 1980 to the attempt at a military rescue of
American hostages in Iran, and William Jennings Bryan (1915), over policies he
felt might lead the country to war, Lewis Cass resigned in 1860 because he
considered President James Buchanan weak on secessionists.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cyrus R. Vance in 1980. (George Tames/The New York Times)(pg.
1); Mr. Vance, in a 1968 meeting with President Lyndon B. Johnson, for whom he
undertook several sensitive diplomatic missions. (Associated Press); Secretary
of State Cyrus R. Vance conferred with President Jimmy Carter at the White House
in 1977. (UPI/Corbis-Bettman)(pg. 34)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%);
RESIGNATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (77%); POLITICS (75%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); PNEUMONIA (71%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (70%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); HELICOPTERS (65%); FIRES (63%) DEATHS
(OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

JIMMY CARTER (89%); RONALD REAGAN (79%) VANCE, CYRUS R; BERGER, MARILYN

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             727 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends: In the Dark;
The Rogue to Fear Most Is the One Following Orders

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1519 words


IN 1999, Pakistan's civilian prime minister sent the head of its intelligence
agency on a secret trip to the United States. He listened as Clinton
administration officials urged Pakistan to withdraw its support for the Taliban.
Equally important, he had instructions to tell the Americans that Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif suspected that the Pakistani army chief of staff was plotting a
coup against him.

As the intelligence director traveled from office to office in Washington, he
was trailed by a spy -- a man within his own agency whose real loyalties were to
the generals Mr. Sharif feared. The spy's job was to keep an eye on his boss,
the director general of Inter-Services Intelligence, and report back to the
military leaders who held the real power in Pakistan and controlled the spy
agency itself. Within a month, Mr. Sharif was ousted and the army chief of
staff, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, had taken his place.

The story, told by former Pakistani and American officials, hints at what can
happen when intelligence officials become more powerful than their governments
-- the emergence of an independent agency able to overturn government policies
or the government itself. It also demonstrates the precariousness of General
Musharraf's position today as he, even more than his predecessors, comes under
American and British pressure to abandon policies and allies that the spy agency
and his fellow generals have backed over the years. As prime minister, he has
vowed, as he did again last night, to curb Islamic extremism and terrorist
groups, but a critical question remains: Do his military and intelligence
officers support those goals?

So General Musharraf must navigate a treacherous course, and a misstep could
bring calamity. India and Pakistan, nuclear powers prone to brinksmanship, are
at the edge of war. India charges that Pakistan and its intelligence agency
support Kashmiri militants, including two groups that India accuses of attacking
its Parliament on Dec. 13. Meanwhile, even as troops mass on both sides in
disputed Kashmir, Al Qaeda leaders are slipping away across Pakistan's western
frontier.

The stakes for the United States are enormous. Averting an India-Pakistan war
and catching Al Qaeda's leaders are critical to the success of America's war on
terrorism. And achieving both goals depends in large measure on General
Musharraf: Can he force the intelligence agency to renounce its activities in
Kashmir without provoking another coup?

The relationship between intelligence agencies and the governments they serve is
often murky; by definition, spies operate in the shadows, and even in open
societies their exploits are often designed to let governments deny connection
to them. In countries like Pakistan, where military and intelligence officers
exert power independent of civilian authority, these agencies routinely flout
the law and pursue their own interests.

Looked at one way, intelligence agencies can seem impossible for the state to
control. Looked at another way, their independence also allows the state or
military to play a double game, espousing one policy while secretly undermining
it through the actions of a supposed "rogue" organization.

In the case of Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence, the agency's actions have
generally been carried out at the instruction of the military leadership, which
has usually been too strong to be overruled by civilian governments. The
agency's top officers come from the armed forces; the director general is always
a senior general. So the agency operates as an arm of the military leadership,
no matter who is running the government, even one of its own.

General Musharraf is a career military officer, but he must beware of
antagonizing hard-liners among his colleagues, particularly when it comes to the
perception that he might be abandoning a popular national cause like ending
Indian control over part of Kashmir. The Pakistani leader knows the role that
the spy agency and its friends in the military played in his rise. And he knows
he serves at their pleasure.

"The I.S.I. started out as an important arm of Pakistani national security, but
it ended up defining national security in its own terms," said Husain Haqqani, a
political analyst in Islamabad and a former Pakistani government minister.
"Whenever a covert agency is allowed to define the national interest, it ends up
with more power than intended."

The result is that the agency is not so much a rogue outfit as one that has
enormous independence from the political leadership, though the army chiefs and
political leaders sometimes find it convenient to use the rogue pretense to
maintain deniability.

Deniability brings its own risks. After years of publicly denying intelligence
activities to which they have covertly given a green light, a state's leaders
can find it much harder to rein in such an agency when the world changes, as it
has done for Pakistan since Sept. 11. Simply put, they get used to doing things
their own way.

General Musharraf now faces a trap created by the culture of deniability, which
has also made it easier for India to demonize Pakistan's spy agency -- depicting
it as the omnipresent evil hand behind every dastardly act. Can General
Musharraf control his spies and deliver what President Bush and the Indians
demand? Or is he playing a double game -- exaggerating how hard it would be to
rein them in, in order to maintain his hold on power or extract a higher price
from Washington for his cooperation?

IN fact, General Musharraf faces substantial risks -- perhaps to his life -- if
he is serious about regaining control of the agency. He has already angered key
figures there by ending Pakistan's support for the Taliban after Sept. 11. Now
he is trying to wean his spymasters from their support of militant groups
fighting in Kashmir, an issue even dearer to their hearts.

There are unpleasant precedents from other countries that allow policies to be
made in the shadows. For instance, a chief difficulty for Washington in dealing
with Iran has been not being able to know who is really accountable when its
surrogates take hostages or stage terror attacks. In an odd parallel, President
Ronald Reagan was tarnished, during the Iran-Contra scandal, when elements of
his own national security and intelligence community were said to have acted
independently (certainly they acted outside the view of Congress) to trade arms
for hostages and funnel money to Nicaraguan rebels.

IN Peru, former President Alberto Fujimori paid a high price for the shady
dealings and human rights crimes attributed to his spy chief, Vladimiro
Montesinos, but there too deniability clouds the real story. As he rose to
power, Mr. Fujimori got considerable help from Mr. Montesinos, and for many
years it was difficult to tell who owed his job to whom.

And in the Middle East today, Yasir Arafat's motives have been brought into
question by his unclear relationship with violent forces among the Palestinians.
In trying to assess his real intentions, President Bush, echoing the Israeli
leadership, has fallen back on a harsh standard: Results are what count, not
promises or even deeds that can be quickly reversed.

In South Asia, with the stakes so high, Indians are now suggesting that such a
standard should also be applied to General Musharraf, even as he tries to close
down Inter-Service Intelligence's powerful Kashmir and Afghan divisions.

Under pressure from the United States after Sept. 11, General Musharraf took the
first steps to control the agency when he replaced its pro-Taliban director
general with a moderate who was loyal to him, Lt. Gen. Ehsan ul-Haq. His
mission, originally to end support for the Taliban, expanded after the attack on
India's Parliament in December, when General Musharraf reluctantly agreed to try
to reduce the agency's Kashmir operations too.

Some Pakistani intelligence officials argued that the Parliament attack was not
approved by the agency, but had been carried out by groups that the agency had
backed. The intent, these officials said, was to force hard-liners within
Pakistan's military to stop General Musharraf from dismantling the Kashmir cell.

Whether that twisting plot comes from Islamabad or from an imagination like John
le Carre's, no one imagines that General Musharraf and his new intelligence
chief have yet ridded the spy agency of its pro-Kashmir elements or pro-Taliban
"jihadis." Their inroads are simply too deep.

"What is important now," said Jessica Stern, an expert on religious terrorism
who lectures at Harvard's Kennedy School, "is not whether the I.S.I. as a whole
is a rogue agency, but whether there are rogue pockets within the agency that
Musharraf cannot control."

In other words, the fate of the corner of the world where Osama bin Laden hides
from Americans while two nuclear neighbors face off could well depend on whether
a spy agency that may or may not be a rogue is now infected by rogues within
itself. And by whether the officials who were there at the rogue's birth can, or
will, bring all of it into line with what the government says is its policy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the weeks after Sept. 11, Pakistani police and army officers
kept watch in Quetta, where protests had broken out against cooperation with the
West. (Vincent Laforet/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (91%); PRIME MINISTERS (91%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%);
ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); COUPS (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TALIBAN (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); POLITICS (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%);
ASSAULT & BATTERY (62%); RELIGION (50%) INTELLIGENCE SERVICES;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (89%); NAWAZ SHARIF (78%) MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (PRES);
FRANTZ, DOUGLAS

STATE: KASHMIR (94%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (94%); ASIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  INDIA;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Conspiring Against Humanity

BYLINE:  By Bill Berkeley;  Bill Berkeley is the author of "The Graves Are Not
Yet Full: Race, Tribe and Power in the Heart of Africa."

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1034 words


THE KEY TO
MY NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE
Seeking Justice in Bosnia and Rwanda.
By Elizabeth Neuffer.
492 pp. New York:
Picador USA. $27.

The title of this often remarkable if sometimes frustrating examination of two
international war crimes tribunals is drawn from the trial testimony of Hamdo
Kahrimanovic, a Bosnian Muslim and a former school principal who was detained in
1992 in the notorious Serbian-run Omarska concentration camp, where some 2,000
Bosnians are believed to have died from torture, rape and starvation. Among the
camp's most zealous thugs was a former student of Kahrimanovic's named Dusan
Tadic, a Bosnian Serb who, five years later, would become the first person
convicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity in an international court
since World War II.

At the trial Kahrimanovic was asked if he could explain the barbarism that had
seized so many of his former friends, neighbors and colleagues. "It is difficult
to answer this question," he replied. "I had the key to my next-door neighbor's
house who was a Serb, and he had my key. That is how we looked after each
other."

The United Nations created the Yugoslav tribunal, located in The Hague, and then
its poorer cousin, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, in Arusha,
Tanzania, in part to assuage the shame of Western powers that turned their backs
on two of the last century's worst mass slaughters. The tribunals were widely
derided at first, and they have made but fitful progress over the past several
years, convicting mostly lower-level figures like Tadic. But progress they have
made. The transfer to The Hague last summer of the former Yugoslav president
Slobodan Milosevic, who was indicted in November on charges of genocide,
provided the Yugoslavia tribunal with a major infusion

of legitimacy. Senior accused conspirators in Rwanda's 1994 genocide, including
its alleged mastermind, Col. Theoneste Bagosora, are in custody in Tanzania, and
are expected to go on trial in the coming months. Both tribunals finally seem
poised to deliver a measure of justice for crimes against humanity. In doing so,
they have the potential to demystify ethnic conflict by showing that wars like
those that consumed the Balkans and Rwanda are less the result of ancient
hatreds than of calculated tyranny.

Elizabeth Neuffer, a reporter for The Boston Globe who covered the Balkans for
more than four years, has taken upon herself the formidable job of making these
profound but complex judicial undertakings accessible to American readers. At
its best, "The Key to My Neighbor's House" captures the human drama at the core
of the trials by focusing on a handful of victims. Tracking them down in
war-shattered Bosnia and Rwanda, and visiting them repeatedly over a period of
years, Neuffer manages to convey in intimate and sometimes painful detail the
trauma of their personal ordeals and the importance of their search for justice.

In addition to Kahrimanovic, we meet Petko Grubac, a Serbian psychiatrist who
wound up imprisoned in the Celebici prison camp south of Sarajevo, a camp run by
Bosnian Muslims where accounts of hunger, torture and rape mirrored those told
by survivors of Omarska and other Serb-run camps. Then there is Hasan Nuhanovic,
a Bosnian Muslim student whose family disappeared at the hands of Bosnian Serbs
in 1995.

Shifting to Rwanda, Neuffer tells the story of Anonciata Kavaruganda, whose
husband, a prominent judge, was hauled away from their home in Kigali, the
Rwandan capital, by Hutu soldiers as United Nations peacekeeping troops assigned
to protect him looked on without interfering. He was never seen again.

Another Rwandan is the young Tutsi woman who came to be known, in the vernacular
of the Rwanda tribunal's witness protection program, as Witness JJ. She was
repeatedly gang-raped by Hutu militiamen in her rural village even as the
village's Hutu mayor, a former schoolteacher named Jean-Paul Akayesu, egged them
on. Witness JJ's courageous testimony in Arusha was instrumental in securing
Akayesu's conviction for genocide and crimes against humanity. It was the first
conviction after a trial for genocide in an international court and the first
time that rape was defined as an act of genocide.

Neuffer is clearly moved by the work of these tribunals and, for all the
problems that she documents in depressing detail, she seems optimistic about
their ultimate utility. But she is not naive about their limitations. "Most
disappointing of all," she writes, "the two tribunals do not reach the victims
for whom they were intended. Theirs has become a justice aimed more at
international lawyers than genocide survivors." That seems harsh. A conviction
of Milosevic or Bagosora would surely please more than just international
lawyers.

Neuffer deserves considerable credit for tracking down these individuals and
telling their stories. She has brought to this task prodigious research and
exemplary reporting. Unfortunately, her book is unevenly written. She has not
come up with a strategy that succeeds in weaving into a coherent whole so many
disparate themes and personal stories. Her book has a kaleidoscopic quality that
leaves the reader struggling to keep track of names and places and multiple
narrative threads. She jumps back and forth between Europe and Africa, from one
war to the other, from one trial proceeding to the next. And she makes little
effort to compare or contrast Bosnia and Rwanda, contenting herself with what
sometimes reads like two books shuffled together into one.

Neuffer's writing about the law lacks the depth and clarity to sustain major
themes. Her attempts to connect war crimes to the lives of American readers seem
counterproductive. These stories, she declares, speak to us because "their
narratives parallel our own. They tell us something about what justice could
mean, as Americans struggle to reconcile as individuals to misfortunes and as a
society to our hatreds." But such parallels trivialize the mass slaughters of
Bosnia and Rwanda, and they are unnecessary. As Neuffer's best reporting amply
demonstrates, what we have in common with the victims and perpetrators of crimes
against humanity is not our experience but our humanity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: KEY TO MY NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE,

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); BOOK REVIEWS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (77%); WORLD WAR II (77%); TESTIMONY (77%); WITNESSES
(72%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (71%); STARVATION (71%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION
(71%); LITERATURE (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;
REVIEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (55%)

PERSON: BERKELEY, BILL; NEUFFER, ELIZABETH

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             735 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/The Case Against the Nazis;
How Hitler's Forces Planned To Destroy German Christianity

BYLINE:   By JOE SHARKEY

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1490 words


THE chilling testimony of crimes against humanity by the Nazi regime in Hitler's
Germany have been on the historical record since the Nuremberg war-crimes trials
of 1945 and 1946. But any criminal prosecution, and especially one as mammoth as
the case against Nazi Germany, consists of far more than public testimony in
court. The Nuremberg trials were also built on many millions of pages of
supporting evidence: documents, summaries, notes and memos collected by
investigators.

One of the leading United States investigators at Nuremberg, Gen. William J.
Donovan -- Wild Bill Donovan of the O.S.S., the C.I.A.'s precursor -- collected
and cataloged trial evidence in 148 bound volumes of personal papers that were
stored after his death in 1959 at Cornell University. In 1999, Julie Seltzer
Mandel, a law student from Rutgers University whose grandmother survived the
Auschwitz death camp, read them. Under the Nuremberg Project, a collaboration
between Rutgers and Cornell, she has edited the collection for publication on
the Internet.

The first installment, published last week on the Web site of the Rutgers
Journal of Law and Religion (www.camlaw.rutgers.edu/publications/law-religion),
includes a 108-page outline prepared by O.S.S. investigators to aid Nuremberg
prosecutors. The outline, "The Persecution of the Christian Churches,"
summarizes the Nazi plan to subvert and destroy German Christianity, which it
calls "an integral part of the National Socialist scheme of world conquest."

Verbatim excerpts from the outline would require extensive explanations.
Instead, the outline is summarized below.   JOE SHARKEY

In the 1920's, as they battled for power, the Nazis realized that the churches
in overwhelmingly Christian Germany needed to be neutralized before they would
get anywhere. Two-thirds of German Christians were Protestants, belonging to one
of 28 regional factions of the German Evangelical Church. Most of the rest were
Roman Catholics. On one level, the Nazis saw an advantage. In tumultuous
post-World War I Germany, the Christian churches "had long been associated with
conservative ways of thought, which meant that they tended to agree with the
National Socialists in their authoritarianism, their attacks on Socialism and
Communism, and in their campaign against the Versailles treaty" that had ended
World War I with a bitterly resentful Germany.

But there was a dilemma for Hitler. While conservatives, the Christian churches
"could not be reconciled with the principle of racism, with a foreign policy of
unlimited aggressive warfare, or with a domestic policy involving the complete
subservience of Church to State." Given that these were the fundamental
underpinnings of the Nazi regime, "conflict was inevitable," the summary states.
It came, as Nazi power surged in the late 1920's toward national domination in
the early 30's.

According to Baldur von Schirach, the Nazi leader of the German youth corps that
would later be known as the Hitler Youth, "the destruction of Christianity was
explicitly recognized as a purpose of the National Socialist movement" from the
beginning, though "considerations of expedience made it impossible" for the
movement to adopt this radical stance officially until it had consolidated
power, the outline says.

Attracted by the strategic value inherent in the churches' "historic mission of
conservative social discipline," the Nazis simply lied and made deals with the
churches while planning a "slow and cautious policy of gradual encroachment" to
eliminate Christianity.

The prosecution investigators describe this as a criminal conspiracy. "This
general plan had been established even before the rise of the Nazis to power,"
the outline says. "It apparently came out of discussions among an inner circle"
comprised of Hitler himself, other top Nazi leaders including the propaganda
minister, Joseph Goebbels, and a collection of party enforcers and veteran
beer-hall agitators.

The regional branches of the German Evangelical Church, the main Protestant
body, were often administered and financed through governmental agencies. The
Nazis saw a distinct advantage in having Protestant churches "whose supreme
administrative organs were located within the borders of Germany," the outline
says. This facilitated plans "to capture and use the church organization for
their own purposes" and "to secure the elimination of Christian influences in
the Evangelical Church by legal or quasi legal means."

The Roman Catholic Church, centrally administered from Rome, posed a different
problem for the Nazis, whose relationship with that church in the 1920's had
been bitter. In 1933, when Germany was under Hitler's total control, the Nazis
made "unmistakable overtures" to the Christian churches in general, and to
Catholics in particular.

 Having already witnessed fairly smooth relations after the 1929 Lantern treaty
between Mussolini's fascist regime and the church in Italy, many German
Catholics "accepted the Nazi proposition" of peaceful coexistence. In July 1933,
a Concordat was signed between the Reich and the Holy See.

"For the first time since the Middle Ages, the Reich itself had entered into an
agreement with the Roman Catholic Church," the outline says. "Moreover, the new
treaty was apparently entirely to the advantage of the church. In return for the
retreat of German Catholicism from the political scene, the church was
guaranteed, by international treaty, freedom for Catholic organizations and
maintenance of denominational schools and youth education."

All Hitler seemed to demand in return was "a pledge of loyalty by the clergy to
the Reich government and a promise that Catholic religious instruction would
emphasize the patriotic duties of the Christian citizen." This posed no big
problem for the church, the outline asserts. "Since it had always been the
practice of the Catholic Church to abide by established governments and to
promote patriotic convictions among the faithful, these stipulations of the
Concordat were no more than legalizations of an existing custom. The Concordat
was hailed by church and state authorities as marking the beginning of a close
and fruitful collaboration."

Of course, the churches stayed in Hitler's good graces for only as long as the
Nazis considered their cooperation expedient. Soon after Hitler assumed
dictatorial powers, "relations between the Nazi state and the church became
progressively worse," the outline says. The Nazis "took advantage of their
subsequently increasing strength to violate every one of the Concordat's
provisions."

In 1937, Pope Pius XI denounced Nazi treachery in an encyclical that accused
Hitler of "a war of extermination" against the church. The battle had been
joined on some fronts. Nazi street mobs, often in the company of the Gestapo,
routinely stormed offices in Protestant and Catholic churches where clergymen
were seen as lax in their support of the regime.

The dissident pastor Martin Niemoller spoke openly now against state control of
the Protestant churches. He was arrested and imprisoned in 1937 for using his
pulpit for "underhand attacks on state and party." When a judge acquitted him,
"on leaving court he was arrested by the Gestapo and sent to a concentration
camp where he remained until the end of the war," says the outline.

Still, in a society where the entire Jewish population was being automatically
condemned without public protest, care was taken to manipulate public
perceptions about clergymen who fell into Nazi disfavor. "The Catholic Church
need not imagine that we are going to create martyrs," Robert Wagner, the Nazi
Gauleiter of Baden, said in a speech, according to the O.S.S. study. "We shall
not give the church that satisfaction. She shall have not martyrs, but
criminals."

But once they had total power and set off to launch a world war, the Nazis made
no secret of what lay in store for Christian clergymen who expressed dissent.

In Munich, Nazi street gangs and a Gestapo squad attacked the residence of the
Roman Catholic cardinal. "A hail of stones was directed against the windows,
while the men shouted, 'Take the rotten traitor to Dachau!' " the outline says,
adding: "After 1937, German Catholic bishops gave up all attempts to print"
their pastoral letters publicly and instead "had them merely read from the
pulpits."

Then the letters themselves were confiscated.

"In many churches, the confiscation took place during Mass by the police
snatching the letter out of the hands of the priests as they were in the act of
reading it."

Later the same year, dissident Protestant churches joined in a manifesto
protesting Nazi tactics. In response, the Nazis arrested 700 Protestant pastors.

Objectionable statements made by the clergy would no longer be prosecuted in the
courts, the Nazis said. Statements "injurious to the State would be ruthlessly
punished by 'protective custody,' that is, the concentration camp," the outline
says.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 20, 2002



CORRECTION: An article last Sunday that summarized the contents of newly
released documents from the Nuremberg trials that outlined the Nazi plan to
destroy German Christianity referred incorrectly to a 1929 treaty between
Mussolini's fascist regime and the Catholic Church in Italy. It was the Lateran
Treaty, not Lantern.

GRAPHIC: Photo: The defendants at the trials at Nuremberg, in 1946. (Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (98%); RELIGION (97%); WAR CRIMES (93%);
EVIDENCE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); TESTIMONY
(90%); CONSERVATISM (87%); WORLD WAR I (78%); HISTORY (78%); HOLOCAUST (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); NEWS
BRIEFS (76%); LAW SCHOOLS (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (73%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (71%); WEB SITES (71%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (66%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (66%); FOREIGN POLICY (60%) NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES;
CHRISTIANS AND CHRISTIANITY;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  NUREMBERG WAR CRIMES
TRIBUNAL (1945-49)

ORGANIZATION: RUTGERS UNIVERSITY (93%); CORNELL UNIVERSITY (83%)

PERSON: MANDEL, JULIE SELTZER; DONOVAN, WILLIAM J (GEN); SHARKEY, JOE

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (90%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             737 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Airlines Seek an E-ZPass For Fast Security Checks

BYLINE:  By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section 5; Column 1; Travel Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE long lines afflicting passengers as airlines and airports tighten security
seem to pres age a new era of inconvenience as the international war on
terrorism intensifies.

As ever, the travel industry and regulatory agencies are looking for technology
to solve the aviation security riddle.

In the past the better mousetraps they sought came in the form of X-ray machines
and other devices to detect bombs and weapons; now the technology they are
suggesting focuses on the traveler's identity.

The key to this new approach is foolproof identity papers, backed up with
reliable databanks for tracking travelers as they move across international
borders. In this approach, the new buzzword is biometrics, the science of
identifying people through biological markers just as reliable as fingerprints,
such as quick computerized scans of their faces, their palms, or even the
insides of their eyeballs, whose detailed features are unmistakable signatures
of self.

In the wake of the September hijackings, a consortium of airlines and airports
has proposed issuing smart ID cards linked to biometric markers, carried by
anyone willing to sacrifice some privacy in order to avoid travel delays. While
the carry-on luggage of such participants would still be X-rayed, these
travelers could pass through special gates in much the same way that automobiles
with E-ZPasses zip through tollbooths. No legislation would be required to put
the system into place, as it would be operated entirely by the private sector.

All passengers carrying the SkyD card, as the proposed identification card is
called, would agree that the industry group could maintain personal profiles of
them that would include all available public information -- such things as
credit ratings, telephone numbers, addresses, driver's license files, voting
registrations.

People whose records show a normal, stable life would be presumed to pose little
risk as potential terrorists, while those with no credit history, no fixed
address and no other evidence that they are who they claim to be would be
refused the identity cards. The data about travelers would be kept confidential,
although the government could demand to see it in criminal investigations.

Privacy groups like the American Civil Liberties Union object to the proposal,
not so much because the assembled data is especially sensitive but because
people who chose not to carry the cards would be subjected to intrusive
searches. In effect, that would make participation in the program coerced rather
than voluntary.

But at a hearing of the Senate aviation subcommittee in November, Senator Jay
Rockefeller, a Democrat of West Virginia, endorsed the idea and said people
might find any sacrifice of privacy worthwhile if it resulted in a more secure
aviation system. Jane Garvey, the administrator of the Federal Aviation
Administration, which enforces regulations governing airline security, said the
agency would like to test the idea.

There are many variations on the proposal, such as legislation introduced by
Senators John Kyl, an Arizona Republican, and Dianne Feinstein, a California
Democrat, that would require foreign nationals to present smart cards linked to
their visas when they enter and leave the country, so that their comings and
goings could be traced at the borders.

Most advocates balk at the ultimate in smart-card identification: a system that
would use DNA samples as proof of identity, as is done in some criminal trials.
Proponents of other, less invasive, techniques say they are adequate.

Ingersoll Rand, which makes handprint reading equipment, says in publicity
material that biometric hand readers "simultaneously and instantaneously record
90 separate measurements of a hand -- including length, width, thickness and
surface area -- to verify that the person using the device really is who he or
she claims to be. The hand reader compares this information with a 'template' of
the person's hand that has been recorded previously and stored in a secure
database. The reading and verification process takes less than a second."

Approaches like these are so promising that Technology Review, an M.I.T.
magazine, has named biometrics one of the top 10 innovations likely to change
the world in the coming few years. Aviation security is just its most prominent
application at the moment.

Experts in the technology, like John Woodward, a former C.I.A. operations
officer who is a senior policy analyst at the RAND Corporation, which does
research for government agencies and companies, say that it is not a silver
bullet against terrorism, but that it offers obvious advantages, such as making
it harder to forge ID cards or travel documents.

Even the International Biometric Industry Association, an advocacy group, in a
formal policy statement 10 days after the Sept. 11 attacks, warned against
considering the technology a panacea for international security problems. But it
also emphasized the "pivotal role biometrics will almost certainly play" in
fighting terrorism.

Indeed, it is already being used experimentally. The Immigration and
Naturalization Service has been using identification cards linked to handprints
since 1997 to let tens of thousands of frequent travelers enter the country
swiftly through some major airports, including Los Angeles, Miami, Newark,
Kennedy, San Francisco, Honolulu and Dulles, near Washington. Automated kiosks
that accept the cards, called INSPass cards, are to be installed at 23 airports
within a few years. Enrollment in the system has more than doubled in the past
year, to 45,000 people, who typically use the cards about four times a year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRLINES (93%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); AVIATION SECURITY
(90%); AIRPORTS (90%); BIOMETRICS (90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (90%);
HIJACKING (90%); CIVIL AVIATION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REGULATORY
COMPLIANCE (89%); AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (89%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (88%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (86%); TOLL ROADS & TURNPIKES (86%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(84%); AVIATION TRANSPORTATION LAW (78%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
(77%); FINGERPRINTING (75%); EVIDENCE (75%); GENETIC MARKERS (74%); DISEASE
MARKERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(73%); AIR TRANSPORTATION SAFETY (73%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (72%); LEGISLATION (71%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (71%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (65%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  IDENTIFICATION DEVICES;  DELAYS (TRANSPORTATION);
SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  HIJACKING;
AIRPORTS;  PRIVACY

PERSON: JAY ROCKEFELLER (66%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (50%) CUSHMAN, JOHN H JR

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             738 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cyrus R. Vance, Confidant of Presidents Who Resigned a Top Post, Dies at 84

BYLINE:  By MARILYN BERGER

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2928 words


Cyrus R. Vance, who after two decades in public service was appointed secretary
of state, and who then took the rare step of resigning from the nation's highest
cabinet post on a matter of principle, died Saturday afternoon at Mount Sinai
Medical Center in New York. He was 84.

The cause was pneumonia and other complications, said Elva Murphy, his longtime
secretary.

Mr. Vance was secretary of state from 1977 until 1980, when he resigned in
protest over President Jimmy Carter's decision to try a military rescue of
American hostages in Iran, an action that he considered ill advised and futile.
He was soon proved right.

After more than 20 years in and out of government, during which he served
several presidents, Mr. Vance submitted his resignation with what he called "a
heavy heart." His doubts that the elaborate rescue would succeed, and his fears
that it would sabotage diplomatic efforts to free the 52 American hostages,
brought him to what he called "one of the most painful days of my life."

His opposition to the rescue mission was the immediate cause of his resignation,
but he had already come to see that Mr. Carter was increasingly rejecting his
advice in favor of that of his national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski.

As it turned, out the rescue attempt failed. Of the eight American helicopters
sent on the mission, three broke down in the first stage of the operation. It
was decided to abandon the mission, but there was more humiliation ahead for the
United States. One of the remaining helicopters collided on the ground with a
transport plane and both craft burned. Eight servicemen died in the fire and the
rest fled.

The failed mission became an issue in the 1980 political campaign in which Mr.
Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan. The hostages were not released until the
day of Mr. Reagan's inauguration, 444 days after they were taken captive.

Mr. Vance said in 1999 that he had watched from the sidelines with "frustration
and sadness" as relations between the United States and Iran "plunged into
increasing hostility, mistrust, name calling and mutual recrimination." In an
address at the Asia Society, Mr. Vance called for the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations with Iran.

Mr. Vance -- who had decided to leave office whether the rescue succeeded or
failed -- was only the second secretary of state in the history of the United
States to resign on a matter of principle, joining what another secretary of
state, Dean Acheson, called "the most exclusive club in America." William
Jennings Bryan, the only other secretary of state to resign, was a pacifist who
resigned in 1915 over policies by Woodrow Wilson that he thought might lead to
war.

An Obligation to Serve

That Mr. Vance allowed principle to get in the way of his career came as no
surprise to the people who knew him best. To them, Cyrus Vance, the tall, lanky,
patrician lawyer with the open face of a prep school boy was Mr. Integrity, Mr.
Honesty. He was the epitome of the American establishment, that small group of
men who moved seamlessly from the prep schools of New England and the Ivy League
colleges of the East to the law firms of Wall Street, with time out for service
in government. Then they would return again to private practice, bringing with
them the old values of family, work and public service.

After his return to private practice, Mr. Vance was repeatedly called back to
the public arena to use his quiet negotiating skills on some of the most violent
conflicts of the 1980's and 1990's: in the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute between
Azerbaijan and Armenia; in South Africa; and in a disintegrating Yugoslavia.
There, he successfully negotiated a cease-fire in Croatia to allow a United
Nations peacekeeping force to enter and disarm warring militias.

In accepting one assignment after another, Mr. Vance was only doing what he
believed was expected of him. He said, "A lot of us were raised in families
where we were taught that we were very fortunate, that we were going to have a
good education, and that we had the responsibility to return to the community
some of the benefits and blessings we had, and that there was an obligation to
participate in government service at the local, state and national level."

This, in a nutshell, was the un-self-conscious voice of the establishment -- the
one that Jimmy Carter ran against so vigorously that his campaign manager,
Hamilton Jordan, once said: "If, after the inauguration, you find a Cy Vance as
secretary of state and Zbigniew Brzezinski as head of national security, then I
would say we failed. And I'd quit."

Mr. Vance was Mr. Carter's first appointee, followed soon after by Mr.
Brzezinski.  Mr. Jordan did not quit.

In both his personal approach to the job and his overall philosophy, Mr. Vance
presented a striking contrast to his flamboyant predecessor, Henry A. Kissinger.
A calm, publicity-shy diplomat who was more a mediator than a policy maker, Mr.
Vance was one of the most modest and unpretentious men ever to hold the post. He
was a popular figure around the State Department as he loped through the
hallways in his pinstripes or tweeds, occasionally rumpled but always well
tailored.

When he took office, Mr. Vance vowed to limit his travel abroad and eschew Mr.
Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy -- a pledge that quickly fell by the wayside. But
while he adopted some of Mr. Kissinger's tactics, he harbored doubts about his
strategy. Mr. Vance was deeply skeptical that any master plan could provide
answers for individual foreign policy problems. He did not think in terms of a
Soviet grand design to encircle and undo the West any more than he thought about
a grand design for American foreign policy. His method was "to slog it out,"
putting together solutions to individual problems.

Prof. Norman A. Graebner, a historian of American diplomacy at the University of
Virginia, said, "The general attitude toward the acceptance of the Soviet
position in the world and the fact that revolutionary pressures in the third
world were genuine and that it was America's task to live with those realities
was most pronounced during those first Carter years."

The president and his secretary of state pursued a moderate course,
characterized by the strategic arms negotiations, the Panama Canal Treaties, the
normalization of relations with China and the settlement that brought majority
rule to Zimbabwe, the former British colony that had been known as Rhodesia.
During the historic talks at Camp David in 1979, Mr. Vance developed an
effective working relationship with two of the Israeli negotiators, Foreign
Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman. It became crucial in
working out the landmark agreement that established peace between Egypt and
Israel.

Mr. Vance shared with Mr. Carter the conviction that the advancement of human
rights around the world was in America's national interest. And from his years
in the Pentagon, Mr. Vance knew the limits of the use of military force to solve
nonmilitary problems. He was secretary of the Army in 1962 when the Army was
called in to open the doors of the University of Mississippi to blacks. The
walkie-talkies failed, providing a lesson that he still carried years later when
he heard of the plan to rescue the hostages in Tehran. If a problem like that
could occur in Mississippi, he wondered how a complicated mission in a country
in the throes of revolution half a world away could succeed.

But the Carter administration had been rocked by a series of events in 1979: the
fall of the shah of Iran, the appearance of a Soviet brigade in Cuba, the fall
of the Somoza regime in Nicaragua, the taking of American hostages in Tehran
and, finally, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. "All these were attributed to
a failure of will and courage on the part of President Carter," Professor
Graebner said, and that is when Mr. Carter "went ideological with behavior that
became extremely appealing to the right wing. The effort to rescue the hostages
was part of that, and at that point, Vance found himself increasingly on the
outside looking in."

To Mr. Brzezinski, Mr. Vance was not hardheaded enough about world realities. In
his book "Power and Principle," Mr. Brzezinski wrote that Mr. Vance, "as a
member of both the legal profession and the once-dominant WASP elite, operated
according to their values and rules, but those values and rules were of
declining relevance not only in terms of domestic American politics but
particularly in terms of global conditions."

Paul C. Warnke, an admirer of Mr. Vance's who served as his chief arms control
adviser, said Mr. Vance suffered from the vice of his own virtue. "He thought he
could work with Zbig," Mr. Warnke said.  "But Zbig not only used guerrilla
tactics, he was in closer proximity to the president."

The Hard Choice to Leave

Mr. Vance was always circumspect about his relationship with Mr. Brzezinski, but
years later, in an interview for this article, he reluctantly acknowledged that
he had probably been mistaken when he agreed to Mr. Brzezinski's appointment. "I
had some reservations about him," he said, "but I knew the president wanted him
very badly. I now realize my instinctive feeling on that was right."

When Mr. Carter gave the order to rescue the hostages in Iran, it was clear that
Mr. Brzezinski had won the contest, and Mr. Vance decided to resign. He recorded
some of this story in his 1983 book, "Hard Choices."

His son, Cyrus Vance Jr., said on Saturday that the family was proud of him when
he stepped down, because he had acted on his principles. "I don't think he ever
failed to follow those principles in his entire professional life," he said.

Mr. Vance came to the Carter cabinet with impeccable credentials. In 1957,
Lyndon B. Johnson, then the majority leader of the Senate, asked Mr. Vance, then
40 years old, to leave his Wall Street law firm to serve as counsel for a Senate
armed services subcommittee on preparedness. The Soviet Union had launched the
world's first man-made satellite, Sputnik, and the United States was trying to
catch up in the race for space. Mr. Johnson was to call on Mr. Vance repeatedly;
the younger man helped draft the act establishing the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration in 1958, and served as counsel for Senate investigations of
missile and space satellite programs and Defense Department budgeting.

Mr. Vance knew the Pentagon inside and out when Robert S. McNamara, John F.
Kennedy's secretary of defense, asked him to come to work. He rose from general
counsel in 1961 to secretary of the Army and finally to deputy secretary of
defense in charge of running the Pentagon. He helped Mr. McNamara impose a
reorganization of defense management practices intended to make the services
work with one another.

President Johnson sent him to Panama as part of a peacemaking team in 1964,
after student riots in the Canal Zone had been put down at a cost of 27 lives.
Almost 15 years later, Mr. Vance presided over the successful negotiations and
Senate ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties, under which the United States
agreed to cede control of the canal to Panama by 2000.

By 1967, a painful back ailment forced Mr. Vance back into civilian life, but he
was repeatedly called back for delicate assignments. Mr. McNamara asked him to
go to Detroit when riots broke out there in 1967. Although Mr. Vance was
criticized in some quarters for being slow to call in federal troops, he won
praise from black leaders for easing the crisis.

That same year, Mr. Vance was credited with forestalling a war between Greece
and Turkey over Cyprus. "Cyrus Settles Cyprus" was the headline carried in The
Economist. In 1968 President Johnson sent Mr. Vance to South Korea to reassure
President Park Chung Hee of Washington's support after North Korea had breached
the armistice agreement and seized the Pueblo, an American
intelligence-gathering ship.

Although Mr. Vance was not one of the formulators of the Johnson
administration's policies in Vietnam, he had supported the war effort. But in
1968, as a member of the group of so-called Wise Men assembled to review the war
effort, he joined others to call for an end to the bombing and a negotiated
settlement.

He was sent to Paris in 1968 as deputy to W. Averell Harriman, the chief United
States negotiator, who was trying to work out a settlement with the North
Vietnamese. Mr. Vance was forced to devote much of his time to such fine points
as the shape of the negotiating table. When the furniture was finally arranged,
however, South Vietnam, encouraged to expect a Republican victory in the
election and a better deal from Richard M. Nixon, refused to negotiate. "In my
mind," Mr. Vance recorded in an oral history for the Lyndon B. Johnson Library,
"this was one of the great tragedies in history, that the South Vietnamese
double-crossed the United States, which I clearly feel they did."

That kind of language was uncharacteristically strong for him. Outwardly he was
so mild that he was once called "a man who leaves no footprints." Because of
that reputation, he surprised his State Department colleagues with the force of
his advocacy and the clarity of his goals, chiefly to bring the nuclear menace
under control and to improve relations with the Soviet Union.

He fought when he had to, as he did early on as secretary of state when he
vigorously supported the appointment of Mr. Warnke to head the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency. He knew Mr. Warnke would be opposed by Senator Henry Jackson
of Washington and other hard-liners, but he believed the agency needed to be led
by a firm advocate of arms control. "He went to the wall for Paul," one former
State Department official said. He won.

An Early Interest in Law

Cyrus Roberts Vance was born in Clarksburg, W. Va., on March 27, 1917, the
second son of John Carl and Amy Roberts Vance. His father was an insurance
broker and landowner who worked in a government agency during World War I. His
mother came from a Philadelphia Main Line family and was active in civic
affairs.

Cyrus was only 5 years old when his father died. In the ensuing years, the boy
developed an exceptionally close relationship with his first cousin, best friend
and mentor, John W. Davis, who had been a member of Congress, ambassador to
Britain and Democratic candidate for president in 1924. It was through Mr. Davis
that Mr. Vance said he developed an early interest in the law.

As a student at the Kent School in Connecticut, Cyrus served as senior prefect,
played football and hockey, and rowed on the 1934 crew that made the Henley
Regatta. He went on to Yale, where he found among his classmates R. Sargent
Shriver, William Scranton, Stanley Resor and William Bundy. He would serve in
government with all of them.

At Yale he was remembered as a hard-working and conscientious economics major.
He received a bachelor's degree in 1939 and graduated from Yale Law School with
honors in 1942. In later years he was to win more than a dozen honorary degrees,
and in 1969 President Johnson bestowed on him the Medal of Freedom, the
government's top civilian award.

Mr. Vance served in the Navy during World War II and saw action on destroyers at
Bougainville, Tarawa, the Philippines, Saipan and Guam. He was discharged in
1946 with the rank of lieutenant, senior grade. After a year at the Mead
Corporation, he was admitted to the New York bar in 1947 and joined Simpson
Thacher & Bartlett, where he was to remain for his entire legal career.

On Feb. 15, 1947, he married Grace Elsie Sloane, a Bryn Mawr graduate and
daughter of the board chairman of the W. & J. Sloane furniture company. Mr.
Vance is survived by his wife, their five children, Cyrus R. Jr., Elsie, Amy,
and twins, Grace Roberts and Camilla; and by two grandchildren, Simon and Clare.
His funeral will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday at Heavenly Rest Church, on
Fifth Avenue and 90th Street in Manhattan.

Over the years Mr. Vance served on the boards of directors of corporations,
among them I.B.M., Pan American Airways, Manufacturers Hanover Trust, U.S. Steel
and The New York Times.

He also served as a trustee of the New York Presbyterian Hospital, the Yale
Urban Institute and the Yale Corporation, and was chairman of the board of the
Rockefeller Foundation. He was vice chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations
until 1987, and a member of the United Nations Association and the Trilateral
Commission. From 1970 to 1972, he served on a committee to investigate police
corruption in New York City, and in 1987 he was named to the New York Commission
on Government Integrity, established to investigate corruption at all levels of
government in the state. From 1988 to 1990, Mr. Vance was chairman of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

As president of the New York City Bar Association in 1975 and 1976, he made a
stubborn but not too successful effort to persuade the lawyers to devote
Saturdays to providing the city's needy with free legal advice.

To those, like Mr. Brzezinski, who referred occasionally to the "once-dominant
WASP elite," Mr. Vance said: "The establishment is still alive and reasonably
healthy. I think you'll find the establishment, with its moral force and
integrity, will be playing a larger role in the future."

Mr. Vance never dwelled on his own legacy, but when asked at 70 how he wanted to
be remembered, he said, "I hope for being a reasonably decent, honest person who
tried to do some things for the country that might have lasting effect and
create a better life for a large number of people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Cyrus R. Vance

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Vance, left, in 1979 with Zbigniew Brzezinski, President
Jimmy Carter's national security adviser. The two men were often at odds. Above
right, Mr. Vance with Mr. Carter outside the White House in 1979. In 1980, Mr.
Vance resigned as secretary of state. (United Press
International/Corbis-Bettmann); (The White House); Cyrus R. Vance with President
Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968. Mr. Vance undertook several diplomatic missions for
Mr. Johnson. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (95%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%);
RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (88%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); ACCIDENTAL
FATALITIES (77%); POLITICS (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); PNEUMONIA (71%);
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (70%); HELICOPTERS (65%); FIRES (63%) UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  HOSTAGES;  DEATHS (OBITUARIES)

JIMMY CARTER (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%) BERGER, MARILYN; VANCE, CYRUS R; CARTER,
JIMMY

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

REGION: IRAN

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             739 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2002 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Cyrus R. Vance, Confidant of Presidents Who Resigned a Top Post, Dies at 84

BYLINE:   By MARILYN BERGER

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2928 words


Cyrus R. Vance, who after two decades in public service was appointed secretary
of state, and who then took the rare step of resigning from the nation's highest
cabinet post on a matter of principle, died Saturday afternoon at Mount Sinai
Medical Center in New York. He was 84.

The cause was pneumonia and other complications, said Elva Murphy, his longtime
secretary.

Mr. Vance was secretary of state from 1977 until 1980, when he resigned in
protest over President Jimmy Carter's decision to try a military rescue of
American hostages in Iran, an action that he considered ill advised and futile.
He was soon proved right.

After more than 20 years in and out of government, during which he served
several presidents, Mr. Vance submitted his resignation with what he called "a
heavy heart." His doubts that the elaborate rescue would succeed, and his fears
that it would sabotage diplomatic efforts to free the 52 American hostages,
brought him to what he called "one of the most painful days of my life."

His opposition to the rescue mission was the immediate cause of his resignation,
but he had already come to see that Mr. Carter was increasingly rejecting his
advice in favor of that of his national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski.

As it turned, out the rescue attempt failed. Of the eight American helicopters
sent on the mission, three broke down in the first stage of the operation. It
was decided to abandon the mission, but there was more humiliation ahead for the
United States. One of the remaining helicopters collided on the ground with a
transport plane and both craft burned. Eight servicemen died in the fire and the
rest fled.

The failed mission became an issue in the 1980 political campaign in which Mr.
Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan. The hostages were not released until the
day of Mr. Reagan's inauguration, 444 days after they were taken captive.

Mr. Vance said in 1999 that he had watched from the sidelines with "frustration
and sadness" as relations between the United States and Iran "plunged into
increasing hostility, mistrust, name calling and mutual recrimination." In an
address at the Asia Society, Mr. Vance called for the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations with Iran.

Mr. Vance -- who had decided to leave office whether the rescue succeeded or
failed -- was only the second secretary of state in the history of the United
States to resign on a matter of principle, joining what another secretary of
state, Dean Acheson, called "the most exclusive club in America." William
Jennings Bryan, the only other secretary of state to resign, was a pacifist who
resigned in 1915 over policies by Woodrow Wilson that he thought might lead to
war.

An Obligation to Serve

That Mr. Vance allowed principle to get in the way of his career came as no
surprise to the people who knew him best. To them, Cyrus Vance, the tall, lanky,
patrician lawyer with the open face of a prep school boy was Mr. Integrity, Mr.
Honesty. He was the epitome of the American establishment, that small group of
men who moved seamlessly from the prep schools of New England and the Ivy League
colleges of the East to the law firms of Wall Street, with time out for service
in government. Then they would return again to private practice, bringing with
them the old values of family, work and public service.

After his return to private practice, Mr. Vance was repeatedly called back to
the public arena to use his quiet negotiating skills on some of the most violent
conflicts of the 1980's and 1990's: in the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute between
Azerbaijan and Armenia; in South Africa; and in a disintegrating Yugoslavia.
There, he successfully negotiated a cease-fire in Croatia to allow a United
Nations peacekeeping force to enter and disarm warring militias.

In accepting one assignment after another, Mr. Vance was only doing what he
believed was expected of him. He said, "A lot of us were raised in families
where we were taught that we were very fortunate, that we were going to have a
good education, and that we had the responsibility to return to the community
some of the benefits and blessings we had, and that there was an obligation to
participate in government service at the local, state and national level."

This, in a nutshell, was the un-self-conscious voice of the establishment -- the
one that Jimmy Carter ran against so vigorously that his campaign manager,
Hamilton Jordan, once said: "If, after the inauguration, you find a Cy Vance as
secretary of state and Zbigniew Brzezinski as head of national security, then I
would say we failed. And I'd quit."

Mr. Vance was Mr. Carter's first appointee, followed soon after by Mr.
Brzezinski.  Mr. Jordan did not quit.

In both his personal approach to the job and his overall philosophy, Mr. Vance
presented a striking contrast to his flamboyant predecessor, Henry A. Kissinger.
A calm, publicity-shy diplomat who was more a mediator than a policy maker, Mr.
Vance was one of the most modest and unpretentious men ever to hold the post. He
was a popular figure around the State Department as he loped through the
hallways in his pinstripes or tweeds, occasionally rumpled but always well
tailored.

When he took office, Mr. Vance vowed to limit his travel abroad and eschew Mr.
Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy -- a pledge that quickly fell by the wayside. But
while he adopted some of Mr. Kissinger's tactics, he harbored doubts about his
strategy. Mr. Vance was deeply skeptical that any master plan could provide
answers for individual foreign policy problems. He did not think in terms of a
Soviet grand design to encircle and undo the West any more than he thought about
a grand design for American foreign policy. His method was "to slog it out,"
putting together solutions to individual problems.

Prof. Norman A. Graebner, a historian of American diplomacy at the University of
Virginia, said, "The general attitude toward the acceptance of the Soviet
position in the world and the fact that revolutionary pressures in the third
world were genuine and that it was America's task to live with those realities
was most pronounced during those first Carter years."

The president and his secretary of state pursued a moderate course,
characterized by the strategic arms negotiations, the Panama Canal Treaties, the
normalization of relations with China and the settlement that brought majority
rule to Zimbabwe, the former British colony that had been known as Rhodesia.
During the historic talks at Camp David in 1979, Mr. Vance developed an
effective working relationship with two of the Israeli negotiators, Foreign
Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman. It became crucial in
working out the landmark agreement that established peace between Egypt and
Israel.

Mr. Vance shared with Mr. Carter the conviction that the advancement of human
rights around the world was in America's national interest. And from his years
in the Pentagon, Mr. Vance knew the limits of the use of military force to solve
nonmilitary problems. He was secretary of the Army in 1962 when the Army was
called in to open the doors of the University of Mississippi to blacks. The
walkie-talkies failed, providing a lesson that he still carried years later when
he heard of the plan to rescue the hostages in Tehran. If a problem like that
could occur in Mississippi, he wondered how a complicated mission in a country
in the throes of revolution half a world away could succeed.

But the Carter administration had been rocked by a series of events in 1979: the
fall of the shah of Iran, the appearance of a Soviet brigade in Cuba, the fall
of the Somoza regime in Nicaragua, the taking of American hostages in Tehran
and, finally, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. "All these were attributed to
a failure of will and courage on the part of President Carter," Professor
Graebner said, and that is when Mr. Carter "went ideological with behavior that
became extremely appealing to the right wing. The effort to rescue the hostages
was part of that, and at that point, Vance found himself increasingly on the
outside looking in."

To Mr. Brzezinski, Mr. Vance was not hardheaded enough about world realities. In
his book "Power and Principle," Mr. Brzezinski wrote that Mr. Vance, "as a
member of both the legal profession and the once-dominant WASP elite, operated
according to their values and rules, but those values and rules were of
declining relevance not only in terms of domestic American politics but
particularly in terms of global conditions."

Paul C. Warnke, an admirer of Mr. Vance's who served as his chief arms control
adviser, said Mr. Vance suffered from the vice of his own virtue. "He thought he
could work with Zbig," Mr. Warnke said.  "But Zbig not only used guerrilla
tactics, he was in closer proximity to the president."

The Hard Choice to Leave

Mr. Vance was always circumspect about his relationship with Mr. Brzezinski, but
years later, in an interview for this article, he reluctantly acknowledged that
he had probably been mistaken when he agreed to Mr. Brzezinski's appointment. "I
had some reservations about him," he said, "but I knew the president wanted him
very badly. I now realize my instinctive feeling on that was right."

When Mr. Carter gave the order to rescue the hostages in Iran, it was clear that
Mr. Brzezinski had won the contest, and Mr. Vance decided to resign. He recorded
some of this story in his 1983 book, "Hard Choices."

His son, Cyrus Vance Jr., said on Saturday that the family was proud of him when
he stepped down, because he had acted on his principles. "I don't think he ever
failed to follow those principles in his entire professional life," he said.

Mr. Vance came to the Carter cabinet with impeccable credentials. In 1957,
Lyndon B. Johnson, then the majority leader of the Senate, asked Mr. Vance, then
40 years old, to leave his Wall Street law firm to serve as counsel for a Senate
armed services subcommittee on preparedness. The Soviet Union had launched the
world's first man-made satellite, Sputnik, and the United States was trying to
catch up in the race for space. Mr. Johnson was to call on Mr. Vance repeatedly;
the younger man helped draft the act establishing the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration in 1958, and served as counsel for Senate investigations of
missile and space satellite programs and Defense Department budgeting.

Mr. Vance knew the Pentagon inside and out when Robert S. McNamara, John F.
Kennedy's secretary of defense, asked him to come to work. He rose from general
counsel in 1961 to secretary of the Army and finally to deputy secretary of
defense in charge of running the Pentagon. He helped Mr. McNamara impose a
reorganization of defense management practices intended to make the services
work with one another.

President Johnson sent him to Panama as part of a peacemaking team in 1964,
after student riots in the Canal Zone had been put down at a cost of 27 lives.
Almost 15 years later, Mr. Vance presided over the successful negotiations and
Senate ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties, under which the United States
agreed to cede control of the canal to Panama by 2000.

By 1967, a painful back ailment forced Mr. Vance back into civilian life, but he
was repeatedly called back for delicate assignments. Mr. McNamara asked him to
go to Detroit when riots broke out there in 1967. Although Mr. Vance was
criticized in some quarters for being slow to call in federal troops, he won
praise from black leaders for easing the crisis.

That same year, Mr. Vance was credited with forestalling a war between Greece
and Turkey over Cyprus. "Cyrus Settles Cyprus" was the headline carried in The
Economist. In 1968 President Johnson sent Mr. Vance to South Korea to reassure
President Park Chung Hee of Washington's support after North Korea had breached
the armistice agreement and seized the Pueblo, an American
intelligence-gathering ship.

Although Mr. Vance was not one of the formulators of the Johnson
administration's policies in Vietnam, he had supported the war effort. But in
1968, as a member of the group of so-called Wise Men assembled to review the war
effort, he joined others to call for an end to the bombing and a negotiated
settlement.

He was sent to Paris in 1968 as deputy to W. Averell Harriman, the chief United
States negotiator, who was trying to work out a settlement with the North
Vietnamese. Mr. Vance was forced to devote much of his time to such fine points
as the shape of the negotiating table. When the furniture was finally arranged,
however, South Vietnam, encouraged to expect a Republican victory in the
election and a better deal from Richard M. Nixon, refused to negotiate. "In my
mind," Mr. Vance recorded in an oral history for the Lyndon B. Johnson Library,
"this was one of the great tragedies in history, that the South Vietnamese
double-crossed the United States, which I clearly feel they did."

That kind of language was uncharacteristically strong for him. Outwardly he was
so mild that he was once called "a man who leaves no footprints." Because of
that reputation, he surprised his State Department colleagues with the force of
his advocacy and the clarity of his goals, chiefly to bring the nuclear menace
under control and to improve relations with the Soviet Union.

He fought when he had to, as he did early on as secretary of state when he
vigorously supported the appointment of Mr. Warnke to head the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency. He knew Mr. Warnke would be opposed by Senator Henry Jackson
of Washington and other hard-liners, but he believed the agency needed to be led
by a firm advocate of arms control. "He went to the wall for Paul," one former
State Department official said. He won.

An Early Interest in Law

Cyrus Roberts Vance was born in Clarksburg, W. Va., on March 27, 1917, the
second son of John Carl and Amy Roberts Vance. His father was an insurance
broker and landowner who worked in a government agency during World War I. His
mother came from a Philadelphia Main Line family and was active in civic
affairs.

Cyrus was only 5 years old when his father died. In the ensuing years, the boy
developed an exceptionally close relationship with his first cousin, best friend
and mentor, John W. Davis, who had been a member of Congress, ambassador to
Britain and Democratic candidate for president in 1924. It was through Mr. Davis
that Mr. Vance said he developed an early interest in the law.

As a student at the Kent School in Connecticut, Cyrus served as senior prefect,
played football and hockey, and rowed on the 1934 crew that made the Henley
Regatta. He went on to Yale, where he found among his classmates R. Sargent
Shriver, William Scranton, Stanley Resor and William Bundy. He would serve in
government with all of them.

At Yale he was remembered as a hard-working and conscientious economics major.
He received a bachelor's degree in 1939 and graduated from Yale Law School with
honors in 1942. In later years he was to win more than a dozen honorary degrees,
and in 1969 President Johnson bestowed on him the Medal of Freedom, the
government's top civilian award.

Mr. Vance served in the Navy during World War II and saw action on destroyers at
Bougainville, Tarawa, the Philippines, Saipan and Guam. He was discharged in
1946 with the rank of lieutenant, senior grade. After a year at the Mead
Corporation, he was admitted to the New York bar in 1947 and joined Simpson
Thacher & Bartlett, where he was to remain for his entire legal career.

On Feb. 15, 1947, he married Grace Elsie Sloane, a Bryn Mawr graduate and
daughter of the board chairman of the W. & J. Sloane furniture company. Mr.
Vance is survived by his wife, their five children, Cyrus R. Jr., Elsie, Amy,
and twins, Grace Roberts and Camilla; and by two grandchildren, Simon and Clare.
His funeral will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday at Heavenly Rest Church, on
Fifth Avenue and 90th Street in Manhattan.

Over the years Mr. Vance served on the boards of directors of corporations,
among them I.B.M., Pan American Airways, Manufacturers Hanover Trust, U.S. Steel
and The New York Times.

He also served as a trustee of the New York Presbyterian Hospital, the Yale
Urban Institute and the Yale Corporation, and was chairman of the board of the
Rockefeller Foundation. He was vice chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations
until 1987, and a member of the United Nations Association and the Trilateral
Commission. From 1970 to 1972, he served on a committee to investigate police
corruption in New York City, and in 1987 he was named to the New York Commission
on Government Integrity, established to investigate corruption at all levels of
government in the state. From 1988 to 1990, Mr. Vance was chairman of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

As president of the New York City Bar Association in 1975 and 1976, he made a
stubborn but not too successful effort to persuade the lawyers to devote
Saturdays to providing the city's needy with free legal advice.

To those, like Mr. Brzezinski, who referred occasionally to the "once-dominant
WASP elite," Mr. Vance said: "The establishment is still alive and reasonably
healthy. I think you'll find the establishment, with its moral force and
integrity, will be playing a larger role in the future."

Mr. Vance never dwelled on his own legacy, but when asked at 70 how he wanted to
be remembered, he said, "I hope for being a reasonably decent, honest person who
tried to do some things for the country that might have lasting effect and
create a better life for a large number of people."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Cyrus R. Vance

CORRECTION-DATE: January 26, 2002



CORRECTION: The obituary of former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance on Jan. 14
(and in late editions on Jan. 13) misstated the rarity of resignations from that
post over matters of principle. Historians generally agree that there were
three, not two. Besides Mr. Vance, who objected in 1980 to the attempt at a
military rescue of American hostages in Iran, and William Jennings Bryan (1915),
over policies he felt might lead the country to war, Lewis Cass resigned in 1860
because he considered President James Buchanan weak on secessionists.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Vance, left, in 1979 with Zbigniew Brzezinski, President
Jimmy Carter's national security adviser. The two men were often at odds. Above
right, Mr. Vance with Mr. Carter outside the White House in 1979. In 1980, Mr.
Vance resigned as secretary of state. (United Press
International/Corbis-Bettmann); (The White House); Cyrus R. Vance with President
Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968. Mr. Vance undertook several diplomatic missions for
Mr. Johnson. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (91%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%);
RESIGNATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (77%); POLITICS (75%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); PNEUMONIA (71%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (70%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); HELICOPTERS (65%); FIRES (63%) Terms not
available from NYTimes.

JIMMY CARTER (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             742 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Passenger on Jet: Gay Hero or Hero Who Was Gay?

BYLINE:  By EVELYN NIEVES

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 15


Mark Bingham was one of those people who pop up all over the high school
yearbook, a popular, brawny, 6-foot-5 rugby player who could have played any
sport, just as he could have talked his way into any room.

When the story of the passengers on United Airlines Flight 93 who fought their
hijackers on Sept. 11 became public, everyone who knew Mr. Bingham was sure he
was one of the leaders. The hijackers commandeering the cockpit had to be right
in front of Mr. Bingham as he sat in seat 4D in first class. Those who
remembered him fighting off an armed mugger knew he was a man of action, never
one to back away from a confrontation.

In the weeks and months since Sept. 11, Mr. Bingham, a 31-year-old public
relations executive who played rugby for the University of California, has
become one of the most celebrated heroes of that day.

He has also become an icon among gays. The man tearfully eulogized by Senator
John McCain of Arizona is also the subject of a cover story and Person of the
Year in The Advocate, the national gay and lesbian biweekly news magazine. He
has inspired a Web site, markbingham.org, and plans for a permanent memorial in
his honor in the Castro, San Francisco's famous gay neighborhood.

That he was gay might seem irrelevant to any discussion about his role in Flight
93, many gay rights advocates say. Sept. 11, they agree, was a transformative
day for the nation, when what was notable about this country of diverse groups
is how everyone united in grief and outrage.

But the sexual orientation of Sept. 11 heroes is not really irrelevant, gay
civil rights groups contend, at a time when openly gay men and lesbians are
barred from the military and when gay couples do not have the same rights as
heterosexual ones.

"When you ask what difference does it make if the heroes were gay, I say I agree
with you," said Judy Wieder, editor in chief of The Advocate, which devoted its
Oct. 23 issue to "the gay heroes of the terrorist tragedy."

"That's precisely our point," Ms. Wieder said. "They were just like everybody
else. So we ask, why is it that when they died, they were equal to everyone, but
had they lived, they would not have the same equality as heterosexuals?"

The importance of identifying gay heroes became especially important, gay
advocates say, when the Rev. Jerry Falwell and the Rev. Pat Robertson asserted,
just two days after the attacks, that an angry God had allowed the terrorists to
succeed because the United States had become a nation of abortion,
homosexuality, secular schools and courts and the American Civil Liberties
Union.

"Maybe because of the lack of visible heroes for us, there's a greater
significance in finding heroes," said Joan M. Garry, executive director of the
Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (Glaad), which has been critical of
news organizations that did not mention Mr. Bingham's sexual orientation. Later
profiles were more forthright, Ms. Garry said.

Mr. Bingham's sexual orientation was not his full story, his friends and his
mother, Alice Hoglan, say.

"Mark was a fully alive person," said Ms. Hoglan, a flight attendant for United
Airlines who raised her son as a single mother. "I don't mind at all that he is
being identified as a gay hero, though that was just one aspect of him. He was
proud of being gay, just as he was proud of being a Republican, and proud of
playing rugby, and proud of his friends."

Daniel Chu, a Chi Psi fraternity brother of Mr. Bingham in the early 1990's, who
registered and maintains the markbingham.org Web site, said his friend's sexual
orientation was not the impetus for the site.

"Most of us in the fraternity didn't know about Mark's sexual orientation," he
said, "and we didn't find out about it until a week before he graduated. School
was not really Mark's No. 1 priority. Mark was always about people. Always."

The Web site has become a sprawling tribute, with testimonials from friends gay
and straight.

"I don't think he would have asked for this," Mr. Chu said. "But I'm sure he's
cracking up to see a big deal made of something he did every day. If a friend
needed help, he was always there. If a friend needed someone to talk to, he was
always there. That's the way Mark was. He loved life and lived it to its
fullest."

To gay advocates, part of Mr. Bingham's appeal as a gay hero, or a hero who was
gay, is that he was not a stereotype.

For Michelangelo Signorile, a gay journalist, what was notable about the early
coverage of the Sept. 11 heroes is not that it omitted Mr. Bingham's sexual
orientation but that it seemed to overlook Mr. Bingham entirely.

In many of the early reports, he said, most of the attention was focused on Mr.
Bingham's seatmate on the plane, Todd Beamer, who is believed to have uttered
the now-famous "Let's roll" comment as the passengers sought to overcome the
hijackers.

"I feel that in general the average American doesn't have any idea who Mark
Bingham is," Mr. Signorile said. "Everyone knows Todd Beamer because he had a
wife, he was heterosexual, he had a story, the great American family. But we
just didn't hear that much about Mark Bingham."

For many gays and lesbians, Mr. Signorile said, there has been a real tension
between two ways of looking at the issue of whether Mark Bingham should be seen
as an American who acted heroically and who happened to be gay, or whether he
should be honored as an example of a gay man who became a hero.

"In the gay community you see both of these strains, an ambivalence because many
have both of these feelings," Mr. Signorile said. "On the one hand they say:
'Why focus on it?' And, on the other hand, they say, 'We want people to know.' "


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Bingham, honored by a national gay and lesbian magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); RUGBY (90%); AIRLINES (90%); HIJACKING (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); LGBT RIGHTS (87%);
CELEBRITIES (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); ABORTION (64%)
TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
HOMOSEXUALITY

COMPANY: UNITED AIR LINES INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (58%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (51%) NIEVES, EVELYN; BINGHAM, MARK

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             743 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing Midwest: Illinois: A.C.L.U. Sues Over Airport Search

BYLINE:  By Tamar Lewin (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 88 words


The American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois filed suit against a National
Guardsman and three security guards at O'Hare International Airport for making
Samar Kaukab, an American of Pakistani descent, remove her traditional Muslim
head covering in a search last November in which her pants and sweater were also
opened.

The A.C.L.U. said Ms. Kaukab, 22, had been singled out because of her religious
attire for a search that violated her constitutional rights to equal protection
and religious freedom.   Tamar Lewin (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRPORTS (94%); RELIGION (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(89%); EQUAL PROTECTION (88%); HIJACKING (87%); TERRORISM (86%); SEARCH &
SEIZURE (86%); AIRLINES (85%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (85%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY;  SEARCH AND SEIZURE;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  O'HARE
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT (CHICAGO);  TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  APPAREL;  DISCRIMINATION;
PAKISTANI-AMERICANS;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  AIRPORTS;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; NATIONAL GUARD (US)

PERSON: LEWIN, TAMAR; KAUKAB, SAMAR

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); MIDWEST USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);
ILLINOIS, USA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: ; NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             744 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Sierra Leone: Agreement On War Tribunal

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 124 words


The government and the United Nations signed an agreement creating a special
court to try people accused of committing atrocities during the West African
country's decade-long civil war. The tribunal, to be based in the capital,
Freetown, is expected to try around 20 people who will be charged with crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other serious violations of international law.

Those expected to be indicted include Foday Sankoh, the leader of the
Revolutionary United Front, a rebel group that killed and chopped off the limbs
of thousands of civilians. The rebels, who have turned in their weapons under a
peace plan brokered by the United Nations, say members of government forces also
committed atrocities and should be tried.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); PEACE PROCESS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) UNITED NATIONS

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (93%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (91%)

REGION: SIERRA LEONE

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             748 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Powell Now 'Very Encouraged' on Kashmir

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM with CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: KATMANDU, Nepal, Jan. 18


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he had received strong signs from India
and Pakistan today that tensions between them were decreasing, but he ended his
36 hours of cross-border diplomacy without concrete agreements from either side
on easing their military standoff.

"I leave here very encouraged that we can find a solution to this troubling
situation," Secretary Powell said after meeting with the Indian prime minister,
Atal Behari Vajpayee, and other officials before flying to Nepal to show
solidarity with a government beleaguered by a radical Maoist insurgency.

"I think we are on a path that could lead to the restoration of dialogue,"
Secretary Powell said of India and Pakistan's monthlong conflict over a deadly
attack on the Indian Parliament attributed to Pakistani extremist groups opposed
to India's control of the disputed Kashmir province. "But it will take action,
further action, before we can really start walking down that path more
aggressively."

Even as Secretary Powell wrapped up his second visit to the region since
October, Pakistan's military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, said for the first
time in the standoff that he was confident that war could be avoided, but warned
that Pakistan would respond strongly to attack.

"We don't want war," he told clerics in Islamabad today. "But if war is imposed
on us, we are ready" to fight "with all our might."

In New Delhi, Secretary Powell appeared at a joint news conference with India's
foreign minister, Jaswant Singh, who emphasized that the most important factor
in avoiding conflict was the restoration of mutual confidence, adding,
"Confidence is a factor that is born of actions."

In particular, Mr. Singh again called on Pakistan to take action against 20
suspected terrorists and criminals who live in Pakistan and are wanted by India,
at least 14 of whom are Indian citizens. "And when there is action in regard to
the 20 wanted terrorists and criminals, then I am very hopeful that there would
be distinct movement" toward restoring normal relations, he said.

Mr. Singh said the 20 were wanted "for the most heinous crimes," adding that the
authorities in Pakistan knew where they were. "It is not as though they are
hiding in some caves in Karachi," he said.

Secretary Powell repeated his understanding that Pakistan might be willing to
extradite non-Pakistanis.

Later, India's home minister, L. K. Advani, considered a powerful hard-liner in
the government, said in an interview, "Powell got the clear impression here that
unless Pakistan does something in respect of these 20, there will be no movement
from India's side."

In a more hopeful sign, Secretary Powell said in an interview with India's Star
News television channel that there were indications of "instructions being
given" to stop infiltration across the Line of Control, the de facto border
between Pakistani- and Indian-held territory in Kashmir. That would imply a
change in Pakistani policy.

"I don't know if it is temporary," he said, "but at some point he has to make a
judgment and decide if these actions are real."

A senior administration official later indicated that intelligence had suggested
the shift. But Mr. Advani said he would wait until next week to see if he could
see a trend of declining levels of infiltration. He said the authorities were
killing about 200 militants a month in Kashmir and estimated that hundreds were
infiltrating into the state each month from Pakistani territory.

Then he riffled through papers on his desk looking for an intelligence report he
received on Thursday that indicated that the militants in Indian-held Kashmir
were being told, "Bear with the situation for two to three months," intercept
traffic that suggests to India that Pakistan may just be telling them to lie low
until America's attention moves on to the next crisis.

A senior Bush administration official traveling with Secretary Powell expressed
satisfaction with the outcome of the mission, despite the lack of any more
dramatic agreement.

"We were looking for some recognition of what Musharraf has done, and we got
that," the official said. "We were looking for time and got that. Vajpayee told
Powell he would give the Pakistanis time" to deliver on General Musharraf's vow
to crack down on extremist groups.

After dealing with the India-Pakistan crisis and making a day trip to Kabul,
Afghanistan, Secretary Powell arrived in the mountainous kingdom of Nepal in a
late afternoon mist. A state of emergency has been in effect here since November
after a truce broke down between the government and a violent Maoist insurgency
that has led to 2,300 deaths since 1995.

Secretary Powell is the first American secretary of state to visit Nepal, and
the most senior government official since Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in 1970,
and he was greeted as if he were a pasha, with hundreds of people lining his
motorcade route. He met this evening with King Gyanendra.

At a news conference with Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, Secretary Powell
blended expressions of support with a sober call to the government to work to
crack down on corruption and mismanagement.

"We fully acknowledge the government of Nepal's right to protect its citizens
and institutions from terrorist attacks," Secretary Powell said. "However, we
hope that the current state of emergency will be of limited duration, and we
encourage the elected government to focus on protecting human rights while
dealing with this emergency."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Map of Nepal highlighting Katmandu: Colin L. Powell was warmly welcomed
in Katmandu.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); MILITARY RULE (73%);
EXTRADITION (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (50%) UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (73%) PURDUM, TODD S; DUGGER, CELIA W; MUSHARRAF,
PERVEZ (GEN); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); SINGH, JASWANT (MIN)

CITY: KATHMANDU, NEPAL (90%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (79%);
NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (93%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (95%); NEPAL (94%); ASIA (93%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: INDIA;  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             750 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: ADVISERS;
U.S. Mission Lifts Filipino Hopes for Peace

BYLINE:  By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: ZAMBOANGA, the Philippines, Jan. 19


At a rural Philippine Army base here, beyond a grove of tamarind trees shading a
turkey pen and a cow pasture, construction teams are working around the clock,
preparing for a new step by the United States in the global war on terrorism.

Racing a deadline of Jan. 25, workers are bolting together prefabricated steel
dormitories, classrooms and a mess hall to house 160 of the American troops who
are to come here. They are to train and advise Filipino soldiers in their war
against Abu Sayyaf guerrillas, who hold an American couple hostage on the nearby
island of Basilan.

The American military mission is the talk of this southern city of 500,000
people, about three-quarters Christian and one-quarter Muslim. Weary after a
decade of political violence, most people interviewed today, Christians and
Muslims alike, gave at least qualified support to the American trainers, who are
expected to start work here the first week in February.

"It's good the Americans are coming, they may bring peace to Basilan," said
Abdullah Sadalani, pausing from an afternoon Koran discussion group at Al
Monsour, a mosque built on concrete stilts in a wooden-stilt shantytown over the
wash of the harbor here.

His older brother, Taha, who trades dried coconuts with people from Basilan,
said: "They are scared of those Americans. Will these troops exercise human
rights? When they pass by civilian areas, will they not harm people?"

Across town, Larna Llanes, the owner of a small stationery store, said a rash of
terrorism-related kidnappings, bombings and bomb threats, now forced her to
scurry home every day at 5 p.m., cutting two hours off her shop hours. As two
sales assistants nodded in agreement, she said: "For me, I am in favor of the
Americans. They are coming to prevent people like Abu Sayyaf from doing bad
things."

Ever since the Spanish built Fort Pilar in 1635 to guard the harbor here against
the "moros" or Muslims, Christian-Muslim coexistence has blown hot and cold in
this part of the Philippines. This southernmost tip is closer geographically to
Indonesia, the world's most populous majority-Muslim country, than to Manila,
the Philippine capital, in a nation that is about 95 percent Christian.

While the moros were never defeated, the Spanish left a lasting Roman Catholic
stamp on this city. Today, one can move from Baby Jesus Avenue to Holy Cross
Market, to the neighborhoods of St. Barbara, St. Joseph and Holy Mary.

But only three blocks from the manicured campus of the Immaculate Conception
Archdiocesan School, a new Islamic school stood by a street sign marked:
"Welcome to the Taliban." Poorer than their Christian neighbors and apparently
losing the demographic race, some Muslims turned to armed rebellion over the
last 30 years. To some, the Abu Sayyaf is a politically vague, criminal
kidnapping gang. To others, it is the most recent manifestation of a
400-year-old struggle for moro autonomy.

"Historically, the moro people have never been subjugated by foreign peoples,"
said Eddie Ladja, a professor of Islamic law, at Western Mindanao State
University.

"We don't want American forces on our land because we may become targets," he
said, voicing the only outright opposition heard in a dozen interviews here
today. Although he said he rejected Abu Sayyaf as a kidnapping gang that
violates Koranic principles, he asked, "If this is a military training exercise,
why is this done in the battle zone?"

But the professor seemed to have failed to transmit his rejection to two of his
favorite pupils, both from Jolo, an island that is 90 percent Muslim and has
been plagued by violence.

"It's O.K. for me," Muammar Y. Arbason, a 24-year-old who was working on growing
a goatee, the sign here of an observant Muslim man. Asked about the opinions of
fellow students in the university's Institute of Asian and Islamic Studies, he
said, "We want the Americans here."

Aldrin O. Usman, a 25-year-old goateed friend, agreed saying: "With this, maybe
our relationship with the U.S. will bloom. We dream of the U.S. so much."

With SouthCom -- the Philippine Army's Southern Command -- playing the
21st-century role of Fort Pilar, workers in Zamboanga's dying tourism industry
are openly rooting for the destruction of the Abu Sayyaf.

With a terrace of empty tables and neatly stacked chairs facing his aviary
stocked with expensive tropical birds, Leo M. Alfaro, manager of the Alavar
Restaurant, said of the American military aid: "I'm for it because it could wash
down the Abu Sayyaf."

Down by the beach this evening, visitors seated around a rattan-and-mangrove
table at the Vista del Mar Beach Resort watched fishermen in outrigger canoes
plying a placid sea as a sunset gradually turned the western sky pink.

Only 15 miles across the strait, silhouettes of the dark mountains of Basilan
loomed.

Only 12 chairs were filled in a restaurant with a capacity of 500 guests.

"Tourism is very low," said Dionisio Timoteo, the 50-year-old manager. "We are
very glad you Americans have come to help."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Many in Zamboanga welcome U.S. troops, but Eddie Ladja fears
Filipinos "may become targets." (David Greedy for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ARMIES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); MILITARY BASES (89%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); BOMBINGS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); WAR
ON TERROR (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); TALIBAN (77%); STUDENT HOUSING
(76%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (69%); OFFICE SUPPLY
STORES (64%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  HOSTAGES

ORGANIZATION: ABU SAYYAF GROUP (83%) ABU SAYYAF (REBEL GROUP)

PERSON: BROOKE, JAMES

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PHILIPPINES (97%); INDONESIA (79%)

REGION: PHILIPPINES;  ZAMBOANGA (PHILIPPINES);  BASILAN (PHILIPPINES)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             757 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: ASIAN TERROR;
Qaeda Moving Into Indonesia, Officials Fear

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER and JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Jan. 22


For the last two years, Osama bin Laden has been working to establish a
beachhead here in the world's most-populous Muslim nation, say American and
Asian officials. Members of his organization Al Qaeda have slipped in and out of
the archipelago, bringing millions of dollars in cash for radical Islamic
organizations, recruiting members, and providing military training, those
officials say.

As the Bush administration pushes its war on terror beyond Afghanistan,
Southeast Asia has become a new focus, a place where a senior Pentagon official
said the United States was looking for "bad guys to chase." Of all the countries
in the region, Indonesia is the most worrisome for Washington, yet it is the
place where the United States has the least clout.

One of the operatives in Indonesia, a Pakistani, was deported 10 days ago by
Indonesian authorities to Egypt, where he is wanted for immigration violations
and is also being questioned by American law enforcement officials, a senior
Bush administration official said. The man, Hafiz Mohammed Sasa Iqbal, has been
linked by American intelligence to the attempt by the so-called shoe bomber to
blow up the American Airlines jet from Paris to Miami.

In addition, a Qaeda group carried out surveillance of the American Embassy
here, in late 2000, and last summer a group came from Yemen to blow up the
embassy in downtown Jakarta, a senior American official said.

The men fled before they could be arrested, either because of inept work by the
authorities, or possibly because they were tipped off by powerful sympathizers
within the Indonesian military, he said.

In the region, Singapore announced this month that it had arrested 13 men who
had plotted to blow up the American Embassy there. Authorities said the men were
members of a clandestine organization, Jemaah Islamiah, or Islamic Group, which
they said was associated with Al Qaeda and had cells in Malaysia and Indonesia.
It is a new group in the panoply of international terrorist organizations, and
the Singapore police say that it is headed by an Indonesian cleric.

If a terrorist cell could operate in rigidly controlled Singapore, American
officials say they shudder at what Al Qaeda may have achieved in the disarray of
Indonesia, considered one of the most fertile havens in the world for
international terrorists. It has a weak central government, rampant corruption,
porous borders and 220 million people, most of them Muslims, stretched over a
vast archipelago of tropical islands.

Yet, though neither an American enemy nor an ally, Indonesia has been less
cooperative with the Bush administration's terror campaign than other countries
in Asia, its leadership wary of arousing anti-American sentiment. Its military
contains officers who support the hard-line Islamic cause, which is gaining
ground among the country's traditionally moderate Muslims.

Indonesia has also declined to look for bank accounts of many of the
organizations on the Bush administration's terrorist list, and it has not
granted blanket overflight authority to American warplanes.

What it has done is issue varying public statements about the presence of Al
Qaeda. After long denying any links between local groups and Al Qaeda, last
month the director of the country's intelligence agency, Gen. Hendropriono, said
Al Qaeda had set up training camps here. He made the public statement -- after
consultation with President Megawati Sukarnoputri -- in an effort to persuade
his government to become more active in the war on terrorism.

Several Islamic groups immediately attacked General Hendropriono for raising the
temperature, and he swiftly backed down. "There is a lot of nervousness here
that the opposition to a crackdown on Islamic groups could be 100 times more
than in the Philippines" where President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo faces a
parliamentary revolt for inviting American military trainers, a Western diplomat
said.

On Monday, the Indonesian foreign minister, Hassan Wirajuda, said the government
did not have any evidence that Muslim organizations here were part of an
international terrorist network.

The Bush administration is pushing the Indonesians to do far more. In essence,
the administration wants the Indonesians to do what the Philippines have done:
recognize the seriousness of the terrorist presence in their country and ask for
help. But it is unlikely that the government here will agree to an American
military presence on Indonesian soil.

While Indonesia does not want an American presence, it favors resuming training
of Indonesian military officials in the United States. Congress has barred that
because of human rights abuses by the Indonesian military. The Bush
administration has, however, invited the Indonesian government to submit a list
of equipment it needs for an antiterror campaign, like helicopters and
communications gear. The Indonesians have not responded. "We sure would like to
help them, but the key is what are they willing to do?" a Pentagon official
said.

American officials acknowledge they lack extensive information about a Qaeda
network here, and how it might operate. One senior American official in
Washington said the United States knew that two years ago Al Qaeda had
established at least five cells, as well as a travel agency, several charitable
foundations and training camps.

So far most of the focus has been on a group called Laskar Jihad, the most
visible and violent of the radical Muslim organizations. Founded in early 2000
in Central Java, the group has an avowed agenda of wiping out Christians in the
Moluccas and central Sulawesi, and establishing an Islamic state. It has a
well-designed Web site, which an American official noted is similar to those of
the Chechnyan rebels and several radical Islamic groups in the Middle East, one
suggestion that Laskar Jihad receives help from outsiders.

The organization is headed by Jaffar Umar Thalib, a religious leader of Yemenese
ancestry, who fought against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan in the 1980's, when
he met Mr. bin Laden. Mr. Thalib has said that Al Qaeda offered his organization
money, but that he rejected it, and he has been critical of Mr. bin Laden.

But an American specialist on Indonesian Islam, Robert W. Hefner of Boston
University, told the House International Relations Committee that in recent
years members of Laskar Jihad have had contacts with Mr. bin Laden, and a few
dozen Arab fighters are reported to have traveled to Indonesia to aid in the
battle against Christians. Mr. Thalib's recent statements that he disagreed with
Mr. bin Laden were probably revisionism, Mr. Hefner suggested.

Still, in recent interviews, several American and foreign officials said there
was no hard evidence of links between Al Qaeda and Laskar Jihad, and it was not
placed on the Bush administration's list of terrorist organizations.

With the arrests in Singapore, attention has now turned to Jemaah Islamiah.
According to Singaporean authorities, it is run by Abu Bakar Baasyir, an
Indonesian cleric. Like Mr. Thalib, Mr. Baasyir has denied any links to Al Qaeda
or Mr. bin Laden, but has said he supports their goals "because they are enemies
of the United States."

Singapore and Malaysia have asked Indonesia to arrest Mr. Baasyir, but the
Indonesian government has said it has no evidence that he has committed any
crimes. Under pressure from its neighbors, however, the government called Mr.
Baasyir in for a two-hour interrogation last weekend, and his lawyer said today
that he had been summoned for another round on Thursday.

Despite its irritation with the Megawati government's reluctance to embrace the
antiterror effort fully, the Bush administration has gone along with the
Indonesian government's domestic need to distance itself from Washington. In the
case of Mr. Iqbal, whom the Americans wanted to interrogate in the shoe bomber
case, he was deported to Egypt rather than arrested to avoid having him
interrogated by American officials here. The Indonesian government has said he
was deported for visa violations, and it has declined to say publicly where he
was sent.

But the Indonesians did allow agents from the F.B.I. to visit this month to
pursue the shoe bomber case. The agents were on the trail of the Indonesian
sneakers in which Richard C. Reid is accused of stashing explosives for use
against an airliner. But just as the United States has been frustrated with
President Megawati, so were the F.B.I. agents thwarted. It turned out that the
sneakers were a pirated version of the real thing, and that the Indonesian
manufacturer was of little help in the quest for evidence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Jakarta, Indonesia, a Muslim protester held a poster of
Osama bin Laden yesterday during a demonstration at the American Embassy.
(Agence France-Presse); Jaffar Umar Thalib is the leader of Laskar Jihad in
Indonesia. (Reuters)(pg. A8) Chart: "AT A GLANCE: Indonesia"CAPITAL:
JakartaPOPULATION: 228.4 millionG.D.P. PER CAPITA*: $2,900UNEMPLOYMENT RATE:
15%-20%RELIGIONS: Muslim 88%Protestant 5%Catholic 3%Other 4% POSSIBLE LINK TO
TERRORISMLast month, Gen. Hendropriono, the Indonesian intelligence chief, said
that Al Qaeda had set up training camps on Sulawesi island two years before. But
other Indonesian officials have said there is no proof of the camps. *Purchasing
power parity, 2000 estimate(Sources: C.I.A. World Factbook; news wires)(pg. A8)
Map of Indonesia. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (92%); TERRORISM (92%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); RELIGION (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AIRLINES (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); BOMBINGS
(78%); POLITICS (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); HIJACKING (76%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (74%); ETHICS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(73%); DEPORTATION (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (72%); ISLANDS & REEFS
(72%); MILITARY TRAINING (71%); ARRESTS (69%); IMMIGRATION (68%); CORRUPTION
(64%) TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  DEPORTATION;  POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT;  ETHICS;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

COMPANY: AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (90%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (90%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (91%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES);
BONNER, RAYMOND; PERLEZ, JANE; IQBAL, HAFIZ MOHAMMED SASA; BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (96%); SINGAPORE (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN
ASIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ASIA (92%); MALAYSIA (79%); FRANCE (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: INDONESIA;  SINGAPORE;  WASHINGTON (DC);  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             758 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 23, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE DETAINEES;
Rights Groups Press for Names of Muslims Held in New Jersey

BYLINE:  By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 777 words


With about half the Muslim men detained on immigration charges after the Sept.
11 attacks now in county jails in New Jersey, advocacy groups are increasing
their efforts to find out who, where and how many detainees are in custody there
-- and to ensure their access to lawyers.

In Newark yesterday, the American Civil Liberties Union's New Jersey chapter
sued Hudson and Passaic Counties, seeking the names of all Immigration and
Naturalization Service detainees jailed there.

"Our lawsuit is relying on very clear state law, three different statutes,
requiring that jails make public the names and other information on all those
being held," said Deborah Jacobs, executive director of the A.C.L.U. of New
Jersey.

Kerry Gill, a spokesman for the immigration service's district office in New
Jersey, said the agency would not comment on pending litigation.

For months, there has been great confusion over just how many people have been
detained on immigration charges as part of the terrorism investigation, where
they are, and how many have been sent back to their native countries.

The Justice Department last issued a count in December, when it said 460
detainees were in custody.

The government has repeatedly refused to release the names or locations of the
detainees, most recently in its Jan. 11 response to a Freedom of Information Act
lawsuit brought by the A.C.L.U., the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee
and other advocacy groups. In its response, the Justice Department provided
information on 725 detainees -- but blacked out the names and arrest and custody
locations. What was left was the detainee's nationality, date of arrest, legal
charge and date of charging document. In more than a dozen cases, the documents
showed a lag of more than a month between the arrest and the filing of charges.

"We are concerned about the delays," said Arthur Spitzer, a lawyer for the
A.C.L.U., which yesterday filed new court papers seeking further information.
"Most of these detainees have been cleared of any connection to terrorism. The
information the government provided appears to be incomplete and unreliable,
with all kinds of clerical errors."

In recent months, immigration lawyers nationwide say, many clients detained in
the terrorism investigation have been moved to the Passaic and Hudson County
jails, which now hold nearly 200 post-Sept. 11 detainees.

"We think there are a lot of people sitting there for months, unrepresented, who
may agree to deportation because they are told it's the fastest way out, only to
find that they're still stuck there, and they've waived all their rights." said
Sarah Hogarth, director of the National Lawyers Guild Post-9/11 Project.

The advocacy groups say they have been stymied in their efforts to ensure that
all detainees have access to lawyers, through a kind of Catch-22: they are only
allowed to visit detainees if they know the names and alien numbers, which the
Justice Department will not release.

The only other way to make contact with unrepresented detainees, they say, is by
making know-your-rights presentations at the jails, as they do at most federal
immigration facilities. At the presentations, lawyers describe legal options and
talk with detainees who want lawyers.

Last month, the American Civil Liberties Union and the American Friends Service
Committee wrote to the I.N.S. district director in Newark, asking to conduct
rights presentations at the Passaic and Hudson jails.

The letter said the immigration service had blocked access even to detainees who
had asked for legal visits from the advocacy groups.

"As you know," it said, "an earlier request to visit specific detainees held at
Passaic County Jail was denied. We are deeply concerned that delays in access
for legal visits will result in de facto denials of legal representation for
many of those detained."

A spokesman for the immigration service said the district director responded in
a letter dated Jan. 11, agreeing to let groups conduct the rights presentations.

But Amy Gottlieb of the American Friends Service Committee said she had not
received that response.

Separately, papers filed yesterday in Washington by the coalition pursuing the
Freedom of Information lawsuit said that an official from the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Policy disclosed at a panel discussion last
Thursday that only 160 detainees were still in custody. Dan Nelson, a department
spokesman, yesterday called the lower figure a misstatement, saying: "The last
number we have, from late December, was 460. The 160 was incorrect."

"It could have been a slip of the tongue," Mr. Spitzer said. "But it illustrates
the confusion."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); LITIGATION (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); RELIGION (78%); ARAB AMERICANS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); REFUGEES (73%); EXECUTIVES
(69%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
SUITS AND LITIGATION;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(82%); AMERICAN-ARAB ANTI-DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE (54%) AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION; JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: LEWIN, TAMAR

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (97%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  HUDSON COUNTY (NJ);  PASSAIC COUNTY
(NJ)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             761 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Conditions at Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 129 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Fate of Qaeda Prisoners" (Op-Ed, Jan. 19):

Does William F. Schulz, the executive director of Amnesty International USA,
truly believe that American troops will be less likely to be imperiled if we
afford better treatment to the Al Qaeda prisoners? Al Qaeda and like-minded
groups hate us and likely always will.

Their hatred is not going to be mitigated by gentler handling of prisoners.

Mr. Schulz's logic, however well intended, is flawed: the United States afforded
extremely humane treatment to the terrorists who executed the first attack on
the World Trade Center in 1993. Our reward for this treatment is buried under
the rubble of what was once the World Trade Center and part of the Pentagon.

DAVID CRISCITELLI
Alexandria, Va., Jan. 19, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(87%); ARMED FORCES (87%); HIJACKING (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NAVIES
(71%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
PRISONERS OF WAR;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); PRISONERS OF WAR
(59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: SCHULZ, WILLIAM F; CRISCITELLI, DAVID

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (66%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             762 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

An American With Opinions Steps Down Vocally at War Crimes Court

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


In the circumspect world of the judges at the United Nations war crimes
tribunal, Patricia M. Wald has stood out and knocked down quite a few taboos. To
begin with, there was her American-style informality in a place of stiff
etiquette.

Judge Wald, who had twice refused the post of attorney general in the United
States, first turned heads here by eating in the canteen, where tribunal judges
rarely tread. She raised some very august eyebrows as she kept wandering into
the clerks' section to chat or fetch documents to help judge the atrocities
committed in the 1990's wars of the former Yugoslavia.

Unusually, she also left her chambers' door open and never turned on her red
light, signaling: do not disturb.

Now that she has stepped down from the tribunal after a two-year term, the
73-year-old federal judge has again displayed her belief in openness by speaking
about some of the internal difficulties in the court and about some of her own
frustrations.

She even took the highly unusual step of saying that the judges themselves
shared some responsibility for the plodding pace of the court, which could take
much of this decade to finish judging the crimes of the last.

Although the court is now moving faster -- at present, hearing six cases and
preparing to try the former Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, on Feb. 12
-- delays have been variously attributed to the difficulty of making arrests,
staff shortages, evidence in four different languages and the sheer scope of the
war crimes allegedly committed against civilians.

Yet Mrs. Wald, who spent 20 years on the Federal Court of Appeals in Washington,
believes efficiency has been hampered by a hybrid of judges with extensive trial
experience and judges who are legal scholars or diplomats more used to pondering
fine points of international law.

Governments nominate the judges, and some have sent professors or former
diplomats who have never sat on a bench.

"Of course we need a mix, but you wouldn't put a judge who has never been in
court in charge of a big conspiracy case," Judge Wald said.  "You wouldn't take
a professor of anatomy and put him into an operating theater and say, 'Now
perform this brain surgery.' "

In one of several conversations since she left the tribunal in late November,
Judge Wald said: "The court's image is that it is meant to develop notions of
international laws and flesh them out. That's a very academic notion. But in the
first place this is an international criminal court. You are dealing with
putting people away for many years."

It is thus essential, she said, to pay close attention to criminal proceedings
and fairness. "You need people who know how a courtroom works -- what the basic
elements of a crime and of evidence are," Judge Wald said. "Running a criminal
trial is complex."

She noted that some judges would devote 30 or 40 pages of a sentence to an
obscure point of legal theory. She declined to name names, but continued: "A
judge may have a point or chapter he has written about in a book and he sees
this as an opportunity to put it into a judgment. My point is that it's not a
book or treatise you're writing, but a ruling."

Judge Wald's own focus on a fair trial became apparent last October when the
appeals court that she was heading unexpectedly overturned the convictions for
crimes against humanity of three Croatian fighters on grounds of weak evidence.

The quashing came as a shock because it went against the earlier verdict of a
panel of senior judges.

Judge Wald said that the trials at the tribunal on the whole have been fair and
that mistakes, when made, have been rectified.

Some others have agreed with her criticisms.

Last year, Graham Blewitt, the tribunal's deputy prosecutor, complained in an
address to the International Institute for Strategic Studies that new candidates
to be judges in The Hague lacked experience of criminal courts.

Mr. Blewitt, an experienced Australian prosecutor, was subsequently reprimanded
by the tribunal's president, Claude Jorda of France, but his comments might have
been heeded.

Today, of 16 judges at the tribunal, only three have little trial experience.
One is Mrs. Wald's successor, an acknowledged expert in international criminal
and human rights law, Thomas Meron, a professor of law at New York University
Law School.

The others are Liu Daqun, who used to be China's ambassador to Jamaica and
specializes in the international law of the sea, and Mehmet Gueney, also a
former diplomat, from Turkey.

Michail Wladimiroff, who has taught law at the University of Utrecht in the
Netherlands and who has been a criminal lawyer and served as defense counsel at
the tribunal, said the court required a mix. "What is needed is know-how of
criminal trials, knowledge of international law and overall management skills,"
he said. "Not all judges need to have the same experience."

The tribunal president has recently introduced changes that include more power
for the judges. At a closed-door meeting in Dublin in October, judges and United
Nations officials debated ways to speed up cases. The General Assembly has
approved funding for temporary judges and a pool of 21 trial judges can now be
called on when needed.

Mrs. Wald, who has now returned to Washington to rejoin her husband and family,
said that it was crucial that judges asserted their authority over court
proceedings. But she stressed that, frustrations aside, her time on the court
had been "immensely stimulating, enriching, satisfying."

She remains interested in exploring the ways in which this international
tribunal and the future International Criminal Court, to be established -- so
far without American participation or approval -- in The Hague, can handle cases
that by definition deal with crimes committed on a large scale and far away.

One lesson, she said, is that an international court should only try political
and military leaders, leaving national courts to handle lower-level cases.

Even among cases heard here, she said, things would move more quickly if more
defendants were encouraged through plea bargaining to plead guilty to some
charges. "In the United States, almost 90 percent of criminal cases are settled
by guilty pleas," she said. "Our system would break down tomorrow if we did not
have that option."

While plea bargaining does not officially exist at the tribunal, at least three
defendants have made deals and obtained lighter sentences by cooperating or
pleading guilty.

Other proposals to speed up trials, she said, include cutting back the number of
witnesses and the counts of crime. International law is vague, she noted, "but
there is no need to have a 70-count indictment for a middle-level official."

In the upcoming Milosevic trial, the presiding judge, Richard May, has moved to
speed proceedings by decreeing that the charges related to Kosovo should be
tried separately from the counts related to Bosnia and Croatia. This month, he
ordered the prosecution to reduce the number of witnesses and documents it had
planned to present.

Mrs. Wald insisted that for all the teething problems, there have been
achievements. "Our statute, like our constitution back home, is just a
bare-boned mandate," she said. "Yet there has been a great learning process. And
look at all the jurisprudence it has already produced."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Patricia Wald, former judge at the international war crimes
tribunal. (EPA)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); JUDGES (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); CONSPIRACY (73%); APPEALS COURTS (67%)
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; WALD, PATRICIA M (JUDGE)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); NETHERLANDS (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: YUGOSLAVIA

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             763 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Analyzing the Cultural Collision That Gave Rise to Sept. 11

BYLINE:  By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section E; Part 2; Column 1; Leisure/Weekend Desk; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 1084 words


WHAT WENT WRONG?
Western Impact and Middle Eastern Response
By Bernard Lewis
180 pages. Oxford University Press. $23.

One of the first and most troubling questions to arise after Sept. 11 was
whether Osama bin Laden represented a fanatical aberration of an otherwise
humane and tolerant faith or whether he was the cutting edge of a dangerous and
swelling sentiment in Islam. The question revealed a considerable ignorance
about Islam in America and placed a high premium on those few with genuine
expertise in the field.

Bernard Lewis, an 85-year-old retired professor of Near Eastern studies at
Princeton and a wartime British intelligence officer (he describes it as a
period when he was "otherwise engaged"), was among those who came to the fore.
His books were sought out; his essays in The New Yorker and The Atlantic Monthly
were widely cited; he appeared on "Meet the Press" and "Charlie Rose." So it is
not surprising that a new book by Mr. Lewis with the enticing title "What Went
Wrong?" would raise high expectations.

The title is certainly provocative, suggesting as a starting point a general
agreement that something has gone amiss in the Islamic civilization, at least in
its reaction to the impact of the Judeo-Christian West. But this has been Mr.
Lewis's basic premise for some time. His fundamental argument is that Muslims
became accustomed in the early centuries of their history to perceiving
themselves as the bearers of the final and true faith, and so never came to
understand or accept the Christian civilization of Western Europe that he
maintains has surpassed and humbled them.

The shock of Western ascendancy has led, in our time, to two responses:
emulating the West and its secular culture or returning to the fundamentals of
the faith -- the path whose most extreme manifestation is Mr. bin Laden. This,
Mr. Lewis wrote in 1990 in a celebrated essay in The Atlantic Monthly (which
introduced the catch phrase the political scientist Samuel P. Huntington then
made famous) "is no less than a clash of civilizations -- the perhaps irrational
but surely historic reaction of an ancient rival against our Judeo-Christian
heritage, our secular present and the worldwide expansion of both."

"What Went Wrong?" explores the various aspects and consequences of this
cultural collision -- military, social, cultural, governmental -- usually with
the conclusion that even in those rare instances when Islam overcame its
fundamental resistance to learning from the infidel, it was for a specific and
limited purpose, generally military.

In other words, Westernization, even when it happened, did not lead to
modernization. Simply agreeing to send students to Europe, Mr. Lewis writes, was
a radical act: "It is difficult for a Westerner to appreciate the magnitude of
this change, in a society accustomed to despise the infidel barbarians beyond
the frontiers of civilization. Even traveling abroad was suspect; the idea of
studying under infidel teachers was inconceivable."

Not surprisingly, assertions like that have attracted no little controversy. Mr.
Lewis has been accused of too Eurocentric an approach, of creating a
justification for European imperialism, of taking too narrow a view of Islam.
There is no doubt that he eschews relativism, from the title of his book to
affirmations like this: "By all the standards that matter in the modern world --
economic development and job creation, literacy and educational and scientific
achievement, political freedom and respect for human rights -- what was once a
mighty civilization has indeed fallen low."

But such certainty only raises expectations that "What Went Wrong?" will take
the case forward. Unfortunately, the volume is in fact a few steps behind. In
the preface, Mr. Lewis acknowledges that the book was already in page proof on
Sept. 11, so it does not deal with the terrorist attacks. But the more important
disclosure is reserved for the Afterword, where Mr. Lewis confirms what the
reader already suspects, that the book is really a compilation of lectures and
articles dating from 1980 to 1999.

That does not mean that they are uninformative or uninteresting. There are
fascinating riffs on the profound and fateful differences between the cultures
of Islam and Christendom, from fundamental differences in the understanding of
relations between church and state to more subtle contrasts in perception of
time, literature, authority and identity.

"For traditional Muslims," Mr. Lewis writes, "the converse of tyranny was not
liberty but justice. Justice in this context meant essentially two things, that
the ruler was there by right and not by usurpation, and that he governed
according to God's law, or at least according to recognizable moral and legal
principles."

In his chapter "Time, Space and Modernity," Mr. Lewis advances the provocative
notion that one of the central elements of Western progress is the prevalence of
poly phony -- not only as many voices proceeding harmoniously in music, but also
as a capacity for complex interaction in sports, literature, science and
ultimately politics. In Islamic civilization, he argues, the long absence of a
precise measurement of time has precluded this critical synchronization.

These are certainly intriguing concepts to chew on as we seek to comprehend the
world from which the suicide pilots came to do us such extraordinary damage. But
they do not quite satisfy expectations. For one thing, this slim, 180-page
volume never really overcomes the feel of old lectures. There is a lot of
repetition, a lot of reference to old texts and a lot of generalization of the
sort that may be acceptable in a lecture but is frustrating in a book whose
title promises convincing answers to the riddles of Sept. 11.

It is especially difficult to accept that so vast and complex a portion of the
world could be reduced to a fairly homogeneous historic force. Mr. Lewis often
seems to treat the Ottoman Empire as a template for the entire Muslim
civilization, drawing broad conclusions about all Muslims from Turkish examples
even as he writes elsewhere of the ancient differences and great rivalries among
Turks, Persians, Arabs and other Islamic nations.

Similarly, some of Mr. Lewis's conclusions simply long for more evidence, like
the civilizing role of polyphony. Is its absence really all that great a
handicap? And if it is, why did it not afflict Far Eastern nations with
different musical or organizational traditions? It's an enticing notion, but not
convincing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bernard Lewis (Denise Applewhite/Oxford University Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(78%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS (91%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (91%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (91%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (90%); WESTERN EUROPE (54%)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             764 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
Prisoners, Surely. But P.O.W.s?

BYLINE:  By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


OVER the past week, images of prisoners taken in Afghanistan, shackled, bound
and hooded on their arrival at the United States naval base in Cuba, drew angry
criticism from Europeans and humanitarian organizations. The Bush administration
replied that the prisoners are being treated as humanely as possible, given that
many are terrorists.

But behind the emotive question of whether the pictures gave a true
representation of the way the men were being treated, the core of the issue was
an arcane legal question: are these men prisoners of war? And if not, as the
United States maintains, what are they?

It is not just their treatment that depends on the answer, but the strength of a
coalition in which many partners are becoming anxious about Washington's
apparent lack of concern for international rules.

On one issue, there has been no dispute. Though there is disagreement on whether
the prisoners have been treated humanely, there is no question that the law, and
American tradition, say they should be.

The trickier question is their status. Are they soldiers taken on the field of
battle, and therefore prisoners of war entitled not just to humane treatment,
but to all the protections enshrined in the Geneva Conventions? Are they the
modern equivalent of Barbary pirates, international criminals outside the rules
of law who can be tried by whatever country seizes them, and questioned like any
criminal?

Or are international terrorists a new category, for which the rules are evolving
only now?

In the past, the United States regarded terrorists as common criminals, to be
tried in civil courts. But since Sept. 11, Washington and its allies have talked
consistently of a "war" on terrorism, and the operations in Afghanistan
certainly have all the hallmarks of warfare.

At the same time, the Bush administration has made clear it does not want to
treat the captives as P.O.W.'s, consistently referring both to Taliban and Al
Qaeda prisoners as "battlefield detainees" or "unlawful combatants." If they
were declared prisoners of war, the United States would be constrained in
questioning them, or holding some separate from the others.

Furthermore, the Geneva Conventions specify that if a P.O.W. is put on trial, it
must be "by the same courts according to the same procedure as in the case of
members of the armed forces of the Detaining Power." That would potentially
preclude the special military tribunals President Bush has proposed, and open
the way for many things the administration has hoped to avoid, like drawn-out
appeals, publication of classified information and stricter standards of proof.

So far, while ardently defending the treatment of the captives, the Secretary of
Defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld, has not said precisely what sort of prisoners they
are, although he has said "they will be handled not as prisoners of war, because
they're not, but as unlawful combatants."

ACCORDING to experts in international law, there is a strong argument that Al
Qaeda fighters, at least, are "unlawful combatants" under the Geneva
Conventions. The conventions laid out basic principles -- that civilians and
prisoners are to be protected, that the wounded must be cared for, that
humanitarian workers must be respected. In other words, the carnage had to be
restricted as much as possible to those who had a right to fight -- "lawful
combatants."

"Lawful combatants are members of organized forces who wear distinctive
insignia, are subject to command and are capable of complying with laws of war,"
said Anne-Marie Slaughter, a professor of international law at the Harvard Law
School. "That means essentially government forces."

By their very nature, Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations fall outside
the scope of rules whose basic logic is reciprocity -- "I'll show restraint if
you show restraint." They deliberately target civilians, and flatly reject any
rules of war.

But that logic, Ms. Slaughter and other experts said, was more difficult to
apply to the Taliban, whose fighters were basically government forces.

In any event, even unlawful combatants have rights under the Geneva Conventions.
In cases of doubt, they say, captives will be treated as prisoners of war until
their status is determined "by a competent tribunal." But even this rule runs
into a fundamental American resistance to treating terrorism in any framework of
the laws of war.

"Such a framework may seem to imply a degree of moral acceptance of the right of
any particular group to resort to violence," wrote Adam Roberts, a professor of
international relations at Oxford, in an exhaustive study of the relevance of
the laws of war in counter-terrorism.

In the end, however, the sharp criticism that the treatment of the prisoners has
provoked in Europe and among humanitarian organizations suggests that the
problem may be less legal than political. Both international and military
lawyers noted that much of the criticism might have been avoided if the United
States had stated a clear legal framework, and if it had not shrouded so many of
its actions in secrecy.

"Although many key U.S. positions were defensible, especially that certain
prisoners might not qualify for P.O.W. status," Mr. Roberts concluded, "aspects
of U.S. policy and procedures were very poorly presented, and in some cases did
not appear well thought out." And politically, at least, this problem was made
more acute by the very words in which the fight has been cast -- a contest
between good and evil, in which ideals of freedom are at stake.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At Guantanamo Bay, a sign in Arabic points toward the holy city
of Mecca. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
LAW OF WAR (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); NAVIES (78%); MARITIME PIRACY (78%); TALIBAN (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (66%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (57%) UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
PRISONERS OF WAR;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) SCHMEMANN, SERGE

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  GUANTANAMO (CUBA)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             766 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BRIEFING: LAW ENFORCEMENT;
SUIT ON DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By Jo Piazza

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 102 words


The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey filed a lawsuit against Hudson
and Passaic Counties last week requesting the names of all Immigration and
Naturalization detainees held in both counties' jails after the Sept. 11
attacks.

The suit was prompted by the jails' refusal to disclose the names after several
A.C.L.U. requests. Deborah Jacobs, executive director of the state A.C.L.U.,
said her organization's offer to legally represent detainees was being thwarted
by the refusal. About half the Muslim men held since the Sept. 11 attacks are
believed to be in county jails in New Jersey.   Jo Piazza

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); NATURALIZATION (90%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); IMMIGRATION (88%); LITIGATION (88%);
CORRECTIONS (87%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             768 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colin Powell Dissents

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


High officials at the White House, as well as at State, Defense and Justice, are
having a hissy fit about the revelation in The Washington Times of a dispute
within the Bush inner circle. What legal rights should be accorded to the
terrorists -- including some trained to be savage suicide-murderers -- now being
interrogated at our base in Guantanamo?

That newspaper's enterprising Pentagon correspondent, Rowan Scarborough,
unearthed a four-page memo from Alberto Gonzales, the White House counsel, which
is the basis for a tense meeting today.

The president's lawyer told the president and cabinet members that the Justice
Department opinion that the Geneva Conventions do not apply to Al Qaeda
prisoners "is definitive.  . . . Nevertheless, you should be aware that the
legal adviser to the Secretary of State has expressed a different view."

As a result, Gonzales wrote: "The Secretary of State has requested that you
reconsider that decision. Specifically, he has asked that you conclude that GPW"
-- Geneva's prisoner-of-war rules -- "does apply to both Al Qaeda and the
Taliban."

Colin Powell, sensitive to flak from governments overseas, argues that a
military board should review each case to see if prisoner-of-war status should
be given. This would transform a sweeping executive policy into a series of
individual judicial decisions made on the scene, a process Defense, the F.B.I.
and the C.I.A. all oppose.

Condi Rice's spokesman claimed the Gonzales memo was only a "draft," confirming
suspicions that Gonzales signs off on half-baked memos and orders. The spokesman
says the published memo has since been rewritten to say that Powell personally
agrees that the captives could be determined not to be prisoners of war. That's
foo-foo dust; Powell still thinks each case should be decided on its merits by
military judges.

The central issue has nothing to do with humane treatment of these captives,
called -- legitimately, I think -- "unlawful combatants." Congressional
representatives on the scene have attested that the captives are not being
tortured or starved. On the contrary, their treatment in the balmy cages of Cuba
is far better than they had in the frigid caves of Afghanistan.

Nor is the argument that pits Powell against the rest of the N.S.C. merely
"misunderstandings by lawyers," as the distraught Rice spokesman claims. The
disagreement is substantive: are these guys Taliban soldiers with rights, or
military criminals with fewer rights, or Al Qaeda terrorists with almost no
rights -- and who is to decide which detainee fits in which category?

The real problem is interrogation. If designated as P.O.W.'s, Al Qaeda men and
Taliban leaders -- many of whom may be able to name other Osama bin Laden
confederates already assigned to new attacks -- would be required only to state
name, rank and serial number. They would then claim not only the right to remain
silent, but also the right be freed when the "war" ended -- despite active
participation in a criminal conspiracy to kill civilians.

Our overriding public purpose in the antiterror campaign is to deter as many
future attacks as we can without subverting our Constitution. Some of our
Guantanamo guests could help us save lives by ratting on their fellow terrorists
who are "sleepers" in our midst. Skillful, patient, persistent, detailed
interrogation over a period of months -- coupled with leniency incentives to
talk and deceptive praise for the most recalcitrant -- is urgently needed to
penetrate and disrupt suicidal cells around the world.

After an ill-advised military order at the start, the president is painfully
working out a form of prosecution of accused criminal-warriors that balances the
protection of human lives with a concern for principles of human rights. If
military tribunals subject to civilian review must be one part of his approach,
he should "reconsider" his one-crime-fits-all decision, as Powell suggests, and
have tribunals slot each suspect or defendant into the proper prosecutorial
venue.

It's encouraging that Bush has not allowed last week's leak to trigger a
paroxysm of plumbing. The Washington Times was one of the few conservative media
voices to oppose his early kangaroo-court order; when its editor, Wes Pruden,
shook his hand at a Christmas reception, Bush surprised those nearby by saying,
"You're a conscience of this town." That augurs well for balance at Guantanamo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
LAWYERS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); LAW OF WAR (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); JUDGES (70%); MILITARY OFFENSES
(66%); ARMED FORCES (66%); STARVATION (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (54%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (79%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); CUBA (57%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             769 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
BUSH RECONSIDERS STAND ON TREATING CAPTIVES OF WAR

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE and DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


After a lengthy meeting with his national security team today, President Bush
said he was reconsidering whether Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters held at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, should be protected under the Third Geneva Convention. But
he quickly added that they were "killers" who would not be granted the status of
prisoners of war.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell had asked the president to reconsider a
decision he made on Jan. 18 that the Geneva Convention would not apply to the
captives.

Secretary Powell agrees with the president's view that the captives should not
be classified as prisoners of war, but he has sought to have the Bush
administration affirm that the international law of war does govern the United
States in its treatment of the captives.

His unusual request to reverse the decision, which was made while Secretary
Powell was out of the country, exposed a clear split within the administration.
Officials said that it was not resolved at this morning's meeting of the
National Security Council, but that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld,
reflecting the concerns of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, began moving to support
Secretary Powell's view.

Military officials have expressed concern that by denying the captives the
protections of the Geneva Convention, the United States is setting a precedent
that could put future American battlefield captives at risk.

Secretary Powell's call for a review of the policy regarding the captives came
after European leaders bluntly criticized the American decision.

The administration has contended that the captives are terrorists, not
conventional soldiers in a conventional war, and that they are therefore not
deserving of the protections of the Geneva rules. Under those rules, prisoners
can refuse to answer most questions during interrogation and must be repatriated
when hostilities cease. The administration considers the captives "unlawful
combatants" and wants the freedom to question and hold those it suspects of
complicity in terrorist actions.

Mr. Bush said today that the United States was adhering to the "spirit of the
Geneva Convention."

Secretary Powell wants the administration to adhere officially to the
Convention. Under its terms, if a captive's status is in doubt, it must be
determined by a screening panel. Even if the Geneva rules were applied, the
captives could still be determined to be "unlawful combatants." Prisoners of war
have more privileges and rights than unlawful combatants under the Convention,
including the right to refuse interrogation.

The president's initial decision about the captives was apparently made on
advice from Attorney General John Ashcroft who, a senior administration official
said today, "didn't think about the world reaction." Mr. Ashcroft has held to
his position, and appears to be supported by Vice President Dick Cheney. It is
unclear what advice Mr. Bush received from Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser.

Mr. Bush attempted to dismiss the issue today as a small legal distinction. "I
will listen to all the legalisms and announce my decision when I make it," he
said.

But several governments are now seeking the return of their citizens who are
being held at Guantanamo Bay. Mr. Bush said today that he would "consider" such
requests, but administration officials made it clear that none of the captives
were leaving Cuba soon.

Saudi Arabia's interior minister said today that the United States was holding
"more than 100" Saudi citizens at Guantanamo Bay. American officials have not
publicly confirmed the identities of the prisoners or their nationalities, on
the grounds that their identities could signal to the enemy what information
could be gleaned from interrogating them. But a senior administration official
said tonight that the number given by the Saudis "sounds too high."

Citizens of at least 25 countries make up the population of 158 captives at the
prison compound. The countries include Britain, Australia, France, Belgium,
Sweden, Algeria, Yemen, Afghanistan and Pakistan, according to ministers from
those countries.

The Saudi interior minister, Prince Nayef, said his government did not know the
charges against its citizens, only that they had been arrested in Afghanistan.

"The issue of prisoners is important to us, and we ask that they be handed over
to us so we can interrogate them, since they fall under the kingdom's
regulations," he said.

At the State Department, the Pentagon and the White House, officials
acknowledged that discussions about whether to apply the Geneva Convention were
ongoing -- a rare acknowledgment of a rare dispute within the administration
over the conduct of the war. But they all agreed that the captives would not be
designated as prisoners of war and that they were being treated humanely.

Answering questions in the Rose Garden this afternoon, Mr. Bush was emphatic
that he had made the right decision in refusing to call the fighters "prisoners
of war." But his tone suggested that he was uncertain whether the decision he
made to deal with the prisoners outside the Geneva Convention was correct. Twice
Mr. Bush called the fighters "prisoners," then stopped himself and used the word
"detainees."

His aides say that he was annoyed by the leak of a memorandum written by the
White House counsel, Alberto Gonzales, calling on several cabinet officials to
respond to Secretary Powell's proposals. Mr. Gonzales, who was a longtime aide
of Mr. Bush's in Texas, concluded that the captives were not covered under the
Geneva Convention. But the State Department general counsel came to the opposite
conclusion.

Critics contend that the United States is fudging the definition of war to suit
its political purposes. "The United States government cannot choose to wage war
in Afghanistan with guns, bombs and soldiers, and then assert the laws of war do
not apply," said Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch.

Mr. Bush seemed to be setting the stage today to revise his earlier decision by
dwelling on the issue that his aides agree on. "We're in total agreement on how
these prisoners -- or detainees, excuse me -- ought to be treated," Mr. Bush
said. "And they'll be treated well."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Petty Officer Third Class Krystyna Johnson and Lt. Cmdr. James
Gallagher, top, yesterday rolled up the door to an operating room built for
Afghan detainees at Guantanamo Bay. A medical suite, bottom, was also built.
(Photographs by Peter Muhly/Agence France-Presse)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); LAW OF WAR (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); HIJACKING (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); NAVIES (73%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY
(71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (68%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(64%) TERRORISM;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  GENEVA CONVENTIONS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  MISSING
PERSONS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); PRISONERS OF WAR (91%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
(55%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); TALIBAN
(AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; SANGER,
DAVID E; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (92%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;
WASHINGTON (DC);  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             770 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 30, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY;
In Flash of an Afghan Cape, a World Star Is Born

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


His smile was modest, and so was his series of small, sharp bows from the first
lady's box. But the reception was emphatic and Hamid Karzai, Afghanistan's
interim leader, emerged at the State of the Union tonight as Washington's latest
star.

He is quick with a quip in a clipped British-Indian accent that conjures up Ben
Kingsley as Gandhi. He has read Bob Woodward's best-selling book on the C.I.A.
No less an authority than the Gucci design chief, Tom Ford, pronounced him "the
chic-est man on the planet today."

If Central Casting (or Central Intelligence) had searched for an unknown player
to explain the challenges of a reborn Afghanistan to the United States and the
world, it could hardly have done better than Mr. Karzai.

In his three-day visit, Mr. Karzai has knelt in prayer at a mosque in a suburban
Virginia strip mall and met with President Bush and top aides in the Oval
Office. He has swept through the capital with a feel for the local idiom -- and
a succession of stylish silk capes -- that any American politician would envy.
(Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, went so far as to try on a cape
this morning before a coffee on Capitol Hill.)

Whether basking in the glow of a packed audience of Afghan-Americans at
Georgetown University on Sunday or addressing the striped pants set at a
diplomatic reception with groaning platters of Afghan food at the Ritz-Carlton
hotel on Tuesday, Mr. Karzai has hammered home a simple message of thanks for
help in routing the Taliban -- and a plea for more financial and military help
to repair years devastation he calls "unbelievable."

"Afghanistan is like a good sportsman that's very ill," Mr. Karzai told
reporters in an appearance at the National Press Club today. "Now, if you want
this good sportsman to go back to the field, you must help it recover -- give it
medicine, give it care. And once this good sportsman is on his own or her own
feet, you will see that he or she is a strong, running, vibrant person. That is
what Afghanistan will be very soon."

Mr. Karzai, 44, a descendant of a noble Pashtun tribe from southern Afghanistan
whose interim leadership is to last five months, faces overwhelming challenges
back home. Above all, he must hold together rival warlords and Northern Alliance
loyalists to make something like a workable administration. At the end of Mr.
Karzai's term, which began on Dec. 22, a grand council, or loya jirga, will meet
to choose a transitional government that is to serve until elections are held
within two years.

But, he told a rapt audience of local Afghan leaders at the Ritz, searching
momentarily for the right American slang, he knows how to be a "hard cookie."

The Bush administration has rejected Mr. Karzai's request to have American
troops join the international peacekeeping force in Afghanistan once the
remnants of the Taliban and Al Qaeda have been routed.

So, asked today when United States troops should leave his country, Mr. Karzai
made a joke that cut close to the bone: "Well, we will keep them prisoners
there. There will be no exit. And you know why? When the first American Special
Forces came, wherever Afghans met them, they said: 'You are welcome, but will
you leave us again? Will you neglect us again?' "

In a more serious vein, he added, "As long as the war on terrorism is on, in
whatever form it is, we will require the help of the American and other
international security forces."

At the moment, Mr. Karzai clearly sees a big part of his job as lobbying the
international community to stay involved in Afghanistan, where, as he put it
today, "the tragedy there is longer than four months." Describing the Taliban's
iron rule with poetic simplicity, he said: "These people were against life
itself."

In fact, a senior Bush administration official said today, "Mr. Karzai's best
hope for consolidating control at home may well be raising money and support
abroad, as a means of impressing upon Afghanistan's rival factions that he is
the one who can deliver for the country."

In the last two weeks alone, Mr. Karzai has met with Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell in Kabul, made a pilgrimage to Mecca, attended an international
conference on Afghan aid in Tokyo and stopped in Beijing on the way back to
Afghanistan for meetings with the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan,
and Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of the American campaign, before arriving
here. On Wednesday, he heads to New York to address the United Nations and the
Council on Foreign Relations, before flying to London to meet with Prime
Minister Tony Blair.

The son of a former speaker of the Afghan Parliament, Mr. Karzai was educated in
India, and speaks seven languages, including Persian and Pashto, which he used
alternately with English in speaking to Afghan-Americans here this week.

At Georgetown, he told a cheering crowd, "If somebody wants to be the president,
she or he is also welcomed," and this morning in a hotel ballroom in Alexandria,
Va., he spoke to several hundred expatriate Afghan professionals, many of whom
are eager to return home, if only temporarily, to help with rebuilding.

Six of Mr. Karzai's seven siblings live in the United States, and he made it
clear repeatedly this week that he is well-versed in the ways of Washington's
tribes.

Fielding a question on the United States's handling of detainees at the naval
base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, at the press club today, Mr. Karzai sided with his
American hosts today in saying the Afghan captives did not deserve
prisoner-of-war status.

"They are criminals," he told the reporters. "I don't see them as prisoners of
war."

His rejection of prisoner-of-war status for the captives puts him squarely on
the side of the United States, as opposed to many critics in human-rights groups
and in allied governments who are urging the United States to abide by the
Geneva Conventions and grant the prisoners such status.

"They brutalized Afghanistan," Mr. Karzai said in response to a question. "They
killed our people. They destroyed our land. There was no war there. It was plain
killing fields. Very plain killing fields. And these people are the perpetrators
of that atrocity."

Mr. Karzai recalled reading Mr. Woodward's 1987 book, "Veil," in which he
reported that the former C.I.A. director, William J. Casey, "could not pronounce
Nicaragua."

"I cannot pronounce this other name -- Guanatanamo?" Mr. Karzai said to
laughter.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamid Karzai, interim leader of Afghanistan, arriving at Blair
House in Washington yesterday. (Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(74%); POLITICS (72%); RETAILERS (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%); HIJACKING (68%);
TERRORISM (62%); BESTSELLERS (56%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  FOREIGN AID;
TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

COMPANY: RITZ CARLTON HOTEL CO LLC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (54%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

INDUSTRY: NAICS721110 HOTELS (EXCEPT CASINO HOTELS) & MOTELS (54%); SIC7011
HOTELS & MOTELS (54%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (91%); JOHN KERRY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%) PURDUM, TODD
S; KARZAI, HAMID

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             777 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing New Jersey: Hackensack: I.N.S. To Allow Legal Aid

BYLINE:  By Hope Reeves (NYT) (Compiled by Anthony Ramirez)

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 89 words


Reversing itself, the Immigration and Naturalization Service will permit
civil-liberties lawyers to advise hundreds of foreign nationals held since the
Sept. 11 attacks.

The decision, issued Jan. 11 but not received by the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Jersey until Jan. 24, followed two lawsuits accusing the government
of illegally withholding the names of detainees and the charges against them.
The decision will allow members of the A.C.L.U. to determine whether detainees
require legal assistance.   Hope Reeves (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); LEGAL
AID (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); LAWYERS (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(88%); LITIGATION (88%); HIJACKING (87%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%) IMMIGRATION AND
NATURALIZATION SERVICE

PERSON: REEVES, HOPE

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (87%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             778 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic, Calling Himself a Victim, Asks to Be Freed by Court

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Jan. 30


Slobodan Milosevic vented his anger in war crimes court today, saying his only
goal during the Balkans war had been to "achieve peace" and asking the United
Nations tribunal to free him until his trial begins in two weeks.

Mr. Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, appeared before a five-member
appeals panel as it heard a motion requesting that the three indictments against
him be heard in a single trial. He asked the panel to order his release,
promising to return for a "battle I will not miss" when prosecutors present
their case against him on Feb. 12. He was allowed to rail for 30 minutes against
perceived injustices.

"I would call this an evil and hostile action aimed at justifying the crimes
committed against my country," said Mr. Milosevic, who stands accused of
carrying out crimes against humanity during almost 10 years of rule. He also
asserted that trying him was "an attempt to turn the victim into the culprit."

Prosecutors seeking the single trial said top witnesses who were once close to
Mr. Milosevic might not be able to testify here more than once. The lawyers also
argued that the cases should be merged because the crimes -- in Kosovo, Croatia
and Bosnia -- were part of a general plan to create a greater Serbian state by
clearing areas of non-Serbs.

The tribunal said it would deliver its decision at a later time, and did not
respond to Mr. Milosevic's plea for freedom.

For the first time in his six tribunal appearances, Mr. Milosevic was allowed to
speak at length, and he seized the opportunity to voice political opinions he
had not been permitted to detail at earlier hearings by the lower court judge,
Richard May.

Gesturing in anger at the prosecution and the tribunal, the former president,
speaking in Serbian, dismissed the charges as absurd, saying "the only goal of
Serbia in that conflict was to achieve peace."

"Serbian politics, Serbia and I myself were involved in creating peace in Bosnia
and Croatia," he said. "We were not involved in making war."

Mr. Milosevic, who has refused to accept legal representation, was asked by an
appellate court justice, Claude Jorda, to respond to the prosecution's motion to
combine the trials, but the judge did not interrupt his tirade.

Mr. Milosevic faces a total of 66 counts for actions during the war in the
Balkans, including allegations of carrying out genocide from 1992 to 1995 during
the Bosnian war. Serbian authorities handed him over for trial at The Hague last
June. He could be jailed for life if convicted of any of the charges.

"The grand project, the accused Milosevic's overall plan, which is already
evident from 1989, was an essentially Serbian state, dominated by Belgrade,"
said the chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte. "And the common denominator of all
this criminal activity was -- we must never forget -- forced expulsions."

A lower court agreed in December to a single trial on the Croatia and Bosnia
charges, but said the 1999 Kosovo conflict should remain a separate case.

Prosecutors said they would be ready for the Kosovo trial in February, whether
or not the cases are joined. Geoffrey Nice, the deputy prosecutor, said he would
call several "high-level witnesses who can give direct evidence of what he was
doing."

The trial is being closely watched by the Yugoslav government, which faces the
threat of a Bosnian government lawsuit for billions of dollars in war damages
based on Mr. Milosevic's actions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JUDGES (78%); APPEALS
COURTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%);
POLITICS (77%); APPEALS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA
(92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             785 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Great Defender

BYLINE:  By Jeremy Waldron; Jeremy Waldron teaches law at Columbia University.
His most recent books are "Law and Disagreement" and "The Dignity of
Legislation."

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1145 words


SHOUTING FIRE
Civil Liberties in a Turbulent Age.
By Alan M. Dershowitz.
550 pp. New York:
Little, Brown & Company. $26.95.

"NEITHER slavery nor involuntary servitude . . . shall exist within the United
States." Does the 13th Amendment prohibit military conscription? Charles
Schenck, general secretary of the Socialist Party in Philadelphia, thought it
did, and in 1917 he printed a pamphlet to this effect and arranged for it to be
distributed to men who were about to be inducted into the Army. When he was
arrested and charged under the espionage act with conspiring to cause
insubordination, Schenck said that his pamphlet was protected by the First
Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech. Oliver Wendell Holmes, perhaps this
country's greatest jurist, disagreed. Upholding Schenk's conviction, he said:
"When a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace are
such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured." He
also said a couple of other things that have passed into the lexicon of our
constitutional lore. Cases like this, he said, turn on whether there is "a clear
and present danger" that publication will bring about evils that Congress has a
right to prevent. And: "The most stringent protection of free speech would not
protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic."

"Shouting Fire" is the 17th book published by Alan Dershowitz,
celebrity-criminal defender and law professor at Harvard. It contains 55 short
essays on rights and their limitations, particularly in areas like free speech,
church-state and the criminal process. Apart from some introductory
philosophizing, most of the essays have been previously published and are
largely unedited here, though each has a preliminary sentence or two to give a
little context. The earliest dates back 35 years; the latest include reflections
on Sept. 11.

The title track of this album is a meditation on the hold that Holmes's
"shouting fire" analogy has on the popular imagination, and the mindless way in
which it has been invoked since Schenck v. United States to justify restrictions
on our liberties. Let's begin with Justice Holmes's use of it. In what sense is
a Socialist pamphlet about the 13th Amendment like falsely shouting "Fire!" in a
crowded theater? Is it because of its effect, because of the danger that the
pamphlet will prevent the government from waging war with an army of docile
conscripts? But this argument only works if conscription is a legitimate aim of
government, and Schenck's pamphlet denied this. Anyway, all sorts of protected
speech have bad effects. Shouting "Fire!" is wrong, presumably, not just because
of its effect but because of the visceral way it works -- through panic and
adrenaline rather than careful consideration of a published proposition. To move
forward to last September, maybe bad jokes about terrorism by airplane
passengers are like shouting "Fire!" But the dangers of the analogy are evident
when you consider that the Charles Schencks of today are not those who write
"anthrax" on an airline napkin, but those who publish their misgivings about the
constitutionality of the antiterrorist measures Congress and the president have
put in place since Sept. 11.

"Shouting Fire" is the best of the essays, though it is matched in its energy by
Dershowitz's attack on any breach in the wall of separation between church and
state, and by his refusal to concede anything to those who criticize his
involvement in the defense of people like Mike Tyson, Meir Kahane, Leona
Helmsley, Larry Flynt and Claus von Bulow. He gives a chilling account of the
hate mail he received for his work in the O. J. Simpson case, and in a
passionate vindication of the role of the criminal defender, he does a good job
of turning the tables on prosecuting counsel. Criminal defenders, he says, are
not the only ones who are blinded by zealotry, who interfere with witnesses or
who elicit testimony they know to be perjurious. Yet critics of our criminal
justice system rarely focus their scrutiny on the ethics of prosecutors.

Given all this, it comes as something of a surprise to find Dershowitz at the
end of the book defending the suspension of certain civil liberties in times of
national emergency. He takes his lead from various policies of Israel:
preventive detention of individual suspects is fairer, he says, than mass
internment based on ethnicity, which is what the United States used the last
time its territory was attacked. He advocates targeted assassination as a last
resort if it is the only way to prevent suicide bombings. And he is not prepared
to rule out torture as a response: he says that torture would have been an
"understandable" tactic if American security forces had had someone in custody
on Sept. 11 who knew which buildings were targets. About the only part of
Dershowitz's civil liberties posture that survives his thinking about terrorism
is a provocative argument that a lawyer who defended terrorists would be
performing a patriotic duty.

Perhaps these compromises are what one should expect, given the philosophical
theory set out at the beginning of the book. Dershowitz argues stridently
against the proposition that rights are God-given absolutes. But he doesn't want
to say that they are merely positive laws, like any other enactments. They are
special, he says, and we should take special care of them, because they
encapsulate our response to appalling experiences of atrocity and injustice. We
know what slavery is like, we know about the Holocaust, we have experienced
religious establishment and inquisition, and we know what happens when a
government tries to take control of thought and expression. On the basis of
these experiences we build up our rights (and our sense of their limits)
gradually, experimentally -- not with any confidence that we know for sure how
to achieve a free and just society, but in the certainty that we know what
"perfect injustice" looks like. It's an engaging model, but I'm not sure that it
really offers us anything more helpful than Holmes's metaphor in time of
emergency. Consider the argument about torture: we have experience now of two
sorts of "perfect injustice": (1) the injustice of terrorist outrage, of
airplanes smashing into the World Trade Center, murdering thousands of
innocents; and (2) the sickeningly familiar injustice of torture as actually
practiced all round the world by thugs in uniform using electric shock and
sexual assault against those they call terrorists. Which should inform our
thinking about torture in the wake of Sept. 11? I guess Dershowitz would say
both. But that may already set us on a dangerous road to "balancing" and moral
compromise, which, in the case of torture, has always been the beginning of
great evil and has always been prohibited in the human rights tradition.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); ARMIES
(89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); CHURCH & STATE (78%); CONSPIRACY (75%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); PUBLISHING (71%); ARRESTS
(70%); ESPIONAGE (55%); RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

COMPANY: LITTLE BROWN & CO INC (91%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             786 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BRIEFING: BUSINESS;
I.N.S. DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By John Holl

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 90 words


The Immigration and Naturalization Service changed its policy last week and
agreed to allow advocacy groups to visit foreign nationals held in the Hudson
and Passaic County jails since Sept. 11.

The service will allow such groups as the American Civil Liberties Union and the
American Friends Service Committee to help detainees with legal questions and to
provide representation. There are 460 aliens held nationwide since the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks, according to the I.N.S., though how many are in New Jersey is
not known.   John Holl

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (85%); TERRORISM (85%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (52%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (58%); AMERICAN FRIENDS SERVICE
COMMITTEE (58%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             788 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY REVIEW;
Images of Afghanistan, When the Taliban Ruled

BYLINE:  By WILLIAM ZIMMER

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: NEW BRUNSWICK


SINCE last fall the American public has had something of a crash course on
Afghanistan. By now most of us know at least the main outlines of its recent
history, and is aware that events in that country over several decades make up a
human tragedy that has cut both widely and deeply.

Many intrepid photographers and photojournalists are responsible for providing
what we now know about Afghanistan. But one whose pictures are on view at the
Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum at the State University of New Jersey, at
Rutgers, began his work before the recent wave of interest in that country.

The show, "The Victor Weeps: Photographs by Fazal Sheikh of Afghan Refugees,
1996-98," displays the pictures of Mr. Sheikh, the son of a Kenyan father and an
American mother, who was born in 1965, grew up in New York and graduated from
Princeton University.

In 1996, Mr. Sheikh went to Afghanistan to just after the Taliban had taken
power. The results of his photographic investigations were seen in "The Victor
Weeps," a book published by Scalo in 1998, the year he completed the last of
several trips to Afghanistan.

Although the show includes several panoramic pictures of Kabul mostly in ruins,
as it looked when the Taliban took over, most of the show is composed of rich
black-and-white photographs of people. Many are close-ups. Some subjects -- men
and women, young and old -- have sharp recollections of particular, horrifying,
even sadistic events of war that are printed in text below their pictures.

The main foe, still fresh in the memory of Mr. Sheikh's subjects, is the
Communists, who fought with invading troops from the Soviet Union in the 1970's.
The title "The Victor Weeps" alludes to the fact that although the Communists
were defeated and the Soviets expelled, the human toll was so great that there
was mourning rather than celebration.

Mr. Sheikh has balanced the pictures and stories of bleakness and tragedy with
more optimistic images. A gridlike arrangement of 21 photographs with the
descriptive title "Afghan Children Born in Exile" is a reminder that life and
the life cycle go on, and that people who so often make up nameless statistics
are particular personalities. In these pictures of children, Mr. Sheikh has
captured across the board a clear-eyed hopefulness. Only one child is crying,
and it is a baby.

One aspect of human rights in Afghanistan that has piqued wide interest in the
United States is the treatment of women. At first glance, "Abdul Shakour's
Eldest Wife, Najiba" would not seem to be someone who could speak about
enlightened attitudes. Wearing an enveloping burka, she is mainly identified as
someone's wife. But her printed statement reads, "Our prized possessions are
pens and books."

Mr. Sheikh presents two other photographs that tacitly address the way women are
regarded in Afghanistan. In "Sisters, Siam and Shahima," these young girls are
photographed in what seems like opulence even though it is mainly the floral
prints on their dresses and on the wall covering that provides the sensation of
luxury.

The other picture features a toddler identified as "Shahria." She is outdoors on
a striped blanket, playing with a couple of flowers; the photograph includes
part of the leafy tree that shades her. This is as close to idealism as the
exhibition comes.

The largest photographs contain hints of tales apart from the usual war stories.
"Dr. Jan's Son and Friend" shows two young men standing and facing each other
against the background of a mud wall. One man holds the other's hand tightly by
a couple of fingers.

The humanistic promise of this picture is not fully evident until the viewer
comes upon "Osman and Farid, Blind 'Qari' Brothers." The wall text explains that
qari means "one who knows the Koran by heart." These boys, while standing close,
face away from each other.

One of Mr. Sheikh's most frequent devices is the photograph within a photograph.
People whom he interviews and photographs present a picture of someone they have
lost, and these images become seamlessly collaged in Mr. Sheikh's compositions.
This is an effective narrative technique because it corresponds to the subjects'
dreams that they relate at the same time that they describe atrocities. The
loved ones appear radiant in dreams and offer at least a moment's consolation.

"The Victor Weeps: Photographs by Fazal Sheikh of Afghan Refugees, 1996-98"
reamins at the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum at the State University of New
Jersey, Rutgers, 71 Hamilton Street, New Brunswick, (732) 932-7237, through
March 31.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Abdul Shakour's Eldest Wife, Najiba," above, and "Kabul" are
on display at the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers. (Photographs by
Fazal Sheikh)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PHOTOGRAPHY (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (77%); VISUAL
ARTISTS (76%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (76%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (74%); PREGNANCY &
CHILDBIRTH (74%); PHOTOJOURNALISM (71%); REFUGEES (70%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%)
Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: PRINCETON UNIVERSITY (56%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             793 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Angrily Faults India on Kashmir

BYLINE:  By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: MUZAFFARABAD, Kashmir, Feb. 5


President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, on a high-profile visit to Kashmir,
bitterly denounced India today for refusing to accept his reconciliation efforts
in a crisis that began in December and has left the two neighbors facing off
across a tense frontier.

"This is brinkmanship at its most dangerous," General Musharraf said in an angry
address marking Kashmir Solidarity Day broadcast live on national television. He
accused India of failing to reciprocate gestures made by Pakistan in recent
weeks, particularly a crackdown on groups blamed by India for cross-border
attacks and for the attack on India's Parliament in December that set off the
current crisis.

General Musharraf's campaign against militants, promised on Jan. 12, carries
substantial political risks for him since the groups fighting in Kashmir, in
particular, enjoy wide popular support. His speech today combined denunciations
of what he called "the cynical Indian reaction" with a defense of his own
reasons for ordering the crackdown, to which he said he remained firmly
committed.

His tone suggested increasing frustration and concern in Pakistan over the fact
that the standoff remains unresolved. He urged "influential countries" to begin
immediate mediation efforts to try to defuse the confrontation, since India and
Pakistan have not managed to do so.

"Bilateralism has not worked," General Musharraf said in his address, delivered
to a joint session of the two legislative houses here in the capital of the
Pakistani-controlled section of Kashmir. He said urgent help from international
mediators was "essential to peace and harmony in the region."

"If war is imposed on Pakistan, we will defend every inch of our soil with all
the means at our disposal and every last drop of our blood," he said. "Let there
be no confusion."

In New Delhi, a government spokeswoman said General Musharraf would have to live
up to his pledge to end what India calls cross-border terrorism before India
would begin talks aimed at soothing the confrontation. The spokeswoman, Nirupama
Rao, accused General Musharraf of having "reverted to yesterday's cliches."

She said Pakistan had made no move to end the infiltration of militants into
Kashmir nor taken any action on India's call for the return of 20 alleged
criminals and terrorists. India has called those demands its "touchstones" for
any move toward winding down the conflict.

There are visible indications in Muzaffarabad that Pakistani authorities have
indeed begun some kind of crackdown in the Kashmiri territory Pakistan controls.
The offices of at least five extremist organizations have been shuttered,
graffiti that until several weeks ago voiced support for the militants has been
scrubbed away and as General Musharraf spoke to the assembly today the galleries
were notably empty of representatives of militant groups. Pakistani journalists
have said that they previously maintained a regular presence here.

General Musharraf traveled to Kashmir by helicopter, flying over craggy, snowy
peaks on a national holiday meant to show solidarity with the Kashmiri people.
Pakistan contends that Kashmiris have been subjected for more than half a
century to a reign of suppression by the government of India, which controls
two-thirds of the region. He met with troops in the small town of Rawalakot,
less than 20 miles from the Line of Control, which divides the forces of the two
countries.

Wearing his military uniform and delivering his address in Muzaffarabad almost
entirely in English, he was clearly seeking international attention: foreign
reporters were specifically invited to the event, and shuttled here in
government buses, a three-hour drive each way along narrow, winding mountain
roads.

In his speech, General Musharraf accused India of waging "state terrorism" in
Kashmir and said its human rights abuses there had ignited the revolt over the
last decade against New Delhi's rule in Jammu and Kashmir, largely Hindu India's
only Muslim-majority state. He insisted that the rebels were legitimate freedom
fighters and accused India of being "engaged in a sinister worldwide campaign to
denigrate and malign the Kashmiri freedom movement."

General Musharraf's call for international mediation, and his urging that it be
carried out by "influential countries," reiterated a longstanding Pakistani
position, but it is one that India has repeatedly rejected. On Monday, Robert
Blackwill, the American ambassador to India, was quoted as saying that the
United States would not be willing to mediate on the Kashmir issue but would
urge India and Pakistan to talk about it.

In defending his own recent promise to curb terrorism in all its forms, made in
the Jan. 12 speech, General Musharraf spoke at some length, an apparent sign
that he is feeling some heat from internal critics who have portrayed him as
bowing to demands from India and the United States.

He said he was determined "to root out the dual scourge of extremism and
sectarian hatred" in Pakistan and said that his decision to begin the campaign
had been made "under no pressure, under no prompting from any quarter this was
in Pakistan's interest."

"We have to establish the writ of the government of Pakistan, and remove the
perception of Pakistan that we are a soft state," he said. He said the country's
need for foreign investment, in particular, meant that "we have to improve our
internal law and order situation."

He also admonished all Pakistanis against independent involvement in any foreign
conflict, specifically mentioning Kashmir and Kosovo, which along with the
Taliban-led struggle in Afghanistan have attracted considerable numbers of
Pakistani volunteers.

"No organization, no party has a right to follow its own independent agenda on
external affairs," he said. "Let the government deal with all issues."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pervez Musharraf, left, prayed yesterday with the assembly
speaker in Pakistani-controlled Kashmir, Sardar Siab Khalid. In a televised
address, General Musharraf denounced India for spurning reconciliation efforts.
(Agence France-Presse) Map of Pakistan and Kashmir highlighting Muzaffarabad:
Pakistan's leader visited Muzaffarabad and bitterly denounced India.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); HELICOPTERS (60%) TERRORISM;  INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PAKISTAN

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%) JEHL, DOUGLAS; MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (GEN)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (96%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (98%); ASIA (96%); PAKISTAN (95%)

REGION: INDIA;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU;  MUZAFFARABAD (KASHMIR);  PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             795 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ALLIES;
French Minister Calls U.S. Policy 'Simplistic'

BYLINE:  By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 6


Frustration with President Bush's worldview burst into the open here today, as
Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine openly criticized Washington's approach to
terrorism as "simplistic."

"Today we are threatened by a new simplistic approach that reduces all the
problems in the world to the struggle against terrorism," Mr. Vedrine said
during a lengthy interview on France's Inter radio. "This is not well thought
out."

Mr. Vedrine suggested that Europeans would need to speak out more and more
because they faced a United States that acted "unilaterally, without consulting
others, making decisions based on its own view of the world and its own
interests."

In Washington, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell today rejected that criticism,
declaring, "We believe in multilateralism." He said suggestions in "intellectual
circles" that the United States had failed to consult with its European allies
"could not be further from the truth."

Secretary Powell, appearing before the House International Relations Committee,
added that "when the multilateral community does not agree with us," the United
States would not "shrink from doing that which is right, which is in our
interest, even if some of our friends disagree with us."

Using a specific example of American-European differences, Mr. Vedrine lashed
out at the way the White House was pressuring the Palestinian leader, Yasir
Arafat. He called the United States policy of isolating him "another error" that
Europe could not go along with.

"European countries do not agree with the White House Middle East policy and
think it is a mistake to support Ariel Sharon's purely repressive policies," he
said.

In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, European leaders quickly rallied in
support of America, showing solidarity with Washington's determination to root
out terrorism.

But since President Bush's State of the Union address last week, which was seen
here as evidence of Washington's single-minded drive to broaden its war on
terror, expressions of dissent have surfaced.

Many leaders are drawing a sharp distinction between American attacks on
Afghanistan, justified as self-defense, and any future action against countries
like Iraq, Iran and North Korea, described by Mr. Bush as part of an "axis of
evil" that threatened the world.

Mr. Vedrine's comments may be the harshest yet, but other European leaders have
also begun to distance themselves from Washington.

Even Tony Blair, Britain's prime minister and Washington's leading partner in
the war on Afghanistan, has cautioned against a military strike on Iraq unless a
clear connection is found between Baghdad and the Sept. 11 attacks.

On a visit to Washington last week, Britain's foreign secretary, Jack Straw,
dismissed Mr. Bush's speech as political grandstanding. He said the president's
words were "best understood by the fact that there are midterm Congressional
elections coming up in November."

Secretary Powell said today that the administration recognizes "that there are
strong points of view in Europe and we always appreciate hearing strong points
of view."

"I hear them whether I appreciate them or not," he added. "That is part of
diplomacy, that is how friends work with each other."

Over the weekend, Germany's defense minister, Rudolf Scharping, said he favored
a political strategy for dealing with Iraq, rather than a military one.
Germany's deputy foreign minister, Ludger Volmer, took a harsher line, flatly
denying that there was any evidence that Iraq had been involved in recent
terrorism. He also warned that the United States should not use talk of
terrorism to settle old scores with Iran.

On Tuesday, the European Union said it would resist making an enemy of Iran in
the widening war on global terrorism.

European diplomats said that by lumping Iraq, Iran and North Korea together as
rogue states, Mr. Bush was ignoring Europe's view that engagement was a way to
support Iranian moderates.

Spain's foreign minister, Josep Pique, whose country holds the rotating
presidency of the European Union, told a news conference in Madrid that the
15-nation bloc would be seeking maximum cooperation with Iran on trade, the
fight against terrorism and human rights.

"We profoundly respect the opinions of the administration, our principal ally in
every respect," Mr. Pique said of the United States after holding talks with
visiting Iranian deputy foreign minister, Ali Ahani. But, he added, members of
the European Union "think that it is very important to support the process of
reform" in Iran.

In another sign of differences between Europe and Washington, the European Union
envoy to the Middle East said today that the bloc had told the United States
that support for the Palestinian leader was essential in their view.

"We have to reinforce the Palestinian Authority in order that the result on the
ground will be much better," the envoy, Miguel Angel Moratinos, said after
meeting with Mr. Arafat in the West Bank. "That is the European decision."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The French foreign minister, Hubert Vedrine, who is criticizing
the United States for conducting foreign policy without consulting its allies.
(Pool photo by Henny Ray Abrams)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (70%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (69%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (63%);
WAR & CONFLICT (63%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); JACK STRAW (58%); TONY BLAIR (50%) DALEY, SUZANNE;
VEDRINE, HUBERT (MIN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); BLAIR, TONY
(PRIME MIN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (52%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); FRANCE (94%);
IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  FRANCE;  GREAT BRITAIN;  IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             796 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: ASIAN ARENA;
How Qaeda Linked Up With Malaysian Groups

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Feb. 6


Once a month, starting in mid-1999, a group of Muslim men, mostly in their 20's,
gathered in a whitewashed bungalow in a suburb of the capital here to discuss
religion and world affairs.

They were guided by three exiled Indonesian clerics who delivered a similar
message: "The West and capitalism are enemies of Islam, and you have to do
everything you can to fight them," recalled Muhammad Sobri, the owner of the
house, who also attended the meetings.

Osama bin Laden was held up as a role model, a man who had given up his wealth
and comfortable life in Saudi Arabia to live in poverty and fight in
Afghanistan, Mr. Sobri, a roadside food vendor, said today. His wife tended to
their 6-month-old son in a stroller.

Mr. Sobri, 43, said the group's political interests were primarily local:
support for armed Muslim militants in Indonesia and the Philippines. But recent
investigations suggest that Al Qaeda may have been using the young Malaysians
for broader purposes.

Some of the men attending the meetings were later arrested last year after a
botched bank robbery that was intended to raise money for Islamic militants
abroad. Their interrogations led to a larger network and a plot to blow up the
American and Israeli embassies in Singapore, the authorities say.

One of the Indonesian clerics who lectured at Mr. Sobri's house, Riudan
Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, called Mr. bin Laden a friend, according to
Mr. Sobri.

But Mr. Hambali did not say that he was Al Qaeda's point man in the region,
according to American and Asian intelligence officials. Mr. Hambali has links to
terrorists, including Wali Khan and Ramzi Yousef, who are now in prison in the
United States after being convicted on terrorism charges including the 1993
truck bombing of the World Trade Center, American and Malaysian officials said.

Mr. Hambali set up at least three other groups here like Mr. Sobri's. One was
headed by Yazid Sufaat and met at a mosque in a nearby suburb.

The other group met at the home of Muhammad Iqbal A. Rahman, another Indonesian
cleric in exile living in the Malay village of Sungai Manggis, 90 minutes south
of the capital.

The meeting at Mr. Sobri's house began when a neighbor asked him if three
clerics could use his house to preach, Mr. Sobri said. Next to him was a van
that he uses to supplement his income by driving children to and from school .

Mr. Sobri's path to Islamic fundamentalism began in the mid-1980's, he said.
When he was a soldier in the Malaysian Army, the police attacked a commune where
a group of Muslim fundamentalists lived, killing more than a dozen, an incident
that many people here now compare to what the United States government did to
the Branch Davidians near Waco, Tex., in 1993.

After leaving the army, Mr. Sobri said, he visited the site of of the commune.
"The question that consumed me was, why were these Muslims killed? I felt a
great injustice had been done."

When the meetings began at his house in 1999, only 10 men showed up at first,
and Abu Bakar Baasyir, an exiled Indonesian cleric, was the first preacher. More
and more men began attending, from as far as 30 miles away, until there was a
regular group of about 30, Mr. Sobri said.

Five men from the group eventually went off to fight in Afghanistan, Mr. Sobri
said; they have not returned, he said. Other men went to fight in Indonesia and
the Philippines.

Mr. Hambali, who has not been seen here for more than a year, ended every
evening with a lecture about security, about how the men should blend in with
society and keep secrets, Mr. Sobi recalled today. "He told us if you are caught
by the police," Mr. Sobri said, "hang on as long as you can without saying
anything."

He laughed nervously. "What was the point of all the lectures?" he said.

The police arrested the first members of Mr. Sobri's group last May. They
talked, leading to the arrest of more men, including Mr. Iqbal, one of the three
preachers. That lead to further arrests, including that of Mr. Sufaat in
December. Altogether, 37 men have been arrested.

Mr. Baasyir was the spiritual leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, or the Islamic Group,
a terrorist organization with cells throughout the region, according to the
authorities in Singapore and Malaysia, and Mr. Iqbal and Mr. Hambali were
members of the group's regional council.

Mr. Baasyir was questioned recently by the Indonesian police, under pressure
from the Malaysian and Singaporean governments, and released because the
authorities in Indonesia say they have no evidence that he committed any crimes.

The Malaysian authorities have said Mr. Sobri, Mr. Sufaat and the others were
members of a group that the police have called the Malaysian Mujahedeen Group
and, later, the Malaysia Militant Group. But Mr. Sobri said that for security
reasons, the group did not have any name.

One of the obligations of each group was to raise money for the Islamic fighters
in Indonesia and the Philippines, Mr. Sobri said. The money was given to Mr.
Hambali or Mr. Baasyir when they preached.

But Mr. Sobri's group was not very successful in raising money from followers.
They asked the Islamic Party of Malaysia, an opposition political party, for
money, but it turned them down, Mr. Sobri said.

So a small cell within his group decided to rob a bank. He was not part of this
smaller cell.

"They failed," he said with a laugh. One man was killed, one was injured and two
were caught.

Mr. Sobri was held for 73 days, during which he was beaten, he said. He was
released because he had never been to Afghanistan, Pakistan or any of the other
places to fight, said Badaruddin Ismail, who works with political detainees as a
member of Malaysian People's Voice, a human rights organization here.

But if it had not been for the botched bank robbery, he might have gone to
Afghanistan, he said.

As for the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States, he said, "I am very happy"
with them.

Would he have signed on to a similar suicide mission, leaving his wife and five
children? He paused for a long time. "I am really not sure what I would have
done," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (91%);
RELIGION (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); ROBBERY (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); BANK
ROBBERY (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (88%); SUBURBS (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(78%); CULTS & SECTS (77%); FUNDRAISING (75%); BOMBINGS (75%); POOR POPULATION
(74%); HIJACKING (73%); CORRECTIONS (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%); CHILDREN (65%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (55%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  FOREIGN SERVICE;  UNITED STATES FOREIGN SERVICE;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  BANK ROBBERIES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%) BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA (75%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MALAYSIA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDONESIA (95%); PHILIPPINES
(92%); SINGAPORE (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MALAYSIA;  INDONESIA;  PHILIPPINES;
ISRAEL;  SINGAPORE

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             797 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Priest Surrenders To Tribunal

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 75 words


A Rwandan wanted by the United Nations war crimes tribunal on genocide charges
flew to Arusha, Tanzania, to turn himself in to the court there, the Italian
diocese that has sheltered him announced.

The Rev. Athanase Seromba, 38, has lived in the Florence diocese since 1997.
According to the group African Rights, Father Seromba fled his parish in western
Rwanda in June 1994, "leaving behind him mass graves filled with more than 2,000
bodies."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;
TUTSI TRIBE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: SEROMBA, ATHANASE (REV)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); AFRICA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: RWANDA;  ITALY

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             799 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: 'Not Guilty' Plea At Tribunal

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 90 words


A Roman Catholic priest pleaded not guilty to charges of genocide and crimes
against humanity at the United Nations war crimes tribunal for Rwanda.

The Rev. Athanase Seromba, who has been a priest in Florence, Italy, since 1997,
surrendered Wednesday to the court, in Arusha, Tanzania. Father Seromba, 37, a
member of Rwanda's Hutu majority, is charged with ordering Hutu extremists to
kill thousands of minority Tutsi in April 1994 by bulldozing his parish church
in Nyange, where the Tutsi had taken refuge during the ethnic massacres.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (91%); GENOCIDE
(91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%)
PRIESTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (84%) ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: SEROMBA, ATHANASE (REV)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: RWANDA;  NYANGE (RWANDA)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             800 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Monster in The Dock

BYLINE:  By BILL KELLER;  E-mail: billkeller@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1499 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


In the courtrooms at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia you find the Euro-utilitarian furnishings and sober drone of a Dutch
insurance company, which is exactly what the building housed until a few years
ago. The defendants, too, are surprisingly ordinary, deprived of whatever strut
and menace they had when they were lords of the Balkans. The other day I looked
in on the trial of one Stanislav Galic, who reminded me of my high school
swimming coach. Mr. Galic is accused of commanding the Bosnian Serb sadists who
turned the streets of civilized Sarajevo into a shooting gallery, shelling
families as they queued for bread or attended funerals. The trial, like most
trials, is a tedious accumulation of detail, the bookkeeping of heartbreak.
Hours are spent pinning down the precise location of a tram at the moment sniper
bullets pierced its windows, hitting a woman and her 4-year-old daughter. This
is where the banality of evil meets the banality of justice.

Next Tuesday the chief among the monsters of Yugoslavia begins his turn in the
dock. Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of the former Yugoslavia, the
author of three horrible wars of ethnic cleansing in the heart of Europe, and
now a sulky, self-pitying defendant, goes on trial as a war criminal.

You might think all of this would be a bonanza for an American administration
seeking to assure the world, in particular the Islamic world, that American
power can be a force for good. The United States was instrumental in delivering
these men to justice -- many of them, including Mr. Milosevic, on President
Bush's watch. The trial is also a reminder that the West did (after much
dithering) send warplanes to save the lives of Muslim Bosnians and Muslim
Albanians from the incited wrath of their Serbian neighbors.

And the calm, fastidious ministrations of law here exemplify the "non-negotiable
demands of human dignity" that Mr. Bush described in his State of the Union
speech as the heart of America's mission in the world. Mr. Milosevic will be
treated to a trial no tyrant, no terror-master, no rogue regime would stand for,
a trial in which the outcome has not been ordained. At a time when resentment of
American power festers not only in the Arab world but in the Waldorf-Astoria, to
judge by the hectoring at the recent World Economic Forum, this is an
opportunity for the United States to glory a little in its moral superiority.

Curiously, this is a bonanza the administration has chosen not to reap.

No one thought to write an applause line into the State of the Union address
mentioning America's role in bringing Mr. Milosevic to justice. So far the White
House seems just slightly more enthusiastic about this trial than Mr. Milosevic
himself, and Mr. Milosevic has done everything short of mooning the judges.

What's missing here? It's tempting to say this is just another manifestation of
the Bush administration's instinct to go it alone, like dropping out of the
Kyoto global warming treaty, but it is not nearly so simple.

Probably one factor is that, in the Bush lexicon, Yugoslavia stands for the
wrong kind of American intervention -- peacekeeping, nation-building, do-gooder
foreign policy driven more by compassion than by our national interest.
Grudgingly, Mr. Bush has accepted the inherited duty to stick with NATO in
policing the Balkans, though there is still a residue of scorn for the idea that
this is a meritorious use of America might.

But the main reason you have not heard the administration crowing about Mr.
Milosevic is that this trial represents the high-water mark of a rising world
enthusiasm for international criminal courts. The specialized tribunal on
Yugoslavia and a similar court that is litigating the genocidal slaughter in
Rwanda have helped convince 139 nations that the world needs a permanent
International Criminal Court to judge atrocities committed in the name of war.
The idea is that a standing court would develop a pool of legal expertise and
credibility in these difficult-to-prosecute crimes, that it would serve as a
check on cyclical vengeance, and that it might even give pause to some future
monster.

Fifty-two of those signatory nations, including many of our closest allies, have
formally ratified the treaty creating the court; when that number hits 60,
perhaps within a year, the court is born. The Clinton administration signed the
treaty, saying it still needed improvement. Mr. Bush, prodded by the Pentagon
and backed by Congress, is strongly against ratification and vows to have
nothing to do with it; the administration is still discussing whether to launch
an active campaign to undermine the court, or merely keep a chilly distance from
it.

This is not an easy call. The fact is, a lot of Americans, and not just Bush
Republicans, have misgivings about the prospect that an American could be
dragged from under the shelter of our Constitution and tried before an
international court. A number of people who publicly endorse the international
court privately admit that some aspects of it give them pause.

Like the tribunal, the permanent court would employ a hybrid legal system,
lacking some features Americans take for granted. There is a three-judge panel
in place of a jury, and two can convict. Prosecutors can appeal an acquittal,
which U.S. law regards as double jeopardy. The roster of judges is
international, and draws on some countries you may not think of as bastions of
judicial integrity -- China, to pick on one.

For all that, American jurists who have participated give the court here high
marks. Patricia M. Wald, a respected federal judge who recently completed a
two-year appellate tour on the Yugoslavia tribunal, where she shocked her
colleagues by throwing out three convictions for weak evidence, told me she
would have no qualms about seeing an American put on trial here. "I'm a skeptic
of everything, and I would watch very carefully," she said. "But I think with
all the checks and balances, I wouldn't be uncomfortable."

The graver fear is that a permanent international court, with a broader license
and vaguer accountability, would become a forum for mischievous
anti-Americanism. The new court is intended as a tribunal of last resort, for
countries unable (like Rwanda) or unwilling (like Yugoslavia) to handle their
own colossal messes. The court is supposed to step aside when countries agree to
investigate allegations against their own citizens. But the decision to
prosecute would rest with prosecutors and judges ultimately accountable to an
amorphous assembly of everyone who signed the treaty. American negotiators
fought unsuccessfully for some stronger safeguards, like a requirement that the
U.N. Security Council, where America has a veto, be required to sign off on
indictments.

The administration worries that American soldiers or American officials deployed
abroad would be ripe targets for politically motivated prosecutors. The next
thing you know, Henry Kissinger will be a few cells down from Mr. Milosevic,
standing trial for war crimes in Vietnam and half a dozen other venues, as the
writer Christopher Hitchens proposed in a polemic last year.

In the real world, though, Americans have little to fear, with or without a
permanent international court. Why? First, because the countries that care about
war crimes tend to be liberal democracies that have enough to do without global
grandstanding, and second, because America's diplomatic, economic and military
leverage is a strong disincentive. When Mr. Milosevic sneers at the tribunal
here as "victor's justice," he is not entirely wrong.

"No international tribunal will ever hold Russia to account for Chechnya, or
China for Tiananmen Square or Tibet, let alone the U.S.," said Gary J. Bass,
author of an unsentimental book on the politics of war-crimes tribunals. "This
is an international implement that's going to be used by stronger powers against
weaker powers. So why are we afraid of it?"

Certainly America-haters will try to use an international court against us. Let
them try. They are likely to get as far as Mr. Milosevic got when he exhorted
the prosecutor here to charge the United States with war crimes for its bombing
campaign against civilian Belgrade.

We have something to lose by shunning the court for its imperfections. First,
the tribunal can still assert jurisdiction over Americans and allies, whether we
ratify or not, so it is probably a good idea to do as we have done in The Hague,
sending judges and prosecutors who will shape the institution to our higher
standards. Second, it's not hard to imagine that we would find the court useful
in our war on terrorism, when we get tired of processing all the bad guys
ourselves. And third, if you will forgive a split second of idealism, it is a
way to engage the world with something other than precision-guided munitions.

The Bush administration is standing on principle. The price of that is, America
will be standing on the sidelines.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Knickerbocker)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); WAR &
CONFLICT (70%); WRITERS (66%); RELIGION (64%); HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS (56%);
SWIMMING (56%); SPORTS (56%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (52%) KELLER, BILL; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); ALBANIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             801 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Ends Cambodia Talks On Trials for Khmer Rouge

BYLINE:  By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Feb. 8


After nearly five years of often testy negotiations with Cambodia, the United
Nations announced today that it was pulling out of talks on setting up a special
tribunal to try former leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan made the decision after the
Cambodian government said it would accept only a yes or no on a complex formula
it had created for a tribunal combining Cambodian and foreign judges and
prosecutors.

"The United Nations has concluded that as currently envisaged, the Cambodian
court would not guarantee independence, impartiality and objectivity, which is
required by the United Nations for it to cooperate with such a court," said Fred
Eckhard, the United Nations spokesman, in New York.

Unless negotiations are reopened, the Cambodian government will now have the
option of proceeding with its plan for a tribunal without the endorsement of the
international community. Cambodia and the United Nations have been working since
1997 to find a formula that would meet international standards of justice to
bring to trial leaders of the Communist movement that was responsible for more
than a million deaths when it ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979.

None of the former Khmer Rouge have been brought to trial for these crimes, and
a number of major figures -- including the movement's leader, Pol Pot -- have
already died. Several others are living in quiet retirement in Cambodia and two
are in prison on related accusations.

The question of putting them on trial remains a major item of unfinished
business as the world has moved in recent years to bring to account the people
responsible for genocide and crimes against humanity in various nations.

The United Nations and many foreign nations have been concerned that the corrupt
and poorly trained Cambodian justice system was not capable on its own of
producing a fair and impartial trial and verdict.

In fits and starts, the Cambodians moved toward a formula, backed by the United
States, that met many but not all of the requirements set by the United Nations.
Last August, King Norodom Sihanouk signed a law that was then sent to the United
Nations for review. As doubts were raised by the United Nations, Prime Minister
Hun Sen effectively threatened to end discussions, saying: "I want only one
answer from the United Nations. I only want to hear yes or no, but they still
don't say yes or no."

Repeating an old warning, he said, "If you are not taking part, we will proceed
without the United Nations because when we toppled Pol Pot's genocidal regime we
did not have United Nations help at all."

In New York today, the United Nations legal counsel, Hans Corell, told reporters
that the decision to drop negotiations left Cambodia free to proceed on its own
or seek cooperation from individual nations for its court. .

He also warned that with its pattern of alternately agreeing and objecting Mr.
Hun Sen's government had shown a "lack of urgency" that could continue. This
pattern has raised questions among many diplomats as to whether Mr. Hun Sen
truly wants to proceed with a trial.

Foreign diplomats in Phnom Penh say the Cambodian prime minister is determined
to control the process and outcome of a trial that would have major implications
for current politics and could possibly focus on some people close to him.

Asked whether the United Nations might reopen talks with Cambodia, Mr. Corell
said, "I'm not getting into hypothetical situations." But he said the impasse
was such that "it is not likely that the parties will be able to solve it
through further negotiations."

The United States, which helped create the formula embodied in the Cambodian
law, voiced disappointment today with the decision by the United Nations. "We
would hope that they would continue discussions," said Richard A. Boucher, the
State Department spokesman.

The discussions began in June 1997 when Mr. Hun Sen and Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, who was then his co-prime minister, formally requested United Nations
help in setting up a tribunal. Their request acknowledged the inadequacy of the
Cambodian justice system.

In 1999, Mr. Hun Sen, who was then the country's sole leader, rejected a United
Nations proposal for an international tribunal and insisted on formulating a
Cambodian law to govern any proceedings.

Mr. Corell said today that it was essential that the United Nations maintain
control over the trial. Otherwise, he said, "It will leave the field open to the
government in Cambodia to make whatever changes they see fit in the future."

The United Nations demanded a guarantee that defendants would be able to select
their own lawyers and a provision allowing the government to apprehend any
suspects who do not surrender.

Last year Mr. Hun Sen said, "I don't care if the foreigners participate or not,"
adding, "I am not the son of the United Nations."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge, in a 1998 interview.
(The Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); VERDICTS (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); LAWYERS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); JUDGES
(71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; POL POT (1925-98)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             804 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Trial of Slobodan Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 620 words


The most important war crimes trial in Europe since Nuremberg opens tomorrow in
The Hague. Slobodan Milosevic, once Yugoslavia's dictator, stands indicted for
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo, and
genocide committed in Bosnia. It is not only his victims who should rejoice that
Mr. Milosevic is facing justice. His trial is a triumph for the civilized world,
which has created a court capable of condemning the most heinous crimes with
appropriate gravity and fairness.

Mr. Milosevic started four wars -- Slovenia was the site of the first -- which
killed 200,000 people and drove 3.5 million from their homes. A longtime
Communist Party functionary, he reinvented himself as a nationalist, and rose to
power in Yugoslavia selling the ancient dream of a Greater Serbia. He artfully
used propaganda and fear to keep Serbs in a nationalist frenzy through war after
disastrous war. It was a cynical strategy to maintain his support among Serbs
and divert public attention from his corruption and mismanagement.

In The Hague, Mr. Milosevic has been a most uncooperative defendant in a trial
that could last up to two years, according to the prosecutor. He has refused to
appoint lawyers or enter pleas, and has treated his court appearances as
opportunities to express his contempt for the tribunal and argue that he is the
victim of a political sham designed to provide cover for NATO's war crimes.

While unlikely to be a winning legal strategy, this is entirely in keeping with
his murderous practice of portraying Serbs as the world's lonely victims who can
rely on no one but themselves. Now, Mr. Milosevic seems to be arguing, he has
been betrayed not only by traditional enemies but also by those who once stood
by him. He has said he will call as witnesses a panoply of Western leaders, and
it is indeed true that many of those applauding his capture were his negotiating
partners when he was in power. Inside Serbia, some of Mr. Milosevic's closest
allies helped to turn him over to the tribunal. His self-image as a nationalist
leader standing up to the West may be all he has left.

Earlier this month, an appeals panel of the tribunal ruled that all the charges
should be combined into one trial. This is both sensible and appropriate. Many
witnesses in this case will risk their lives by testifying. They should not have
to come to The Hague more than once. Moreover, as with the Nazis, Belgrade's
wars were not just an assortment of crimes but the fulfillment of a systematic
plan to create a Greater Serbia by driving out those of other ethnicities. The
scope of its evil is best appreciated when viewed as a piece.

When the United Nations Security Council established the Yugoslavia tribunal in
1993, few imagined it would ever hold Mr. Milosevic. He seemed likely to be in
power for life, and the court was weak, established with few resources by
Western nations feeling guilty about their failure to intervene in Bosnia before
thousands had died. But despite the failure of NATO forces in Bosnia and
Yugoslav officials to arrest indicted war criminals, the court has grown. It has
capitalized on its successes to wrest the money from the United Nations and
Western governments to do its job. So far the tribunal has tried 31 Serbs,
Croats and Muslims -- five of them were acquitted -- and 43 more people are
awaiting trial. It has become an admirably fair tribunal whose judgments have
helped to modernize aspects of international law stagnant since Nuremberg, for
example ruling that rape is a form of torture and a crime against humanity. But
Mr. Milosevic's trial will be its capstone. The tribunal will ultimately be
judged on its competence and fairness in this case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WITNESSES (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); TESTIMONY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); CORRUPTION
(73%); GENOCIDE (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%) EDITORIALS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (93%); KOSOVO (93%); EUROPE (92%); SLOVENIA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             805 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial of Milosevic Will Peel Layers of Balkan Guilt, Too

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2283 words

DATELINE: SANSKI MOST, Bosnia and Herzegovina


The remains of 372 people killed 10 years ago are laid down on a warehouse floor
here. Traces of distinct human beings -- a Mozart T-shirt, a pocket watch --
recede in the sameness of the bones, which two forensics experts arrange like
puzzles and label. B for a whole body, BP for something less.

What overwhelms is the size of the crime: that the earth in what was once a part
of Yugoslavia still disgorges the dead in such large numbers. Digging for these
bodies, all Bosnian Muslims, began only this past Sept. 11, the day the world's
attention turned toward the crimes of a new decade.

But starting on Feb. 12, some of the worst crimes of the last decade will
undergo their own autopsy. Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of
Yugoslavia, and of Serbia, its largest remaining republic, the man accused of
being most responsible for these deaths and thousands of others, will stand
trial before an international court in The Hague.

Mr. Milosevic, the first head of state ever to be tried for war crimes, is
essentially accused of leading a genocidal, criminal enterprise. The aim of that
enterprise, prosecutors allege, was to "cleanse" land he believed belonged to
ethnic Serbs of other ethnic groups, Croats, Muslims, Albanians. It spans three
wars, in Croatia, Kosovo and here in Bosnia, where he is accused of genocide, in
the most significant war crimes trial since Nuremberg.

Mr. Milosevic proclaims innocence, saying he acted only to keep Yugoslavia
whole. "This is a malicious, utterly hostile process aimed at justifying the
crime against my country, using this court as a weapon against my country and my
people," he told judges at The Hague in January.

Even among experts who loathe Mr. Milosevic, there are worries over whether the
proceedings may look like victors' justice and whether the prosecutor, Carla Del
Ponte, can deliver the evidence that draws a direct line between Mr. Milosevic
and bodies like those uncovered here.

That will be for the judges to decide in a trial expected to last at least two
years.

But beyond the trial itself is the question of what it means for the people of
what was once a much larger Yugoslavia, the wreckage of what was an imperfect
but functioning multiethnic state in Europe, a unique bridge between East and
West.

Well over 200,000 died in the wars of that Yugoslavia's destruction, most of
them Muslims. Ethnic cleansing has left an indelible trace; most of Bosnia is
now divided along ethnic lines. Soldiers of outside nations, slow to react as
the war escalated, patrol those still volatile lines. Foreign bureaucrats run
Bosnia, now an independent nation, and Kosovo, still a province of Serbia -- and
will for years to come.

For many victims, there is a need for justice. For the Serbs, who supported Mr.
Milosevic for 13 years, the questions raised by the trial are perhaps more
complex.

Many among the new, reformist breed of leaders in Belgrade -- who faced
criticism at home for extraditing Mr. Milosevic last June -- see an opportunity
to come to terms with a violent past that was long repressed.

But any reconciliation with the past, as they see it, is not a collective thing
but a matter of blaming the old leaders and allowing Serbia to move squarely
into Europe.

"We have to individualize the guilt," said Ivan Djordjevic, a former dissident
lawyer and an official in Serbia's Ministry of Internal Affairs. "Otherwise we
have this feeling of collective guilt, that this whole nation had the goal of
eliminating other people and killing. Not all of us supported this."

For the victims, this lets Serbia, the largest entity in the former Yugoslavia,
off too easily -- and leaves open the possibility of ethnic hatred, then war,
returning.

"Milosevic will be found guilty of crimes," said Veton Surroi, the publisher of
Koha Ditore, an influential Albanian newspaper in Kosovo, Serbia's southern
province. "But his society cannot escape responsibility for those crimes. This
is an opportunity for them to open the soul and say: 'Wait a minute, where was I
when that happened? Where were the Serb people?' "

"After all," he added, "they will need to deal with it, if not for anyone else's
sake, for their own sake."

Serbian Pragmatism
Weary of the Past And Its Burdens

 Maybe he is blunter than most, but Dejan Milojevic is like many Serbs: weary of
Mr. Milosevic, tired of hearing about the savagery of Serbs, eager to reap the
rewards of rejoining the outside world. After Mr. Milosevic's extradition, and
confronting an average income here of $125 a month, many Serbs are more
pragmatist than nationalist.

"The main thing we are interested in," said Mr. Milojevic, 29, a town official
in Aleksinac, south of Belgrade, "is how to cash in on all the misery we've been
through. We are willing to admit guilt in Kosovo if that will bring in money."

Still, Mr. Milojevic has reservations. He wonders if Mr. Milosevic can get a
fair trial at The Hague, since the same nations that paid for the NATO bombing
against Serbia in 1999 are underwriting the trial. He believes that not only Mr.
Milosevic, and not only Serbs, are guilty of war crimes. He is still angry at
the West, not least because stray NATO bombs killed 24 people, most of them
civilians, in Aleksinac in April 1999.

Latinka Perovic, a historian who campaigned against Mr. Milosevic, suggests that
the mixture of pragmatism, adaptability and indignation in Serbia is also a way
to wiggle out of a larger responsibility for supporting Mr. Milosevic.

"It is not good to stay on that level only," Ms. Perovic said. "There is another
level which is not being discussed. That is the issue of punishment of crimes as
a moral issue, an ethical issue."

She said the new Yugoslav government -- led by President Vojislav Kostunica, a
moderate nationalist who defeated Mr. Milosevic at the polls in 2000 -- has done
little to explore this function of the trial.

Serbs often say they had no idea what really happened. Mr. Milosevic's
propaganda was overwhelming. For years, it portrayed a wronged Serbia under
imminent threat, first from reborn Croatian fascists, then from Islamic hordes
in Bosnia and finally from the "demographic genocide" committed by Albanians in
Kosovo -- a reference to their high birth rate. Most Serbs swallowed all this.

So what will be the effect on this society of Ms. Del Ponte's evidence, which
will no doubt present one atrocity after another, from the "ethnic cleansing" of
1992 in Bosnia when tens of thousands died and more than 700,000 Muslims were
driven from home, to the 7,000 Muslim men killed in Srebrenica in Bosnia in
1995, to 300 or more Albanians massacred in the village of Meja in Kosovo in
1999?

Already, there are some cracks. Last year, the conscience of a few Serbs,
drivers of trucks and bulldozers with bad dreams, broke.

The new government soon announced a horrifying find: eight mass graves in Serbia
proper, including five on a police training ground in Batajnica, just outside
Belgrade. So far about 445 bodies -- some of them children -- have been exhumed,
all presumed to be ethnic Albanians killed in the war in Kosovo in 1999, then
transferred from grave to grave. Perhaps 800 or 900 bodies are still in the
ground. It has jolted many Serbs.

"If it's really true," said Marina Ivanis, 22, a clerk in a Batajnica clothing
store, "it's a monstrous thing. It's inhuman."

Bosnia's Hidden Horrors
Skeletons Uncovered; Many Are Missing

 In Bosnia, many more dead lie undiscovered, among the 17,000 Muslims, 2,500
Serbs and 700 Croats still unaccounted for. The skeletons in the warehouse in
Sanski Most, in northwest Bosnia, constitute only about half those dumped in
mine pits outside the town of Ljubija, investigators say. Bones poking through
the dirt revealed the spot.

In 1992, Bosnia became the third war of Yugoslavia's disintegration, after
Slovenia and Croatia. The Serbian destruction of Vukovar, Croatia, had already
become a symbol of Mr. Milosevic's brutality.

Throughout wide swathes of Bosnia, in the months after the war began, the
Serbian violence, most of it against civilians, was overwhelming: villages of
Muslims uprooted, massacres, skeletal figures whose empty gazes behind
barbed-wire fences announced the return of concentration camps to Europe.

In an initial rampage, close to 70 percent of Bosnia was cleared of non-Serbs.
But Mr. Milosevic always dismissed accounts of these events as the inventions of
those plotting Serbia's downfall.

"My son was killed in a concentration camp," said Suhra Pidic, 60, a Muslim
woman who moved back to the demolished village of Kozarac. "He was my only
child. He is these children's father. His children don't have anything."

The children, 12 and 9, poked around the kitchen of their reconstructed house
during a conversation about their father, Irfan, who died at 27 in 1992 after
being held in camps at Keraterm and Trnopolje.

Mrs. Pidic has no hope that Serbs, Muslims and Croats can live together. While
she is pleased Mr. Milosevic is on trial, no courtroom justice will change that.

"I can never forgive them," she said. "In 1,000 years, our children's children
will never forgive them."

The Pidic family has returned unmolested to the Serb-held part of Bosnia, one
family of 150,000 refugees who have gone back to their homes in the last two
years alone.

With two million displaced by the war, "every returnee is a defeat for ethnic
cleansing," said Wolfgang Petritsch, the top international administrator in
Bosnia.

Yet Bosnia remains divided, the Serbs' aims largely achieved.

Mr. Milosevic always waved away Bosnia as a separate country over which he had
no control, despite recurrent evidence that Serbian forces in Bosnia were being
directed and paid from Belgrade. The chief issue for Ms. Del Ponte in court may
well be to demonstrate that Mr. Milosevic, as president of Serbia, did indeed
have effective control over the acts of Serbs in Bosnia, whose independence in
spring 1992 set off the war.

Under the accord reached in Dayton, Ohio, in 1995, which ended the war, roughly
half the country belongs to Bosnian Serbs, while Muslims and Bosnian Croats
share the other half. They exist, and govern, mostly apart.

That Serbs allow people like the Pidic family to return home only underscores
how complete the changes are, argued Mark Wheeler, director of the International
Crisis Group in Bosnia. "The reason they can do it is that they are confident
the demographic balance is not going to be restored to what it was in 1992," he
said. "The ethnic cleansing is permanent."

His progress report on Bosnia was equally bleak: "The economy is a disaster.
There is no rule of law. Democracy malfunctions. The international community
squabbles."

Haris Silajdzic, the former Bosnian prime minister, said that while Mr.
Milosevic was on trial, "his project is not on trial." The only solution to
entrenched ethnic division, he suggested, is to speed admission to the European
Union for the countries that emerged from the former Yugoslavia.

The Kosovo Indictment
Accusations of Terror Against the State

 The indictment is specific. On April 27, 1999, "a large number" of Yugoslav and
Serbian troops rounded up Albanians near Meja, close to Kosovo's border with
Albania. Most were forced to flee. An unknown number of men were culled and
killed. At least 300 are still missing -- identity cards of 7 men last seen
there were found in the mass graves outside Belgrade.

"This was state organized," said Engjell Berisha, 40, who lost two brothers that
day. "There were soldiers, police, high officials from the municipality. If this
was the work of bandits, it wouldn't have been this organized."

Mr. Milosevic got his break in politics as a nationalist leader in 1987, and
again in 1989, when he went to Kosovo, holy ground for Serbs, for what became
famous speeches.

Then, in 1999, Kosovo became the beginning of Mr. Milosevic's end. The West lost
patience with his repression and unleashed a NATO bombing campaign that resulted
in the withdrawal of Mr. Milosevic's security forces. The defeat helped stoke
opposition that led eventually to Mr. Milosevic's defeat at the polls and his
ouster in October 2000.

Prosecutors say that holding Mr. Milosevic responsible in Kosovo may be the
least difficult of the three cases. In contrast to Bosnia, the troops in Kosovo
appeared to be under his direct authority. Kosovo remains formally part of
Serbia.

Mr. Milosevic says he was fighting to protect the integrity of his country
against Albanian "terrorists," the Kosovo Liberation Army. It will be up to Ms.
Del Ponte to provide the direct links to deaths of civilians. The new Serbian
government says it has testimony that Mr. Milosevic personally ordered the
cleanup of "battlefields."

"Something of such proportions would not have been permitted without his
knowledge," said Mr. Djordjevic of the Internal Affairs Ministry.

But Serbs in Kosovo perceive the West's justice as one-sided. Thousands of Serbs
in Kosovo were driven from home after NATO troops arrived in June 1999. The
trial offers one more reason to be angry: no Albanians have been publicly
indicted for war crimes.

As in Bosnia, most Albanians consider the ethnic divisions permanent.

Mr. Berisha, in Meja, said he feared too many had died -- some 4,000 bodies have
been recovered, most of them Albanians -- for coexistence ever to be possible
again.

"Most of these kids have no father," he said, as he walked by a field full of
boys playing soccer. "And they know that Serbs killed them."

In the village of Izbica, a woman named Ajmoni Behrami, 33, said much the same:
"Even if he gets the death penalty, it's nothing." The trial, she said, "is
important, but I could tear his skin off myself and my heart would not even
speed up."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Eva Elvira Klonowski, a forensic expert, with the recently
exhumed remains of 372 people killed 10 years ago in Bosnia. (Alan Chin for The
New York Times)(pg. A1); Ajmoni Behrami, with her daughter, at the grave of her
son, one of 145 killed by Serbian forces in Izbica, Kosovo, in May 1999. (Alan
Chin for The New York Times); Mr. Milosevic at The Hague. (CNN); Bosnian men
imprisoned by Serbs, 1992. (Ron Haviv/Saba)(pg. A10) Chart: "Milosevic on Trial:
The Accusations"Slobodan Milosevic's trial is scheduled to begin tomorrow at The
Hague. The charges stem from the wars in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo. 1989MAY 8,
1989Mr. Milosevic became president of Serbia. 1991JUNE 1991Slovenia and Croatia
seceded from Yugoslavia. Slovenia won independence in 10 days. In Croatia,
clashes between Serbian troops and Croatian defense forces erupted into
full-scale war. 1992JANUARY 1992Truce brokered in the Croatian-Serbian war.
APRIL 1992Bosnia and Herzegovina's independence was recognized by the United
States and European countries. Bosnian Serb forces attacked Sarajevo.
1995NOVEMBER 1995Mr. Milosevic and leaders of Croatia and Bosnia reached an
agreement near Dayton, Ohio, to end the war. Bosnia was divided into a
Muslim-Croat federation and a Bosnian Serb republic. 1997JULY 15, 1997Mr.
Milosevic was elected president of Yugoslavia. JANUARY 1998Albanian rebels in
Kosovo assassinated a Serbian official; clashes between Serbian police and
Albanians grew. 1999MARCH 1999NATO began bombing Yugoslavia to end the
repression of Albanians in Kosovo. JUNE 1999Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo.
2000OCTOBER 2000Serbs drove Mr. Milosevic from power after he tried to steal the
Yugoslav presidential election from Vojislav Kostunica. 2001JUNE 28, 2001Mr.
Milosevic was sent to the United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague.
INDICTMENTS1991-1992CROATIA -- 32 countsFor crimes against Croats and other
non-Serbs from August 1991 to June 1992. 1995BOSNIA -- 29 countsFor crimes,
including genocide, against Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs.
An estimated 200,000 people died and millions were driven from their homes from
March 1992 to December 1995. 1999KOSOVO -- 5 countsFor crimes against Kosovo
Albanian citizens. Hundreds were killed and more than 800,000 were driven out
from January to June in 1999. (pg. A10) Map of Yugoslavia shows surrounding
area. (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
EVIDENCE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); FORENSICS (78%); AUTOPSIES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (76%); RELIGION (75%); GENOCIDE (75%); ETHNIC GROUPS (75%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (73%); ETHNICITY (71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (65%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; DEL PONTE, CARLA

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
DAYTON, OH, USA (59%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA (99%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (97%); ALBANIA (94%); KOSOVO (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SLOVENIA
(92%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             806 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arab Press Glorifies Bomber as Heroine

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 10


The fame of Wafa Idris, identified by Palestinian and Israeli officials as the
first female suicide bomber to attack inside Israel, has spread far beyond the
West Bank refugee camp that was her home.

Ms. Idris, 28, has been hailed in the Arabic-language press as striking a blow
not only against Israel but also for woman's equality by blowing herself up on
Jaffa Road here two weeks ago, killing an 81-year-old man and wounding many
other people. She has been compared to Joan of Arc, the Mona Lisa and the Virgin
Mary.

"From Mary's womb issued a child who eliminated oppression, while the body of
Wafa became shrapnel that eliminated despair and aroused hope," Dr. Adel Sadeq,
head of the department of psychiatry at Ein Shams University in Cairo, was
quoted as writing by the London-based newspaper Al Quds al Arabi.

Dr. Sadeq said that "it is not surprising that the enemy in both cases was the
same," apparently a reference to Jews.

While Ms. Idris has been praised as a nationalist and feminist hero, her bombing
has stirred religious debate over whether Islam permits women to carry out
suicide missions. In general, those grappling with this question have answered
in the affirmative.

The Egyptian and London-based Arabic-language newspapers have focused on Ms.
Idris's act, and the news media in Persian Gulf countries have addressed it as
well, according to a survey by the Middle East Media Research Institute, which
monitors and translates coverage by Arabic-language media.

"What captured their imagination is that she is a real fighter," said Yigal
Carmon, who heads the institute.

Ms. Idris has repeatedly been described as a feminist hero, in columns that
praised her beauty and stressed her femininity. "She bore in her belly the fetus
of a rare heroism, and gave birth by blowing herself up!" the columnist Mufid
Fawzie wrote in the Egyptian daily Al Aalam al Youm. "What are the women of
velvet chatting in the parlors next to the act of Wafa Idris?"

In the Jordanian newspaper Al Dustour, the columnist Hussein al-Amoush wrote
that Ms. Idris had exposed the poverty of Western ideas of women's rights. Ms.
Idris "never dreamed of owning a BMW car or having a cellular phone," he wrote.
"Wafa did not carry in her suitcase makeup but, rather, enough explosives to
fill the enemies with horror."

In Israel, voices have been heard in Arabic-language newspapers criticizing the
bombing as the act of a vulnerable, manipulated person. Ms. Idris, who was
divorced, was a volunteer medic with the Palestine Red Crescent Society, which
is affiliated with the International Red Cross. Some of her relatives and
friends speculated that she was motivated by anger at seeing many Palestinians
wounded and killed during the 16-month-old conflict with Israel.

For all the attention she received elsewhere, Palestinian newspapers, while
reporting the bombing and the disclosure of her identity as news events, have
not dwelled on the matter. "They've moved on," said Maher al-Sheik, the managing
editor of the newspaper Al Quds here. "Every day we have a new story, which is
sad."

He said that with many Palestinians advocating violence, the newspaper had not
published much commentary about Ms. Idris. "It's not easy to open a debate about
something like this," he said. "The reaction of some of the people would not be
very pleasant. So sometimes we try to avoid this kind of debate."

Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, has repeatedly condemned suicide bombing,
and did so again in the case of Ms. Idris, though she was active in his Fatah
faction. Israeli officials argue that Mr. Arafat encourages suicide attacks with
statements like one last week in which he called for "millions of martyrs" to
march on Jerusalem.

The Saudi press has ignored Ms. Idris. Saudi clerics have opposed suicide
bombing. The Lebanese and Syrian media also appear to be silent about her,
according to the survey.

Elsewhere, writers repeatedly declared that Ms. Idris had acted righteously in
reaction to Israeli violence and oppression of Palestinians. Any woman who lost
a brother or father to Israeli attacks and found her life had become valueless
would do the same, one writer said. One of Ms. Idris's brothers, a Fatah leader,
was wanted by the Israelis, but she was not known to have lost relatives in the
conflict.

Some Islamic leaders expressed reservations about women killing themselves for
the Palestinian cause. Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual leader of the Islamic
group Hamas, which has arranged dozens of suicide operations, cautioned that
under Islamic law women should not carry out suicide operations as long as men
were available for the work.

If a woman does go out on a mission for longer than a day and a night, he
warned, she must be accompanied by a male chaperone. He was quoted in the
London-based Al Sharq Al Awsat on Feb. 2.

Sheik Yassin's qualms are consistent with Islamic law, said Martin Kramer, an
Israeli Middle East scholar now visiting at Brandeis University in Waltham,
Mass. "Jihad is a spiritual exercise; it's almost like a form of worship, which
is the prerogative of men," he said. "The jurists are pretty unanimous that a
woman cannot go on holy war."

One militant group sent a female suicide bomber against Israeli forces in
Lebanon. But the Lebanese Islamic group Hezbollah rejected using women for
suicide missions, Mr. Kramer said.

Despite Sheik Yassin's reservations, other Islamic leaders, including officials
of Hamas, have praised Ms. Idris' suicide bombing.

The Israeli police and members of Ms. Idris's family said immediately after her
attack that they were not sure she had intended to blow herself up, rather than
to plant the bomb and escape. But the Fatah-linked group that took
responsibility for the attack described it as a "martyr operation," meaning a
suicide mission, and a senior Israeli military official said an Israeli
investigation had established that she was a suicide bomber.

In the view of Adel Hamuda, editor of the Egyptian opposition weekly Sout al
Uma, Ms. Idris shattered a glass ceiling and proved woman's worth by ending her
life so spectacularly. "Wafa Idris elevated the value of the Arab woman and, in
one moment, and with enviable courage, put an end to the unending debate about
equality between men and women," he wrote.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wafa Idris, the suicide bomber, in an undated family photo.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
REFUGEES (78%); WOMEN (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (75%);
WRITERS (73%); RELIGION (72%); PSYCHIATRY (69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (68%);
POLLS & SURVEYS (68%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%) PALESTINIANS;  BOMBS
AND EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

PERSON: BENNET, JAMES; IDRIS, WAFA; ARAFAT, YASIR

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (71%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (54%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); EGYPT (90%);
JORDAN (79%); GULF STATES (79%); MIDDLE EAST (78%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JERUSALEM

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             807 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MILLIONS IN IRAN RALLY AGAINST U.S.

BYLINE:  By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, Feb. 11


Millions of Iranians galvanized by President Bush's branding of their nation as
part of an "axis of evil" marched in a nationwide pep rally today that harkened
back to the early days of the Islamic revolution, with the American flag burned
for the first time in recent memory.

Amid the dirgelike chants of "Death to America!" marking the revolution's 23rd
anniversary, President Mohammad Khatami tried to display Iran's milder face,
stressing his government's interest in detente.

Ever since Mr. Bush designated Iran part of an international terrorist network
open to American attack, conservatives in Iran have been greatly buoyed, trying
to use a resurgence of disgust with America to quash reform at home, daily
denouncing Washington and exhorting Iranians to follow suit. This has made it
difficult for President Khatami to preserve his reformist agenda of promoting
democracy and rooting out corruption -- an agenda he emphasized today before he,
too, criticized American foreign policy.

"Our policy is a policy of detente," Mr. Khatami told the throng clogging all
avenues to Freedom Square in Tehran. "We intend to have ties and peaceful
relations with all nations in the world," except Israel.

Although less strident than his old guard foes, Mr. Khatami suggested that the
United States was partly to blame for the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. "The
American people," he said, "should ask today how much of the awful and
terrifying incidents of Sept. 11 were due to terrorist acts, and how much of it
was due to the foreign policy adopted by American officials."

The threat to Iran "originates from the fact that America, or at least some of
its officials, see themselves as masters of the world," Mr. Khatami said. "Since
they have power, they want to force the world to obey them and exert pressure on
countries that disobey. Your revolution threatened America's illegitimate
interests in the region, so it is obvious that you are the target of its
animosity."

After each important line, the orderly crowd burst into another round of "Death
to America!" and waved a variety of signs, including one in English quoting the
late revolutionary patriarch, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, saying, "The U.S.
cannot do a damn thing."

The chanting switched occasionally to "Death to Bush!" One man wrapped his white
donkey in a hand-painted American flag with "Bush" written on the side, while a
truck carried a huge poster mounted with five large close-up photographs of the
American president next to five similarly sized pictures of an ape.

In his State of the Union address on Jan. 29, Mr. Bush singled out Iran for
trying to develop weapons of mass destruction and for its support for groups
like Hezbollah that the United States labels terrorists. In addition, Washington
has recently accused Iran of sending weapons to the Palestinians, of trying to
undermine the effort to build a stable central government in Afghanistan and of
helping Al Qaeda members to escape.

In suggesting that the United States review its own foreign policy rather than
cast aspersions, Mr. Khatami specifically cited what he depicted as the plight
of Palestinians denied human rights because of American support for Israel.

The threats expressed by Mr. Bush and other administration officials over the
last two weeks surprised many in Iran. In some ways, they have united the
reformists and the old guard here in criticism of the United States; in other
ways, they have strengthened the hand of the conservatives.

"Any time we face international problems, democracy stops," said Ali Reza
Haghighi, a political science professor. "Now all the discourse must be against
the Americans."

Mr. Khatami worked to keep his reformist agenda alive.

"Some people must not object that we are talking so much about democracy,
religious democracy," he said. "The stress on democracy is the soul of the
Islamic revolution."

Mr. Khatami's supporters had envisioned the efforts to rebuild Afghanistan as a
kind of side door to re-establishing ties with Washington, a prospect that
alarmed the hard-liners who still control many of the levers of power here.

Mr. Bush's remarks thus delighted the old guard, which gleefully presented them
as evidence that the American attitude toward Tehran remained unchanged, no
matter that Iran helped in toppling the Taliban.

The reformists, while critical of America, have tried to suggest that the
actions Mr. Bush criticized were the work of shadowy groups within the Iranian
elite who want to keep the country isolated and autocratic.

Possibly reflecting uncertainty over how to deal with an American-backed
government in Kabul, Afghanistan was barely mentioned at the rally. "The Taliban
were a major bete noire," said one Western diplomat. "But now they see a U.S.
colony with bases developing in their backyard and they don't know how to handle
it."

At the rally, Iranians were generally polite to the few Western reporters in
their midst, saying things like "Welcome to Iran." But there were occasional
outbursts of animosity. "Garbage!" "Pigs!" "Get out of here!" shouted one woman,
while a man veered close to say, "I would like to punch America right in the
mouth!" at which point the crowd edged in, bellowing "Death to America!"

While the size of the Tehran crowd was impossible to estimate authoritatively,
the wide avenues and highways leading to Freedom Square in Tehran were jammed
with hundreds of thousands of people. Iranian television suggested that millions
turned out across the country, showing pictures of jammed streets in every city.
Marchers said they were more galvanized than in years past because they felt
maligned by President Bush.

The turnout also reflected the daily exhortations to attend that accompanied
every news bulletin since Mr. Bush's speech. Employees at various government
ministries said they had been told to go.

The calls to attend did not move everyone. In affluent north Tehran, where one
occasionally hears support for the idea that Mr. Bush should carry through with
his threat to bomb, cars laden with skis headed out of town toward the slopes.

As marchers headed toward the rally, periodically one would step out of the
crowd to offer spontaneous thoughts about the day. "As long as our revolution is
against America, we support it," said one man, wagging his finger. "The day
there is peace between this country and America, the revolution is over."

After 23 years, though, the sense of brooding menace that pervaded marches of
the past had mellowed. This one felt more like a carnival, complete with a gold
coin on offer for the best Uncle Sam effigy.

A yellow banner painted with giant letters in Persian was stretched across one
overpass. In the early days of the Islamic Republic it would have been read as
"America Is the Greatest Satan." But today the lettering helpfully included its
own English translation, reading, "America Is Extremely Naughty."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Mohammad Khatami addressing an anti-American rally in
Tehran yesterday at which he tried to stress his interest in reconciliation.
(Agence France-Presse)(pg. A1); The United States was denounced on placards and
in speeches at a huge rally in Tehran that recalled the early days of the
Islamic revolution. (Reuters)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (82%); HEZBOLLAH (77%);
CONSERVATISM (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); ANNIVERSARIES (76%); FOREIGN
POLICY (75%); HIJACKING (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION (70%); CORRUPTION (68%); RELIGION (57%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  IRAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE;  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA

PERSON: KHATAMI, MOHAMMAD (PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); MACFARQUHAR, NEIL

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (69%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAN (91%)

REGION: IRAN;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW YORK CITY;  TEHRAN (IRAN)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             808 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1153 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

Bush's 'Axis of Evil' Rouses Iranian Throngs
Millions of Iranians marched in a nationwide pep rally prompted by President
Bush's branding of their nation as part of an "axis of evil." President Mohammad
Khatami tried to display Iran's milder face, stressing his government's interest
in reconciliation.   A1

Israel Airstrike on Gaza
F-16 warplanes struck a Palestinian security compound in Gaza City. Israeli
officials hinted it was only a first response to a Palestinian rocket attack on
Sunday that they called an escalation in the conflict.   A14


Trial of Milosevic Begins
Slobodan Milosevic, the former leader of Yugoslavia and its dominant republic,
Serbia, went on trial at The Hague, the first head of state ever to face charges
as grave as genocide and crimes against humanity.   A14

World Briefing   A8

NATION CHALLENGED   A10-12

F.B.I. Issues Warning On Possible Terror Attack
The F.B.I., citing information from detainees at Guantanamo Bay, issued a
security threat alert more specific than any before, warning of the possibility
of an attack as early as today in the United States or Yemen. It included
information on more than a dozen people thought to be involved.   A1

U.S. Defends Drone Attack
Senior military officials defended a missile attack by a C.I.A. drone in
Afghanistan last week, calling the strike "appropriate" and sharply questioning
assertions by Afghans that the missile had killed as many as three peasants who
were merely scrounging for scrap metal.   A10

2 Ex-Security Agents Are Held
The authorities in Pakistan detained two former members of the country's
intelligence service in the hope that they could provide information about the
kidnapping of the American journalist Daniel Pearl.   A10

Sentenced to Death in Jordan
A military court convicted a Jordanian-American, Raed Hijazi, of plotting terror
attacks against American and Israeli tourists in Jordan during New Year's 2000
celebrations, and it sentenced him to death.   A10

U.S. Intelligence Inquiry
The House and Senate intelligence committees plan to begin a joint investigation
into gaps in American intelligence brought to light by the Sept. 11 attacks,
said the chairman of the House panel, Porter J. Goss, Republican of Florida.
A21

Preparing for Bioterror
A consortium of medical institutions in New York State set up a center to
support regional public health agencies in their response to attacks of anthrax,
smallpox, plague and other biological weapons.   A11

Portraits of Grief   A12

EDUCATION

Sept. 11 Enters Curriculum
The terror attacks and their aftermath have become a central theme in college
courses across America.   A11

NATIONAL   A16-21

Bush Encouraging G.O.P. To Kill Campaign Bill
The White House is working through the Republican Party to scuttle campaign
finance legislation that is before the House this week while protecting
President Bush from political fallout, advisers to Mr. Bush said.   A1

Bush in Anti-Democrat Ad
President Bush, who has largely avoided partisan attacks on individual
Democrats, appears in a critical ad running in the states of five Democratic
senators who voted against his economic stimulus package.   A16

Deeper Look at Health Plan
President Bush offered more details on a $300 billion, 10-year health care plan
to overhaul Medicare, provide discount cards for the elderly to buy prescription
drugs and ban insurers from refusing to cover patients with genetic diseases.
A21

California Wildfires
Fierce gusting winds transformed a small brush fire on Sunday into walls of
flame that destroyed 40 structures in Fallbrook, a town in northern San Diego
County, and burned thousands of acres at Camp Pendleton.   A16

Arsonist Without a Cause
A federal judge in Phoenix sentenced Mark Warren Sands, 50, to 18 years in
prison and ordered the out-of-work public relations executive to pay $2.8
million in restitution for fires he set but attributed to eco-terrorists.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Ailing Skyscrapers Are Lingering 9/11 Casualties
Engineers and city planners are trying to determine what to do with an array of
Lower Manhattan buildings that once held 10 million square feet of floor space
but were seriously damaged on Sept. 11. The decisions will have significant
consequences for the city's tax base, downtown revival and architectural
character.   A1

A Child Delays Deportation
A federal judge in Brooklyn has provoked a fierce debate among immigration
experts with a ruling that officials cannot deport an immigrant because he is a
felon unless they first consider the effect on a child he would leave behind.
B1

Justice Dept. Reservations
Walter Timpone's bid to become first assistant to New Jersey's new United States
attorney has bogged down over a meeting he had with Senator Robert G. Torricelli
last summer while representing a man whom prosecutors were trying to recruit to
inform on the senator, Justice Department officials said.   B1

FASHION   B8

ARTS   E1-8

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Decimated Butterfly Population
Researchers said most of the monarchs in the two largest colonies in the
mountains of Mexico -- colonies that make up the entire breeding stock for the
eastern United States and Canada -- died in a storm.   A1

Health & Fitness   F6

OBITUARIES   B7

SPORTS   D1-8

Russians Skate to Gold
Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze took the 11th straight Olympics gold
medal in pairs figure skating for their country, despite a stunning performance
by the Canadians Jamie Sale and David Pelletier.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Global Crossing Inquiry Widens
The federal investigation of Global Crossing, the troubled communications
company, expanded to include the trading of fiber-optic contracts in which Enron
and several other major companies participated.   A1

Fixing the Enron Problem
House Republicans are circulating proposals for post-Enron legislation that they
say will strengthen federal standards for auditor independence and corporate
financial disclosure.   C1

Hand-Holding at Morgan Chase
J.P. Morgan Chase executives have been seeking to reassure employees that the
firm is not at risk despite large loans to Enron, Kmart and Global Crossing,
additional exposure in Argentina and a large portfolio of venture capital
investments that continues to fall in value.   C1

'Friends' Renewal Sets Record
NBC and Warner Brothers television studios concluded the biggest financial deal
ever for a half-hour program, a one-year renewal that will pay each of the
comedy's six stars $1 million for each of 22 episodes.   C1

Slate's Editor Leaving
Michael Kinsley, a pioneer in Web publishing, stepped down as the editor of
Slate, the online magazine owned by Microsoft that he founded.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Poisoning Shays-Meehan; Iran and the "axis of evil"; the unforgiving
edge of sports; a special election.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E4
Public Lives   B2
TV Listings   B7
Weather   C15

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%);
SENTENCING (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(88%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (88%); ANTHRAX (84%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(75%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (75%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (75%); MILITARY
COURTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (71%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (70%);
GENOCIDE (69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (68%); LEGISLATION (65%); CAMPAIGN
FINANCE (65%); CURRICULA (62%); SMALLPOX (60%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
(50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL
(94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); JORDAN (93%); AFGHANISTAN (91%); SERBIA
& MONTENEGRO (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SERBIA (79%); CUBA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             809 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 903 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-16

Trial of Milosevic Opens; Power Cited as His Motive
The chief prosecutor of the United Nations war crimes tribunal accused the
ousted Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic of committing genocide and other
crimes against humanity out of a pure lust for power.   A1

Russian Secrecy Order Voided
Russia's Supreme Court struck down a 1996 military secrecy order and handed
civil-liberties advocates a potentially crucial victory.   A15


Passenger Jet Crashes in Iran
An Iranian airliner crashed in the mountains of western Iran. All 118 aboard
were believed dead.   A11

World Briefing   A10

NATION CHALLENGED   A18-20

U.S. Sharpens Focus on Iraq; Weighs Ouster of Hussein
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said the Bush administration was weighing
options to topple Saddam Hussein, signaling a growing consensus within the
administration over the next phase in the war on terror.   A1

Survivors Recall U.S. Raid
Survivors of an American air raid in Afghanistan on Oct. 21 said the strike
killed only civilians -- 21 people from two families, including 17 children and
3 women -- who were trying to flee their village.   A1

Britain Releases Algerian
Lotfi Raissi, an Algerian pilot held in Britain on charges of having direct
links to the Sept. 11 hijackers, was freed on $14,200 bail after the lawyer
representing the United States said the government no longer intended to press
terrorism charges.   A1

Kidnapping Suspect in Custody
Pakistani officials arrested Ahmed Omar Sheikh, an Islamic militant who is the
main suspect in the kidnapping of the journalist Daniel Pearl, and said he had
told them that the American was alive.   A19

Aid to bin Laden Cited
A senior official of Afghanistan's interim government, Yunus Qanooni, said
elements in Pakistan's intelligence service had helped Osama bin Laden and
Mullah Mohammad Omar evade capture.   A19

Al Qaeda Figures in Warning
Suspected members of Osama bin Laden's network are believed to be among the 17
men identified in the latest terror alert issued by the F.B.I. that warns of an
attack in the United States or Yemen.   A20

Defending Detentions
The Justice Department created a team of lawyers headed by Solicitor General
Theodore B. Olson to defend against any court challenges to the policy of
detaining terror suspects indefinitely on a base in Cuba.   A20

Army Denies Mistreatment
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff rejected accusations that American
forces beat or kicked captives following a raid last month.   A19

Advance in Anthrax Inquiry
A researcher studying the anthrax-mailings case for the F.B.I. said he had
distinguished between stocks of the strain kept in different labs.   A20

NATIONAL   A22-28

G.O.P. Leaders Seek Alternative Campaign Bill
House Republican leaders sought to shape campaign finance legislation that would
fracture a coalition of Democrats and Republicans who support the landmark
Shays-Meehan bill banning large unlimited contributions to the political
parties. Critical votes are expected today.   A1

House Republicans assailed the Shays-Meehan measure as an infringement on
speech.   A26

Backing for Pentagon Budget
Democrats joined Republicans on the House Budget Committee in expressing strong
support for increasing spending for the military, though both sides raised
questions about the long-term costs of some weapons systems in the Bush budget.
A28

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-9

Mayor Looks to Save Money By Paring Uniformed Ranks
Mayor Bloomberg is expected to announce today that he will cut the size of the
39,110-officer police force by trimming the jobs of 1,600 through attrition. The
Fire Department, with 11,500 uniformed members, would lose about 275 firefighter
slots.   A1

New Senator for East Side
Liz Krueger, a Democrat, beat Assemblyman John Ravitz, a Republican, in a
special election for the vacant State Senate seat that was held for more than 30
years by Roy M. Goodman, a Republican.   B1

SPORTS   D1-10

Olympic Skating Inquiry
The International Skating Union said it would investigate whether its rules and
procedures were followed in the controversial awarding of the gold medal in
pairs figure skating to a Russian couple on Monday.   A1

Westminster Dog Show
A miniature poodle, Surrey Spice Girl, was named best in show.   D6

EDUCATION   B9

OBITUARIES   A29

Frank Crosetti
The former Yankee infielder and coach who wore the pinstripes for 37 consecutive
seasons was 91.   A29

FASHION   B10

ARTS   E1-14

Oscar Nominations
"The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring" led all comers, with 13,
including for best picture.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Enron Ex-Chairman's Appeal
Kenneth L. Lay asked the Senate Commerce Committee not to rush to judgment on
his role in Enron's collapse, but declined to discuss it by asserting his Fifth
Amendment right against self-incrimination.   A1

Bristol-ImClone Tensions
ImClone Systems rejected demands by Bristol-Myers Squibb to restructure their $2
billion agreement to develop and market a cancer drug.   C1

No U.S. Inquiry of Explorer
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration denied a request by
Bridgestone/Firestone to investigate Ford Explorer safety defects.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

DINING   F1-12

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: Congress in search of its soul; Afghanistan's civilian casualties;
antibiotics in the poultry industry; a duo deprived.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.
Crossword   E12
TV Listings   E13
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D9

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); LAWYERS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (79%); ARMIES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (76%); COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (76%); AIRCRAFT
PILOTS (76%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (76%); AIRLINES (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (74%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (74%); SUPREME COURTS (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); FAMILY (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(67%); RELIGION (64%); LEGISLATION (61%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (60%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); IRAQ
(79%); CUBA (78%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             812 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Power Drove Milosevic to Crime, Prosecutors Say as Trial Opens

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 12


The chief prosecutor of the United Nations war crimes tribunal today accused the
ousted Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic of committing genocide and other
crimes against humanity out of a pure lust for power that eventually wrecked his
country and killed more than 200,000 people.

Mr. Milosevic, the first head of state to be tried on such grievous charges,
showed little emotion as prosecutors laid out the litany of Europe's horror of
the 1990's: genocide against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
crimes in two other wars in Croatia and Kosovo that tore a still-unsealed hole
in the stability of the Balkans.

Opening the case against Mr. Milosevic, Carla Del Ponte, chief prosecutor for
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, told the panel of
three judges that "today is clearly the most important trial to be conducted in
the tribunal." Excerpts, Page A16.

Against the vast complexity of a trial expected to last for two years, she
suggested that what drove Mr. Milosevic was elemental.

"One must not seek ideals underlying the acts of the accused," Ms. Del Ponte
said. "Beyond the nationalist pretext and the horror of ethnic cleansing, beyond
the grandiloquent rhetoric and the hackneyed phrases he used, the search for
power is what motivated Slobodan Milosevic."

As war rolled across the former Yugoslavia, Ms. Del Ponte said, "some of the
incidents revealed an almost medieval savagery and a calculated cruelty that
went beyond the bounds of legitimate warfare."

Mr. Milosevic, who turned 60 after the new Serbian government delivered him to
the tribunal last summer, said nothing today. He will have a chance to make a
statement in his defense as early as Wednesday.

In earlier court appearances, he has fought to speak; today, he was a model
defendant. He sat quietly, in a plain blue suit, alone except for his briefcase
and two guards at his side.

He did, however, appear engaged, scribbling notes on pieces of paper that he
then folded into quarters. But his face revealed little, except for a moment
when prosecutors played a videotape of a now-famous appearance in Kosovo in 1987
just as he was coming to power in Serbia. A smear of a smile appeared as he
watched his younger, thinner, freer self on a monitor in front of him.

All the talk of history did not impress his lawyers, who are not with him in
court because he has chosen to represent himself.

"I've never heard such infantile and boring speeches," said Jacques Verges, a
French lawyer paid by Mr. Milosevic's supporters.

"He does not recognize the tribunal," Mr. Verges said. "This tribunal is not
independent but a branch of NATO," he added, repeating Mr. Milosevic's claim
that the tribunal is justice dealt out by the same countries, the United States
first among them, that bombed Serb forces in 1995 in Bosnia and in 1999 in
Kosovo.

The scene in the courtroom today -- sealed off from spectators by huge panes of
sound- and bulletproof glass -- gave exactly the impression of an international
effort that the tribunal wants to convey: translations in four different
languages buzzed in headsets, in proceedings overseen by the judges, Richard May
of Britain, Patrick Robinson of Jamaica and O-Gon Kwon of South Korea.

Some legal experts have speculated that it will not be easy to link atrocities
on the ground to the presidential seat in Belgrade, the Serbian capital. They
say Mr. Milosevic, often described by diplomats who negotiated with him as a
brilliant tactician, probably insulated himself from direct evidence with a raft
of official orders against war crimes.

But finally today, the prosecution made clear the outlines of its strategy, held
in secrecy in nearly three years of preparation. Ms. Del Ponte disclosed that
she would rely in part on the testimony of close associates of Mr. Milosevic to
prove he was the driving force behind the killing of civilians and other
atrocities.

"The witnesses must find in themselves the individual courage to give their
accounts in public," she said, in a statement that could suggest either that
close associates would appear or that, as many news reports have it, they are
still reluctant to do so.

By calling members of Mr. Milosevic's inner circle, Ms. Del Ponte apparently
intends to show what she contends was his real aim: a conspiracy to create a
nation patched together from land occupied by Serbs in Croatia, Bosnia and
Serbia.

Ms. Del Ponte indicated that she would argue that Mr. Milosevic's spoken words
-- and the way subordinates interpreted them -- showed the intent to drive out
or kill non-Serbs in three wars devised to seize and occupy that territory.

The tribunal's law provides that a superior is guilty of the acts of
subordinates if he "knew or had reason to know" about crimes and he "failed to
take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or punish the
perpetrators."

The task of making that initial case fell to the lead prosecutor, Geoffrey Nice,
a British barrister who spoke for four hours today.

Using documents, photographs, videotapes and intercepted telephone
conversations, he meticulously drew connections between the Serbian security
forces and government over which Mr. Milosevic presided and the Serbs fighting
in Croatia and Bosnia. He contended that Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
leader also charged with genocide and other war crimes but still free, was
"deferential" to Mr. Milosevic and even called him "boss."

More substantially, Mr. Nice sought to show financial and organizational links
between the Yugoslav government and military and Serb separatists elsewhere. In
an outline of the indictment on the 1991 war in Croatia, he discussed at length
Mr. Milosevic's ties to Arkan, the nom de guerre for a slain paramilitary leader
accused of some of the worst atrocities in both Croatia and Bosnia.

Mr. Nice produced a document showing that air raids by the Yugoslav military,
which was under Serbian control, were called after Arkan was missing in fighting
in Vukovar in Croatia in 1991.

"Was Serbia not involved in this?" he asked. "Impossible. If Serbia was
involved, who was it, of course? This accused," he said, referring to Mr.
Milosevic.

Mr. Nice suggested that Mr. Milosevic was not a raving madman, but a calculating
opportunist who manipulated Serb nationalism and the fears of Serbs as
Yugoslavia crumbled in the early 1990's. He called him "a clever and ambitious
man, it will be revealed, not a racist in the sense of someone determined to
live only with fellow Serbs, not an idealist, someone concerned more, if not
exclusively, with the maintenance of personal power."

Mr. Nice completed roughly half his opening statement today, in outlines of the
wars in Croatia and Bosnia. He and another prosecutor are expected to end their
presentation on Wednesday with the 1999 war in Kosovo, the war that will
dominate the first part of the trial.

The scene around the courthouse in this Dutch city was calm. But victims of the
Yugoslav wars arrived to rally or attend the trial, among them Fadila
Nedzirevic, a Bosnian Muslim from Prijedor in northwest Bosnia, site of some of
the most notorious Serb detention camps.

"In my family, three people were killed as they stepped outside the house," said
Mrs. Nedzirevic, who now lives in Berlin.

Like many others, she said real justice would not come until Mr. Karadzic, the
Bosnian Serb leader, and Ratko Mladic, the top Bosnian Serb military chief, were
also finally arrested. "I came here to ask for Karadzic and Mladic," she said.
"Milosevic is not enough."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Slobodan Milosevic as the case against him was opened
yesterday. (APTN)(pg. A1); The opening yesterday of the war crimes trial of
Slobodan Milosevic at The Hague was broadcast live in the former Yugoslavia. The
television audience included viewers in Belgrade, Serbia's capital, at a cafe,
left, and a television shop, center. Bosnian Muslims, right, survivors of the
Srebrenica massacre of 1995, watched at their home in Tuzla, Bosnia. (Associated
Press); (Associated Press); (Reuters)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES
(91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
LAWYERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
RELIGION (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  ISLAM;
RECORDINGS (VIDEO);  TELEPHONES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (56%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (UN) (WORLD COURT)

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; NICE, GEOFFREY; DEL PONTE, CARLA; FISHER, IAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);
KOSOVO (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA (92%); EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  CROATIA;  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             813 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE COURTS;
Special Legal Team Formed To Handle Detainee Suits

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


The Justice Department has created a special team of lawyers headed by Solicitor
General Theodore B. Olson to oversee all court challenges to the government's
policy of detaining terrorism suspects indefinitely on an American military base
in Cuba, administration officials said today.

The move, they said, reflected the determination of Attorney General John
Ashcroft to use the government's most experienced lawyers to block any legal
challenge that might force changes in the policy, which has been criticized by
civil liberties groups and some constitutional scholars.

Under the arrangement, federal prosecutors based outside Washington, who would
normally handle the cases if they arose in their jurisdictions, will refer them
directly to Mr. Olson's team.

"The feeling was we needed to do this because the stakes are so high," said a
department official in Washington, speaking on condition of anonymity. "These
are national security issues. Fortunately, these are the sorts of issues that
come up only every third generation or so."

Justice Department lawyers based in Washington are expected to travel around the
country to handle the court challenges as they are filed on behalf of the
Taliban and Qaeda prisoners being held at the military base at Guantanamo Bay.

The first of the legal challenges is pending at a federal courthouse in Los
Angeles, brought on behalf of the Guantanamo Bay captives by a coalition of
civil liberties and religious groups.

Civil liberties groups have accused the Bush administration of ignoring
fundamental due process rights for the detainees and of holding them in inhumane
conditions.

The administration has insisted that it is acting in accordance with
international law, that it is treating the prisoners humanely and that a 1950
Supreme Court decision involving German prisoners seized at the end of World War
II makes clear that American civilian courts do not have jurisdiction over
foreign prisoners like those now being held in Cuba.

The creation of Mr. Olson's legal team is almost certain to result in friction
with United States attorneys around the country, who normally represent the
Justice Department in their communities. Some have already complained that Mr.
Ashcroft has centralized too much authority in Washington since the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks.

Officials said the choice of Mr. Olson was a natural one, since as the Justice
Department's chief advocate before the Supreme Court, he also serves as one of
the department's key legal strategists.

Mr. Olson also has a personal connection to the issue; his wife, Barbara, a
lawyer and television commentator, died on the American Airlines jet that
crashed into the Pentagon on Sept. 11.

Justice Department officials said the idea of a special Washington-based team to
handle the court challenges was first discussed last month. Since then, they
said, a dozen department lawyers have been assigned to the team, along with
lawyers from the State Department and the Pentagon.

"The idea was to put together a team that could come up with a coordinated
response on these suits as they arise, and they may arise on relatively tight
deadlines," one official said. "There certainly are going to be some novel
arguments raised that we haven't dealt with before. And any time you face a
novel argument, you need some creative thinking."

The judge in the Los Angeles court case, A. Howard Metz, has already said he has
"grave doubts" about whether he has jurisdiction over the prisoners held at
Guantanamo Bay.

In court filings last week, Justice Department lawyers cited the 1950 Supreme
Court decision, which held that the German prisoners could not file habeas
corpus petitions in American courts because they had been taken to an
American-run prison in occupied Germany and had been held outside sovereign
territory of the United States.

The next hearing in the Los Angeles case is scheduled for Thursday, and the
Justice Department will be represented by Paul D. Clement, Mr. Olson's principal
deputy in Washington.

The Bush administration announced last week that it decided that the Geneva
Convention applied to Taliban prisoners held in Cuba but not to detainees
belonging to Al Qaeda. It said that although the United States did not recognize
the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan, Afghanistan was still a
party to the convention. Al Qaeda, it said, is an international terrorist group,
not a party to the treaty and therefore undeserving of inclusion.

The announcement means that the Taliban prisoners will have legal rights that
will be denied to the Qaeda members. Both groups have been denied
prisoner-of-war status, which allows the United States to try them before
military tribunals.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); MILITARY BASES
(77%); HIJACKING (77%); TALIBAN (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); WORLD WAR II (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(72%); NAVIES (72%); APPEALS (63%); AIRLINES (63%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (60%);
RELIGION (50%) WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
TERRORISM

COMPANY: AMERICAN AIRLINES INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (58%)

PERSON: OLSON, THEODORE B (SOLICITOR GEN); SHENON, PHILIP

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); GERMANY (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL
BASE (CUBA)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             815 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: JUSTICE;
Antiterror Steps Aggressive but Balanced, U.S. Official Says

BYLINE:  By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 664 words


A top Justice Department official offered a spirited defense of the Bush
administration's antiterrorism measures yesterday, saying they were "aggressive
but, at the end of the day, fair and balanced."

The official, Michael Chertoff, chief of the criminal division, said "the
premise of everything we have done in the struggle against terrorism has been to
operate within the Constitution even as we adapt to the new circumstances and
the new priorities."

Addressing a meeting of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Mr.
Chertoff acknowledged that the policy of monitoring prisoners' conversations
with their lawyers might have had "some slight chilling effect," but he said the
policy would apply only in a few cases and only after careful consideration.

He said that it was used when authorities suspected that lawyers might be used,
perhaps unwittingly, to pass information to outsiders, and that it would affect
only a dozen convicted terrorists, who are already subjected to restrictive
prison conditions. He added that authorities were allowed to use information
obtained through the monitoring only to forestall future acts of terrorism, not
for prosecution.

Mr. Chertoff said the government's aggressive use of immigration laws and other
criminal laws to hold suspects -- a practice some officials have called the
"spitting on the sidewalk" approach to law enforcement -- was a valid strategy,
given that preventing terrorism was the department's No. 1 priority.

"Our philosophy is very simple," Mr. Chertoff said. "If you have people that we
have reason to believe are engaged in terrorism or aiding and abetting
terrorism, and they are committing another crime, we will prosecute that crime,
even if it is normally the kind of crime that you would think is not worthy of
priority treatment. I don't think that's unfair, because I don't think that you
have a right to commit a federal crime and not be prosecuted for it."

Mr. Chertoff said the tactics helped in "stirring up" terrorist support
networks. "Where we can go do so legally and constitutionally," he said, "we are
engaged in exactly what we've set out to engage in -- disruption."

He cited Attorney General John Ashcroft's comment, "I want you to think outside
the box, but I don't want you to think outside the Constitution."

Mr. Chertoff, a former United States attorney in New Jersey, came under pointed
questioning by some of those in the audience, and afterward, one, Norman Siegel,
the former executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union who ran
unsuccessfully last year for New York City public advocate, said he was
unsatisfied with Mr. Chertoff's responses.

"They say they want to be out of the box," Mr. Siegel said. "They're out of the
ballpark here."

Mr. Chertoff conceded that the authorities were not always the ones to prevent
an act of terrorism. He cited the case of Richard C. Reid, who has been accused
of slipping by airport guards in Paris and boarding a plane to the United States
with explosives in his shoe. "It took the vigilance of someone who smelled smoke
on the plane, a match, the last line of defense, before we actually prevented a
terrorist act from taking place," Mr. Chertoff said.

He condemned racial profiling as wrong and ineffective, but said investigators
had to be able to examine suspicious patterns of behavior, such as travel to
Afghanistan.

Mr. Chertoff said the proposed military tribunals made sense, given the hundreds
of prisoners now being held at the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba, and even
if only a "significant minority" of them underwent war crimes trials.

"Would we really want to import those people into the Metropolitan Correctional
Center in New York or in other parts of the country?" he asked. "Would we really
want to try 10 or 15 or 20 terrorist cases a year -- one after the other after
the other -- in federal district courts with juries, with judges who would have
to have protection, perhaps for the rest of their lives?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL LAW
(78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); EXECUTIVES (72%); IMMIGRATION LAW (66%);
IMMIGRATION (51%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: MICHAEL CHERTOFF (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             818 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Vows a Parade of Witnesses, Including Clinton

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER and MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 15


Sweeping away his last sliver of indifference to his war crimes trial, Slobodan
Milosevic announced today that he would call present and past world leaders,
including former President Bill Clinton, to the stand.

Now engaging actively with a tribunal he once affected to spurn, he said he also
planned personally to cross-examine witnesses, including those who were raped,
tortured or had their families killed, purportedly by Serbs.

Jutting out his chin, the former Yugoslav leader still addressed the chief
judge, Richard May, as "Mister May." But he set aside his disdain for the bench
in a brief polite exchange in English. This afternoon, Judge May granted Mr.
Milosevic -- who had complained all morning about being rushed -- an extension
of his opening statement, in its second day today, until "lunch time" on Monday.

"I understand that is up to oneo'clock?" Mr. Milosevic, who has spoken in
Serbian, asked in English. "O.K. Thank you." He then moved on without argument,
promising to slow his flood of words to ease the burden on the interpreters.

In its fifth year of trials, the International War Crimes Tribunal is now facing
a position without precedent: it has to manage a defendant who is not only
representing himself without lawyers, but seems likely to do so with full-bore
focus during a trial expected to last two years.

Today, Mr. Milosevic, speaking for over four hours, continued to outline that
defense. He did so by switching among at least three roles: the fighter against
what he says is a stacked trial; the humanist and pacifist who spoke in
reverence about the dead, even ethnic Albanian civilians; the professor
explaining how the Balkans have been battered by history.  His oratory was as
harsh as on the first day of his opening statement, on Thursday: He accused the
Clinton administration of "genocide" against Serbs and asked NATO leaders, who
bombed Yugoslavia for 78 days in 1999, how they confronted their consciences.

"It constitutes a crime," he said, again showing dozens of photographs of
civilians torn to pieces and turned to ash by NATO bombs. "Those who kill
children while they sleep can hardly sleep peacefully themselves if they are
human at all, if they have any moral sense."

Mr. Milosevic is himself charged, in essence, with being the man most
responsible for more than 200,000 deaths in wars in Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina
and Kosovo, the southern province of Serbia, during the 1990's. The first head
of state to be charged with crimes so grave, he has been indicted for genocide
against Bosnian Muslims, as well as crimes against humanity and other offenses.

Since his arrest in June, Mr. Milosevic has questioned the legality of the
court, claiming that he refused to appoint defense lawyers as a way of negating
the court's authority.

But today, after watching him speak for two days, legal experts saw him as
deeply immersed in the trial, even if his exposes amounted to a political
offensive against NATO and its "accomplice," the tribunal, rather than a legal
defense.

"He has now implicitly recognized the court," said Avril McDonald, a lawyer at
the Asser Institute for International Law here and a former official of the
tribunal. "He is addressing it. He still calls Judge May 'Mr. May' as a way to
avoid his authority." But, she said: "He's following the process and has engaged
in it, and he's going to ask the help of the court to subpoena witnesses."

Today, Mr. Milosevic named some of those witnesses, all of whom were involved
with negotiations in the three wars but few of whom may appear. They include:
former President Clinton; Madeleine K. Albright, the former American secretary
of state; Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general; Gerhard Schroder,
the German prime minister, and his predecessor, Helmut Kohl; Klaus Kinkel, the
former German foreign minister; and Rudolf Scharping, the German defense
minister. On Thursday, he said he would call President Jacques Chirac of France.

He also said he would cross-examine the prosecution's witnesses, who are
scheduled to begin testifying in the Kosovo portion of the trial early next
week. Some of the first witnesses are expected to describe how Serb forces, who
prosecutors say were under Mr. Milosevic's ultimate command, killed their
relatives.

The tenor of the trial will then change. After the opening statements, during
which both sides are permitted to contend what they please, the judges will
permit little leeway aside from what is relevant to each witness's testimony.

"It's up to the judges to maintain the dignity of the proceedings, and they
will," said Jim Landale, the spokesman for the tribunal.

Still, there is some degree of uncertainty since the tribunal has never had a
defendant act without a lawyer before, and has never had one with Mr.
Milosevic's high profile. "It will be a very tricky process, both for him and
for the judges," said a judge who has served at the tribunal. "It will be a
unique trial."

In court today, Mr. Milosevic continued the assault on NATO that he began on
Thursday, this time accusing President Clinton of "genocide" for what he said
was deliberately selecting civilians as targets in the bombing of Kosovo and
Serbia. Western leaders say the bombing was meant to force Mr. Milosevic's army
to end atrocities against the Kosovar Albanians.

"What no predecessor did before him, Clinton did," Mr. Milosevic said.

"He proclaimed genocide as a state policy. He said there would be no victims on
their side. He proclaimed the destruction of an independent and sovereign state
-- 776 times weaker, 10,000 kilometers away from America as a target for a war
without casualties."

In one of several historical accounts, he warned against the dangers of Albanian
nationalism and the Albanian "mafia" -- calling them traders in drugs, white
slaves and weapons -- with whom he said the West had sided.

He asked why NATO leaders were not charged with war crimes because they were in
charge in Kosovo at a time when tens of thousands of Serbs were forced from
their homes by Albanians after Mr. Milosevic surrendered in June 1999.

He also said that he had issued orders and instituted new laws in 1999 that
prohibited war crimes and the formation of paramilitary units.  He said he gave
strict orders to arrest and disarm the paramilitary units because they "usually
consisted of looters, not patriots."

There were orders against committing war crimes against civilians, he said,
"orders against murder, rape, robbery, grave armed robbery." He held up texts,
presumably of the orders, saying they would be made available to the court. "So
what more can you expect from a supreme commander or head of state?"

And again and again, he appeared to address Serbs back at home, telling the
judges at one point that "you are actually holding a trial of the whole country
here."

"My advantage is that I can look anyone in the eye," he said. "I defended my
country honorably and chivalrously. I can say that the Yugoslav Army and police
also conducted themselves honorably and chivalrously. They did not stain their
name in any way."

The seat of chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, remained empty today. She was in
the Bosnian town of Banja Luka, demanding that Bosnian Serb authorities arrest
Radovan Karadzic, the fugitive wartime leader who has been indicted for
genocide.

"For sure we know that Karadzic is here," she said. After meeting with the
Bosnian Serb authorities, she said their lack of cooperation had left her
"unsatisfied and frustrated."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A guard stood by yesterday during Slobodan Milosevic's war
crimes trial. The former Yugoslav leader defended himself for more than four
hours. (Pool photo by Fred Ernst)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); TESTIMONY (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); JUDGES (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
US PRESIDENTS (77%); ARRESTS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); RELIGION
(50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%) FISHER, IAN; SIMONS, MARLISE; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             824 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Budget Gap Aside, Security Is Priority

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL KOLBER

SECTION: Section 14CN; Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 831 words


IT has been five months since the Sept. 11 attack on the World Trade Center, but
this month's opening of the legislative session has been the first opportunity
for Connecticut lawmakers to introduce legislation inspired by those events.
Lawmakers have lost no time in putting security spending and tougher criminal
penalties near the top of their agenda.

Even in a short session that will be dominated by negotiations to close the $650
million budget gap, leaders from both parties proposed new spending this month
to provide for terror victims' families and to boost the state's security.

Gov. John G. Rowland asked legislators in his Feb. 6 budget address to make the
first bill that reaches his desk one that will provide full scholarships at any
Connecticut public university to the children of World Trade Center victims.

In January and again in his budget address, Mr. Rowland, a Republican who will
likely seek re-election this fall, proposed measures to increase the state
penalties for terrorism.

Mr. Rowland would make acts of terrorism in which emergency responders were
killed a capital felony and create new penalties for possession of weapons of
mass destruction. Also, under the governor's proposals, background checks would
be required for flight-school students and the permissible uses of federal wire
taps in state terrorism prosecutions would be expanded.

"Sept. 11 changed the way we must address threats to our freedoms," Mr. Rowland
said in his budget address. "Police and prosecutors need new laws to meet those
threats."

Democrats and civil libertarians have cautiously welcomed the governor's
proposals.

Teresa Younger, the executive director of the Connecticut Civil Liberties Union,
said she was concerned that since the legislative session will be so focused on
balancing the budget, legislators might too hastily pass overly broad
anti-terrorism bills. She said legislators need to carefully define "terrorism"
and "weapons of mass destruction" to prevent the new laws from infringing civil
rights.

"We are asking all the legislators to make sure that they're necessary and
effective," Ms. Younger said.

Some legislators were worried the governor's proposals duplicate existing
federal anti-terrorism laws.

"I'm concerned about the expansion of wiretapping and the subpoenapowers," said
State Senator George C. Jepsen, a Democratic gubernatorial candidate. "I think
we ought to tread with great care. The federal government has enormous
capability in the those areas and more sophistication with how to use it."

Mr. Jepsen said he was concerned that the governor had left the state's small
airports too laxly protected.

The governor would also increase penalties for tampering with the state water
supplies, although following the terrorist attacks many water authorities had
increased security around reservoirs and pipelines.

"We believe we've taken the appropriate steps to maintain the safety of our
water supply," said Matt Nozzolio of the Metropolitan District Commission, which
supplies water to 400,000 people in the central Connecticut.

"The measure proposed by the governor reflects the seriousness and the
importance of our water supply."

Nevertheless, Mr. Nozzolio said the water supply appeared to be an unlikely
terrorist target.

The governor also proposed a $250,000 statewide emergency account to pay for
unexpected relief efforts, a $500,000 account to aid with training of public
safety personnel and the addition of 14 positions to the Department of Public
Health's disaster medical response team.

In the wake of the November anthrax death of Ottilie Lundgren, a 94-year-old
Oxford woman, Senate President Pro Tempore Kevin B. Sullivan, a Democrat, said
the new public health positions were "likely to find strong response" in the
Legislature, but that all new spending will face tough scrutiny given the
state's current fiscal climate.

The Senate Democrats are pushing for the formation of a statewide emergency
response commission to coordinate local hospital and emergency services and for
the compilation of a statewide D.N.A. database.

Some towns have begun to implement a reverse 911 system that allows police and
fire departments to notify neighborhoods of emergencies by telephone and the
Senate Democrats also hope to create a statewide system in this session.

Mr. Sullivan said he, too, was concerned that the Legislature not hastily
infringe civil liberties.

"In every moment of insecurity there has been a not too pretty underside of that
time," Mr. Sullivan said. "You have to be mindful when you write protective
legislation that you do not undo the thing you are trying to protect."

But Mr. Sullivan said he expects the governor's proposals, which are modeled on
recently passed New York legislation, to pose few such problems.

"I expect most of it will find its way into the law," Mr. Sullivan said.  "It
might be one of those things where the governor and legislators, Republicans and
Democrats, can find common ground fairly quickly."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. John G. Rowland wants a bill that will give scholarships at
any public state university to children of World Trade Center victims.
(Associated Press)(pg. 9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BUDGETS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); BUDGET
DEFICITS (90%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE
(90%); SCHOOL BUDGETS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (89%); GOVERNORS
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); ELECTIONS (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (78%); HIJACKING
(78%); CAPITAL CRIMES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (77%); AIRPORTS (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%);
FELONIES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); CHILDREN (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS (74%); WATER SUPPLY
UTILITIES (74%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (74%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (72%);
EXECUTIVES (71%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (69%); AIRLINES (66%); FLIGHT SCHOOLS (66%); WIRETAPPING (65%); ENERGY &
UTILITY LAW (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES;  SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS;  LAW AND
LEGISLATION;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL WARFARE

PERSON: ROWLAND, JOHN G (GOV); KOLBER, MICHAEL

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             826 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Barbarians at the Gates

BYLINE:  By Michael Ignatieff;  Michael Ignatieff is the Carr professor of human
rights practice at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1424 words


THE LESSONS OF TERROR
A History of Warfare Against Civilians: Why It Has Always Failed
and Why It Will Fail Again.
By Caleb Carr.
272 pp. New York:
Random House. $19.95.

CALEB CARR, a popular novelist and a military historian, makes two arguments in
"The Lessons of Terror." The first is that punitive warfare by states against
civilians amounts to terrorism. The second is that terrorism never works. Both
of these arguments strike me as wrong.

War against civilians has been a feature of the Western military tradition since
the Romans razed Carthage. Carr argues that indiscriminate war against the
Carthaginians, and then against the barbarians, helped bring about Rome's
downfall. The slaughter of civilians, which was supposed to terrify and subdue,
only incited further rebellion and, besides, taught the barbarians to be
indiscriminate in return. If Carr were saying only that warfare against
civilians has perverse consequences, he would be pointing out something worth
remembering. If he were saying only that when empires teach barbarians to be
indiscriminate, they end up being victims of barbarism themselves, no one could
object.

The problem is that Carr persists in equating war against civilians with
terrorism, and this leads to absurdity. Sherman's march through Georgia during
the Civil War becomes terrorism. So does Jimmy Doolittle's raid on Tokyo and
Nixon and Kissinger's bombing of Cambodia. The problem here is not to absolve
Sherman, Doolittle or Nixon of responsibility for wreaking havoc on civilians.
The problem is that it confuses everything to call them terrorists. Carr makes
no distinction between conventional, if barbaric, acts of war committed by a
state army under regular command, as part of a formally declared campaign to
defeat another state, and violence against civilians by nonstate actors with the
aim not of military victory but of causing panic or inflicting revenge.

Carr has been misled, it seems to me, by what he calls "Vattel's law." Emmerich
de Vattel, a Swiss pastor and jurist, published "The Law of Nations" in 1758. In
it, he made the claim that in determining whether a war is just, it is as
important to assess how combatants are actually fighting as it is to assess what
they are fighting for. Just causes can be betrayed by unjust behavior on the
battlefield, like killing civilians or prisoners, or employing disproportionate
force to attain an objective.

To use the terms of art, Vattel was distinguishing between jus ad bellum and jus
in bello. The former refers to the grounds that justify going to war, the latter
to the rules that define just conduct of hostilities. But the two, while
distinct, need to be considered together. Intentions matter in judging
consequences. Carr makes the valid claim that good causes can be undermined by
the use of barbarous means. He then goes on to argue, mistakenly, that those who
use such means are terrorists. But this ignores intentions and contexts. Sherman
used barbarous means in the context of a just intention, to bring the Civil War
to a speedy conclusion. He was a serving officer of the United States, not an
irregular, like the abolitionist John Brown, whose raids on slaveholders should
properly be counted as acts of terror.

All the people slaughtered by Sherman and by Brown are dead, and aggrieved
descendants may not care whether they were killed by terrorists or armies
pursuing a just cause by unjust means. Yet these distinctions matter intensely.
There are those who equate the civilians killed by American bombing in
Afghanistan with the civilians killed in the World Trade Center. All are dead,
but death does not create any moral equivalency among them. In one case,
civilians were massacred deliberately, and without warning, during a time of
peace, by a nonuniformed group whose intention was to spread terror. In the
other case, civilians were killed during an exercise of legitimate self-defense
by a state, in response to an act of war, and were killed unintentionally
despite good-faith efforts, by targeteers and weaponeers, to avoid doing so.

Carr's blurring of the distinction between terror and war against civilians
works against his own intentions. He is in favor of an ethically disciplined
military response to the atrocities of Sept. 11. He makes a convincing case that
any indiscriminate response to terror only fosters additional terror. But by
failing to distinguish clearly between terrorism and acts of war, he plays into
the hands of those who argue that since America has been indiscriminate in the
past -- for example, in its bombing of civilians in Tokyo, Nagasaki and
Hiroshima -- it is hypocritical for Americans to be shocked when indiscriminate
means are used against them. There are two errors here, the first being that
past brutality by one state justifies retaliatory brutality by others; the
second, that American brutality in winning just wars is equivalent to terrorist
brutality in an unjust cause.

Because Carr blurs the distinction between terror and brutality, he also
confuses two distinct "lessons." The first is that terror never pays. The second
is that counterterrorist brutality never pays.

The second, it seems to me, is truer than the first. The experience of the
French in Algeria illustrates both cases. In their campaign to secure
independence from France, the Algerian National Liberation Front resorted to
terror. The ensuing nightmare is memorably captured in Gillo Pontecorvo's great
film "The Battle of Algiers." As cafes and bus stations were bombed in order to
drive the French out of Algeria, the French Army responded with raids, blanket
arrests, bombing and torture. In this infernal cycle, the French disgraced
themselves and finally lost even the will to disgrace themselves further. The
F.L.N., fighting for their land, eventually triumphed. The message of Algeria
hardly confirms that terror never works. It supports the different point that
indiscriminately brutal acts of counterterror rarely succeed.

As for the futility of terrorism itself, who could say with confidence that
Jewish terrorism -- the assassination of Lord Moyne and then of Count
Bernadotte, the bombing of the King David Hotel, followed by selective massacres
in a few Palestinian villages in order to secure the flight of all Palestinians
-- did not succeed in dislodging the British and consolidating Jewish control of
the new state? Though terror alone did not create the state of Israel -- the
moral legitimacy of the claim of the Holocaust survivors counted even more --
terror was instrumental, and terror worked.

If terror works, then the question becomes: for how long? Carr rightly raises
the question of whether the Jewish success with terror did not provide Israel's
enemies with a deadly example. "Arab anger had bred violence and murder in
Palestine," Carr writes, "but it was the Jews who brought organized,
paramilitary terror into the region." Carr adds that if Jews taught Palestinians
the political uses of terror, they taught them the wrong lesson. The right
lesson is restraint. As long as the Palestinians confined themselves to civil
disobedience, strikes and throwing stones at Israeli soldiers, they steadily
gained international support and even begrudging Israeli willingness to enter
into negotiations. When the struggle was taken over by suicide bombers, and the
targets changed from military command posts to Jerusalem discotheques, the
Palestinian cause lost internal support, international legitimacy and diplomatic
traction.

The paradox Carr advances is that both sides -- insurgent groups and resisting
states -- are more likely to win when they exercise restraint, that is, when
they battle each other directly rather than slaughtering the civilians in
between. Guerrilla groups, who depend for their food and shelter on their own
civilians, understand this paradox well. But, as Carr fails to see, when one
side -- the state -- has all the power, and the other side has only the shock
value of violence to compensate for its military weakness, terror soon begins to
pay better than restraint.

Radical asymmetries of power, more than moral barbarity alone, are what make
terror seem like a logical strategy for the weak. The barbarians who attacked
the World Trade Center knew, unfortunately, that violence is the force
multiplier of the weak. Now the challenge for the strong is to acknowledge that
the same is not true for them. The strong must understand -- and here Carr is
surely right -- that for them restraint is the precondition for victory.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: LESSONS OF TERROR, THE (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Heath Hinegardner)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAW OF WAR
(89%); HISTORY (78%); ARMIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES
(77%); LITERATURE (77%); WRITERS (77%); BOMBINGS (73%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;
REVIEWS;  TERRORISM

PERSON: IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL; CARR, CALEB

CITY: ROME, GA, USA (71%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (71%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             829 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
Suit to Be Filed on Behalf Of Three Detainees in Cuba

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


Families of a 26-year-old Australian man and a pair of young British citizens
captured with fighters for Al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and now held
at an American military base in Cuba are about to go to court in Washington to
demand the men's freedom, lawyers involved with their court challenge said
today.

The lawsuit, which is expected to be filed Tuesday in federal court here, would
be the first brought on behalf of individual prisoners among the approximately
300 captives at the base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The lawyers say that their clients -- Muslims who made their way from their home
countries to Afghanistan and were reportedly apprehended as they fought
alongside Al Qaeda or the Taliban -- are not terrorists and that their detention
is a fundamental violation of the due process guarantees of the Constitution.

While acknowledging that the national mood is not sympathetic to the rights of
terrorism suspects, the lawyers say they are optimistic that the courts will
still find the detentions to be illegal, an argument supported by civil rights
groups and some constitutional scholars. The Bush administration has insisted
that the detentions are legal and humane.

The three men are David Hicks of Adelaide, Australia, and Asif Iqbal, 20, and
Shafiq Rasul, 24, both from the central British city of Tipton. The lawyers said
they were asked to file the lawsuit by the men's families. The lawyers said the
three men might have have no knowledge that it was being filed on their behalf
this week since prisoners at Guantanamo Bay are not allowed access to their
families or to lawyers.

"This is beyond anything the United States has ever attempted," said Joseph
Margulies, a Minneapolis lawyer who is part of the legal team. "There's never
been a situation in which the United States has taken the position that --
without any due process at all -- a person can be held indefinitely, without
being notified of the charges they face, without access to counsel."

Michael Ratner of the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York, which is
also representing the three men, said the lawyers took hope from Supreme Court
decisions in recent years that upheld due process rights for detained refugees
from Cuba, Haiti and other countries. "The government has just gone too far
here," he said.

The Justice Department and the Pentagon have been anticipating a wave of court
challenges brought on behalf of Qaeda and Taliban prisoners in Cuba. Last week,
Justice Department officials disclosed that Attorney General John Aschroft had
created a special team of lawyers led by Solicitor General Theodore B. Olson to
handle any court challenges.

The department and the Pentagon had no comment today on the pending lawsuit,
although they have repeatedly defended the legality of the detention plan. In
responding to the new lawsuit and others like it, government lawyers are
expected to cite a 1950 Supreme Court ruling that held that foreign prisoners do
not have the right of court review in the United States if they are not being
held on American soil.

Last month, civil rights advocates in Los Angeles brought suit there against the
government, charging that the detentions in Cuba were illegal. But the lawyers
in that case did not represent specific prisoners, and a judge there said he had
grave doubts that his court had any jurisdiction in the matter.

The lawyers in Washington say they have a much stronger case because they
represent specific detainees who are known to be held in Cuba and because there
is little question about the jurisdiction of courts in the nation's capital to
handle a case brought against the White House and the Pentagon. The named
defendants in the suit are expected to include President Bush and Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

Mr. Hicks, Mr. Iqbal and Mr. Rasul were among the first prisoners moved from
Afghanistan to Guantanamo Bay after part the base was converted into a prison
for Qaeda and Taliban prisoners who were suspected of being especially dangerous
or who were thought likely to have valuable intelligence information.

American officials say Mr. Hicks has been of special concern. After he was
transferred to Cuba last month, they said, Mr. Hicks threatened his American
captors, once yelling out that he had made it a goal to kill an American
soldier. During the flight to Cuba, they said, Mr. Hicks broke free of his
restraints and had to be subdued by military guards.

In a draft of the lawsuit, lawyers said they believed that Mr. Hicks "had no
involvement, direct or indirect, in either the terrorist attacks on the United
States on Sept. 11, 2001, or any act of international terrorism attributed by
the United States to Al Qaeda or any terrorist groups."

The families of Mr. Iqbal and Mr. Rasul also deny that the two men had any
involvement in terrorism. Mr. Iqbal reportedly told his family that he was going
to Pakistan to meet his father and to prepare for an arranged marriage. The
family of Mr. Rasul also thought he was in Pakistan, studying software
engineering.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Hicks, an Australian whose family is protesting his
detention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); LAWYERS (91%);
LITIGATION (91%); TALIBAN (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DUE PROCESS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); SUPREME COURTS
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); REFUGEES (76%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL
(76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); NAVIES (72%); RELIGION (55%) UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: ;HICKS, DAVID; IQBAL, ASIF; RASUL, SHAFIQ

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); ADELAIDE, AUSTRALIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
AUSTRALIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); AUSTRALIA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(93%); CUBA (92%); HAITI (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  WASHINGTON (DC);  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             830 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DETAINEES;
U.S. Fighting Suit for Names of New Jersey Sept. 11 Inmates

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Feb. 18


With the Department of Justice already fighting a federal suit in Washington by
civil libertarians seeking the names of immigrants detained after Sept. 11, the
United States attorney's office here now says it will help oppose a similar suit
in state court against two county jails housing detainees.

In December, after the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service
invoked a new federal law, the Patriot Act, in refusing to identify the
detainees, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a suit in United States
District Court in Washington to get the names.

That suit, which essentially pits the Patriot Act against the federal Freedom of
Information Act, is pending.

Last month, the A.C.L.U. of New Jersey asked officials of the Hudson County Jail
in Kearny and the Passaic County Jail in Paterson for the names of detainees,
who are housed in the jails under a contract with the immigration service. Jail
officials refused, and on Jan. 22 the civil liberties group filed a lawsuit in
State Superior Court in Hudson County. The suit cited state laws involving
public records, including one that requires that the names of county inmates and
their incarceration dates be made public.

"Essentially, what they told us was that they have a contract with the I.N.S.,
and the I.N.S. told them they cannot release them," said Deborah Jacobs,
executive director of the group's New Jersey chapter. "We're entitled under
three different state statutes to get it."

On Friday, the United States attorney for New Jersey, Christopher J. Christie,
notified the assignment judge in Hudson County, Arthur N. D'Italia, that his
office intended to join with Hudson and Passaic Counties in opposing the state
suit.

Mr. Christie's letter said the suit resembled the federal case, "in which the
United States asserted that the disclosure of information identifying the
detainees could jeopardize the ongoing federal law enforcement investigation,
threaten public safety and violate the privacy rights of the individuals
involved."

Mr. Christie also asked Judge D'Italia to delay a hearing scheduled for March 8
for three weeks, until March 29, to give his office more time to prepare. Ms.
Jacobs, the A.C.L.U. state director, said a delay would further violate the
detainees' rights.

State and federal offices were closed today for Presidents' Day, and the judge
could not be reached.

Michael Drewniak, a spokesman for Mr. Christie, would not comment on the state
suit, but he did say his office was coordinating its efforts with officials in
Washington.

Daniel Nelson, a Justice Department spokesman, said he had no information to
provide on the matter.

Sheriff Jerry Speziale of Passaic County, who runs the jail there, said he was
bound by contract with the immigration service not to divulge any information
about the 150 or so detainees housed in the 2,200-bed jail.

At least half of the detainees, he said, had nothing to do with Sept. 11. He
added that the statute that the civil liberties group had said required
publication of jail inmates' names did not apply to the detainees, since they
are not state inmates, he said.

"There's a misconception about these detainees," Sheriff Speziale said.

"A good portion of these detainees are what we call criminal aliens," he said.
"Are these people who came here to Disneyland and decided to stay and extra four
days? No."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); LITIGATION (91%);
CORRECTIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
PRISONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); US PATRIOT ACT (90%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HIJACKING (79%); LAWYERS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (77%); CONTRACTS LAW (76%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (76%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (74%); TERRORISM (73%); REFUGEES (73%); EXECUTIVES
(65%); MISSING PERSONS (62%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (61%); AIRLINES (61%) TERRORISM;
SUITS AND LITIGATION;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  MISSING PERSONS;  PENTAGON BUILDING

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (92%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(83%); US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (58%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

REGION: NEW JERSEY;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEWARK (NJ)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             832 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Combative Milosevic Displays A Flair for Courtroom Tactics

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 19


Slobodan Milosevic made clear today, as he did during his three-day opening
statement, that he will fight every moment of what may be a two-year trial. He
may not acknowledge the authority of the tribunal at The Hague to try him for
war crimes, but he showed that he could quickly adapt to its interrogatory
style.

He cross-examined his first witness, Mahmut Bakalli, an Albanian politician. The
two men sparred over differing visions of Kosovo, the southern province of
Serbia, which is considered sacred ground for Serbs and Albanians alike, though
Albanians are by far in the majority.

Mr. Milosevic pounded Mr. Bakalli with questions intended to show that Albanians
in Kosovo had turned to "terrorism" on a quest for a separate state leading up
to the war there in 1999 in which over 5,000 Kosovo Albanians were killed.

Mr. Milosevic proved himself a competent first-time lawyer, conducting the cross
examination with an eye toward making political points and a tongue that latched
easily onto courtroom jargon like: "A yes or no answer, please."

His debut performance -- relatively polite but unrelenting -- impressed several
lawyers here. It seemed to amuse and baffle Mr. Bakalli, who endured three and a
half hours of questioning today but did not flinch. At one point, Mr. Bakalli
made fun of Mr. Milosevic's insistence on yes or no answers when pressed for a
definition of "apartheid." Earlier, he had testified that Mr. Milosevic, as the
Yugoslav leader, had systematically curtailed the rights of Albanians in Kosovo
during the early 1990's.

"Define apartheid with a yes or no?" Mr. Bakalli, who has known Mr. Milosevic
for years because both men were high Communist Party officials, asked with sly
innocence.

Mr. Milosevic, who studied law but never practiced, has chosen not to have a
lawyer defend him in court -- a court he says he does not recognize. He is
charged with genocide and other crimes during three wars in the Balkans in the
1990's, in Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo.

Early in the day, he worked to make his point that Albanians wanted special
rights when they withdrew from the Yugoslav education system -- which Mr.
Bakalli said Mr. Milosevic had skewed toward Serbian culture and history after
coming to power in 1987.

"Do you consider that there is a special Albanian mathematics, physics, biology,
chemistry, without going into the exact natural sciences?" Mr. Milosevic asked.
"Philosophy for example? Was there a separate Albanian Plato? Aristotle?"

His apparent ease with the methods of cross examination suggested to some legal
experts here that he received coaching. He has been visited in jail by 10
lawyers since being transferred here in late June, a court official said.

Branislav Tapuskovic, one of three lawyers hired by the tribunal to watch over
Mr. Milosevic's legal interests since he has declined to be represented
formally, said there was no reason for them to speak out in court today.

Thomas Moran, an American who has been a defense lawyer for five years at the
war crimes tribunal here, said: "He is starting to ask leading questions --
'Isn't it true that...?' That's classic cross examination questioning."

"It's clear he knows the facts cold," he added.

Showing his knowledge of the facts, though, may not be the best thing for Mr.
Milosevic. Prosecutors are seeking to meet the legal standard for guilt for a
leader charged with war crimes: that he knew or should have known what his
underlings did and failed to act.

In fact, the prosecutors called Mr. Bakalli as the trial's first witness because
he testified that he had warned Mr. Milosevic early on that his forces were
committing abuses against civilians in Kosovo.

Mr. Milosevic explored the heart of Mr. Bakalli's testimony from the day before:
a raid by Serbian forces on the compound of the Jashari family, home to at least
one known member of the armed Albanian separatist group, the Kosovo Liberation
Army. Many women and children were killed in that and related raids, in February
and March 1998.

"Do you know that the police surrounded the house to arrest them, and that they
did not want to surrender themselves to the police and that they shot at the
policemen?" he asked Mr. Bakalli.

He then essentially conceded Mr. Bakalli's testimony from the day before: that
Mr. Milosevic had told him in a meeting in 1998 that the police had given the
people in the house two hours to surrender.

"Do you know that during those two hours it was the women and children that came
out of the house mostly?" he asked.

Mr. Bakalli answered: "I don't know. But I do know that women and children were
murdered in the house and around the house."

Mr. Milosevic said, "The ones that came out of the house certainly weren't
killed."

While today's discussion felt something like a political debate, the atmosphere
will likely change next week. Then, the prosecution is scheduled to call
Albanians who survived what prosecutors allege were massacres carried out by
Serbian forces in 1999.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mahmut Bakalli, a Kosovo Albanian leader, was the first witness
against Slobodan Milosevic. (ICTY via Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); LAWYERS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); POLITICS (76%);
LEGAL EDUCATION (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%);
EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); TERRORISM
(69%); POLITICAL PARTIES (67%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BAKALLI, MAHMAT; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; FISHER, IAN

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); ALBANIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
CROATIA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA);  BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;  CROATIA

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             833 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Virginia Hamilton, Writer For Children, Is Dead at 65

BYLINE:  By MARGALIT FOX

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 662 words


Virginia Hamilton, an internationally recognized writer for children whose work
celebrated the African-American experience as an essential component of American
life, died yesterday in Dayton, Ohio. She was 65 and lived in Yellow Springs,
Ohio.

The cause was breast cancer, said Kris Moran, director of publicity for
Scholastic, Ms. Hamilton's publisher.

Ms. Hamilton, known privately by her married name, Virginia Hamilton Adoff,
wrote more than 35 books in many genres that spanned picture books and folk
stories, mysteries and science fiction, realistic novels and biography. Among
her best-known works are "The People Could Fly" (1985), "The Planet of Junior
Brown" (1971) and "Many Thousand Gone: African Americans From Slavery to
Freedom" (1993).

She won a National Book Award in 1975 for her novel "M. C. Higgins, the Great";
the book also received a Newbery award, the first to a black writer. In 1995 she
became the first children's author to receive a MacArthur Foundation "genius"
grant.

Woven into her books is a deep concern with memory, tradition and generational
legacy, especially as they helped define the lives of American blacks from the
days of slavery onward. Ms. Hamilton described her work as "liberation
literature."

Virginia Esther Hamilton was born March 12, 1936. She grew up on the small farm
in Yellow Springs that had been her family's since the 1850's; she later
returned there with her husband and children.

She came from a family of storytellers. Ms. Hamilton's grandfather Levi Perry
was born a slave in Virginia and crossed the Ohio River to freedom. Once a year,
she wrote, he gathered his children around him. "Set down," he would say, "and I
will tell you about slavery and why I ran, so that it will never happen to you."
Ms. Hamilton was named Virginia in remembrance of his flight.

After attending Antioch College and Ohio State University -- she lacked the
money to complete her studies -- Ms. Hamilton moved to New York. There, while
studying writing at the New School for Social Research, she met the poet Arnold
Adoff, whom she married in 1960. Mr. Adoff survives her, as do two sisters, Nina
Anthony, of Columbus, Ohio, and Barbara Davis, of Los Angeles; two brothers,
William Hamilton, of Englewood, N.J., and Kenneth James Hamilton Jr., of Chula
Vista, Calif.; a daughter, Leigh Hamilton Adoff, of Berlin, and a son, Jaime
Levi Adoff, of Manhattan.

Ms. Hamilton's first book, "Zeely," appeared in 1967. At the time the few
children's books about black people were mainly "problem" novels, which threw
into sharp relief issues like segregation and poverty.

"Zeely" was a radical departure. It was not that race was absent, but that it
was so completely, unremarkably present. Ms. Hamilton forsook gritty urban drama
for a pastoral tale of enchantment whose characters happened to be black. The
novel told the story of a girl who, during a summer on her uncle's farm, is
captivated by an enigmatic local woman she believes is a Watusi queen.

Among Ms. Hamilton's many honors were an Edgar Allan Poe Award, a Coretta Scott
King Award, a Hans Christian Andersen Medal and an honorary doctorate from Ohio
State.

Many of her recent books were devoted to the black oral tradition; she combed
dusty archives for early manuscripts with long-forgotten songs, riddles and
stories.

The fruits of her travels included "The People Could Fly," which retells slaves'
traditional tales in an accessible vernacular, without the ugly misspellings
historically used to render black dialect. The title story recounts: "The one
called Driver cracked his whip over the slow ones to make them move faster. That
whip was a slice-open cut of pain. So they did move faster. Had to."

The book's carefully worded subtitle, "American Black Folktales," was itself a
political statement, Ms. Hamilton later recalled. Her editor had urged on her
the more conventional "Black American Folktales."

"No," Ms. Hamilton replied. "They're American first and black second."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Books and Magazines

PERSON: Virginia Hamilton

GRAPHIC: Photo: Virginia Hamilton (Kent State University)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (91%); NOVELS & SHORT
STORIES (90%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE (90%); WRITERS (90%); SLAVERY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); SCIENCE FICTION LITERATURE (76%); FOLKLORE (76%);
LITERATURE GENRES (76%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (76%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS
AWARDS (75%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (73%); FOUNDATIONS (67%); BREAST CANCER
(57%) DEATHS (OBITUARIES);  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: KENT STATE UNIVERSITY (59%)

HAMILTON, VIRGINIA; FOX, MARGALIT

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); COLUMBUS, OH, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA
(77%); DAYTON, OH, USA (73%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY,
USA (67%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             835 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Cannily Cross-Examines Kosovo Massacre Survivor

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER and MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 20


When Slobodan Milosevic faced his first victim of the war in Kosovo today in
court, he paused for a moment before asking questions. He blew out a little
breath. He frowned. He rustled his papers, then put his hand on his chin.

The witness, Agim Zeqiri, 49, had his own way of managing a cross-examination by
the very man whose troops, he said, had massacred his wife and five children in
March 1999. Maybe it was fear, or maybe disrespect, but Mr. Zeqiri kept his back
turned.

He never looked at Mr. Milosevic while he questioned him, though he stole two
quick glances once it was over. Nor did he buckle as Mr. Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav leader, on trial here for war crimes, worked to get him to admit that
the Kosovo Liberation Army, an armed Albanian guerrilla group, had been in his
small village, Celina, on the last day he had seen his family.

Only Yugoslav forces were there, Mr. Zeqiri said repeatedly, and they were
shooting civilians.

"I said earlier: they came, and they started burning the village down, the
police and the army," Mr. Zeqiri said.

Mr. Milosevic, acting as his own lawyer, did not offer any words of sympathy,
nor was he especially rough on Mr. Zeqiri. But he did give a first glimpse of
what will soon be a routine but extraordinary sight here: the man charged with
the gravest of war crimes personally asking questions, as he is entitled to, of
dozens of victims and survivors over the course of his two-year trial.

"He lost 16 people in his family, and now Milosevic makes games with him," said
Agim Demneri, 46, an Albanian who visited the court. "For me, it's a very bad
thing."

Mr. Milosevic is charged with genocide and other crimes against humanity for
three wars in the Balkans. In the 1999 war in Kosovo, the southern province of
Serbia, he is accused of the deportation of 800,000 ethnic Albanians, as well as
murder.

He has contended that it was members of the Kosovo Liberation Army and fear of
NATO bombs -- airstrikes the day before the attack on Mr. Zeqiri's village --
that had driven people from their homes. Prosecutors called Mr. Zeqiri, a farmer
and the first war victim to testify, to show that it was in fact the
Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army and the police.

"They started burning down a whole neighborhood," he said under questioning from
a prosecutor, Cristina Romano of Brazil. "There was infantry. There were troops
up there. They surrounded the village entirely. They came down the road and
burned down all the houses."

Mr. Zeqiri's deep voice seemed to break at times, and once he quickly wiped away
tears. He told the court that he and his extended family, including his wife and
children, sought to escape by hiding near a stream. Seeing his family for the
last time, he and the other men in the group separated shortly afterward.

As he hid in a house, he said, he saw another man he was with, a Gypsy, shot to
death about five yards away when he tried to leave.

"I told him, 'Don't, because they will kill you,' " he said. "These are the
words we exchanged. Then we heard firing."

He said the man had been hit. "They fired at him again," he said. "And he fell
down into a ditch." Altogether, he said, 75 people from Celina were killed.

In his cross-examination, Mr. Milosevic did not ask questions disputing that
civilians were killed. Rather, he implied that the attack had been justified by
the presence of the Kosovo guerrillas -- which Mr. Zeqiri denied over and again.

"Who was the first to shoot: was it the army or the K.L.A.?" Mr. Milosevic
asked.

Mr. Zeqiri: "The army. The Serb army."

Mr. Milosevic: "From what direction was the K.L.A. shooting?"

Mr. Zeqiri: "I did not see the K.L.A. at the time they surrounded our village."

Mr. Milosevic did expand on Mr. Zeqiri's admission to Ms. Romano that he and
others in the village had helped the guerrillas, inducing him to concede that
they had given the rebels food and clothing in the past.

Though his questions to Mr. Zeqiri were relatively subdued, Mr. Milosevic
continued to show today that he would take every opportunity to speak in his
defense. At the same time, Richard May, the judge leading a three-man panel
hearing the case, was less and less patient with Mr. Milosevic's speechmaking.

At one point Mr. Milosevic objected to a witness, Kevin Curtis, the lead
investigator, whom prosecutors wanted to call to sum up the testimony of some
1,300 witnesses in Kosovo case. He argued repeatedly that that would be an
unfair repetition of the charges against him.

Judge May cut in: "Mr. Milosevic, we're with you. We're going to exclude it. So
there's no need to make this point again."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WITNESSES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (90%); ARMIES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); TESTIMONY (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); FIRES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); FAMILY
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (73%);
DEPORTATION (69%); MURDER (54%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (83%) KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; SIMONS, MARLISE; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; ZEQIRI, AGIM

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             839 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

THINK TANK;
Challenging the History Of a Slave Conspiracy

BYLINE:  By Dinitia Smith

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1016 words


Among African-Americans, Denmark Vesey's plot to lead a slave rebellion in
Charleston, S.C., in 1822 has always been a symbol of black resistance to
oppression, proof that slaves did not docilely accept their fate. Along with
slave rebellions like the Nat Turner uprising in 1831, the Vesey conspiracy has
been held up as proof that the spirits of blacks were not broken by captivity.
Had Vesey's plot succeeded, it would have been the largest slave rebellion in
American history. But the conspiracy was thwarted by informers -- or so
historians have thought. Thirty-four slaves and Vesey, the one free black, were
hanged as a result of the charges, making it probably the biggest execution ever
in an American civilian judicial proceeding.

But in an article in November in the William and Mary Quarterly, a leading
journal of early American history, Michael P. Johnson, a professor of history at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, has questioned whether a conspiracy took
place. The paper has ignited a debate among scholars over what happened and how
to interpret historical records.

Denmark Vesey was a prosperous carpenter who won his freedom in a lottery. He
was accused of organizing blacks to set fire to Charleston and to kill white
citizens. They were said to have planned to escape to Haiti, the only free black
republic at the time, in ships commandeered in Charleston harbor. But in the
essay, which was first reported in the current Nation magazine by Jon Wiener, a
professor of history at the University of California, Irvine, Mr. Johnson
contends that historians have relied on corrupted accounts of a conspiracy in
the court's official report of legal proceedings against the blacks.

Mr. Johnson argues that the original transcripts of the proceedings show that
the African-Americans confessed to a conspiracy only after being beaten and
tortured. He also points out that the official report tells of Vesey's being
confronted by his accusers and making statements in his defense. The original
transcript, however, has no testimony from Vesey and does not even indicate that
he was present.

In the paper, Mr. Johnson writes that the coerced confessions in the case
mirrored newspaper accounts and rumors in Charleston about the rebellion in
Haiti in 1791, which had eventually led to the abolition of slavery there. At
the time, the conflict over slavery was growing, as evidenced by the Missouri
Compromise, which admitted Missouri to the Union as a slave state but outlawed
slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase north of Missouri's southern
border. The government's willingness to outlaw slavery in new states also
encouraged fresh hope among the blacks. Mr. Johnson says the accusations were
brought by the mayor of Charleston, James Hamilton Jr., in an effort to
discredit his political rival, Gov. Thomas Bennett Jr., four of whose slaves
were said to be involved.

Mr. Johnson's article also demonstrates many errors in a book about the case,
"Designs Against Charleston: The Trial Record of the Denmark Vesey Slave
Conspiracy of 1822," edited by Edward A. Pearson, a history professor at
Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa. Mr. Johnson pointed out mistakes
Mr. Pearson had made in copying the transcript, including rearranging testimony.
As a result of Mr. Johnson's paper, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press has decided to stop publishing the book.

Mr. Pearson admits he made the mistakes and said he regreted them. But in an
interview he said his essay accompanying the transcript was "still a valid piece
of historical material."

"I think in fact Vesey and his associates put together a plan to destroy
Charleston and kill as many white Southerners as they could," Mr. Pearson said.

Little is known about Vesey, except that he grew up as a slave on the Danish
island of St. Thomas. He was said to be a charismatic figure, a leader in the
African Methodist Church who chastised other blacks for stepping aside to allow
whites to pass in the street. He was also literate and invoked the Bible and the
Declaration of Independence in saying that slavery was immoral. According to
Eric Foner, a historian at Columbia University, in a forthcoming book, Vesey
made such pronouncements as "all men had equal rights, blacks as well as
whites."

Mr. Johnson is not the first historian to question whether there was a
conspiracy. In 1964 Richard C. Wade ignited a battle among scholars when, in an
article in The Journal of Southern History and a book, "Slavery in the Cities:
The South, 1820-1860," he suggested that none had taken place. But Mr. Wade's
allegations were generally rejected by historians.

In the forthcoming issue of the William and Mary Quarterly, several historians
also disagree with Mr. Johnson's findings. Thomas J. Davis, an African-American
historian at Arizona State University in Tempe and the author of "A Rumor of
Revolt" (Free Press, 1985), about the New York slave revolt of 1741, said in an
interview: "Professor Johnson goes too far. He throws the baby out with the bath
water."

"He argues those confessions were always self-serving," Mr. Davis said. "But
that is why the confessor confesses. That it was coerced does not thereby make
it necessarily false."

Still, another historian, Winthrop D. Jordan, a professor of Afro-American
studies at the University of Mississippi, supports Mr. Johnson's findings. "That
there was a conspiracy on the scale that the white authorities invented, I doubt
very much," Mr. Jordan said in an interview.

This doesn't mean the African-Americans were not heroes, Mr. Johnson said,
citing the number of the men arrested and subjected to torture but who refused
to testify to a lie. Only a handful gave incriminating testimony. "In discussing
the case, I always quote James Russell Lowell," Mr. Johnson said in an
interview. " 'Truth forever on the scaffold, wrong forever on the throne.' "

"The truth on the scaffold was the integrity of the men executed for refusing to
testify," Mr. Johnson said, "and their 'heresy' at the time in believing in
racial equality and the injustice of slavery."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A painting in Charleston said to be of Denmark Vesey. (Gaillard
Municipal Auditorium)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (92%); SLAVERY (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); CONSPIRACY
(90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CORRUPTION (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(73%); TRANSCRIPTS (72%); TESTIMONY (71%); FIRES (67%); TORTURE (50%) SLAVERY

ORGANIZATION: JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY (56%)

PERSON: SMITH, DINITIA; VESEY, DENMARK (19TH CENTURY)

CITY: CHARLESTON, SC, USA (96%); BALTIMORE, MD, USA (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (96%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); HAITI (92%)

REGION: CHARLESTON (SC)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             840 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Troops Begin Retaking Rebel-Held Territory

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: FLORENCIA, Colombia, Feb. 22


Elite government troops landed by helicopter today inside a swath of southern
jungle that President Andres Pastrana ceded to Marxist rebels three years ago as
a safe haven so peace talks could take place. The soldiers were the first of
thousands expected as the army works to retake the zone now that Mr. Pastrana
has broken off the talks.

The soldiers occupied a former military base just outside San Vicente del
Caguan, one of five towns north of here that had been in the hands of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (known by its Spanish acronym, FARC)
since 1998.

Hundreds of troops have also entered the eastern end of the zone, while
thousands more waited outside the former rebel enclave for orders to enter. The
overall size of the government force is estimated at 12,000.

"We are now in the zone; we now control the zone," one elated soldier told
Colombian television as he walked the streets outside San Vicente.

But although most of the guerrillas responded to the offensive by disappearing
into the jungle, some shot at helicopters this morning, hitting three aircraft
and wounding two soldiers and a pilot, Gen. Fernando Tapias, chief of the armed
forces, told reporters at the Defense Ministry in Bogota this morning. He
suggested that the takeover of the region would be slow, since the military was
wary of anti-personnel mines on the roads and the possibility of rebel ambushes.

The offensive came two days after Mr. Pastrana, furious about the rebel
hijacking of a domestic airliner early this week and the kidnapping of a senior
senator who was a passenger, announced in a nationally televised address that he
was ending the troubled peace process. Soon after his speech, air force planes
began bombarding rebel encampments and storage depots inside the zone, which is
about twice the size of El Salvador.

The offensive has raised concerns among rights groups and some foreign
diplomats, as reports have surfaced of civilians hurt and killed in the attacks.
About 100,000 people live in the former rebel zone.

"The military objectives are not apparent, since the FARC is not in the region
anymore," said Marco Romero, who works with Codhes, an advocacy group for people
displaced by violence. "It is probable there are civilians living there or at
least close to the zones that were bombed."

General Hector Velasco, the air force chief, said that warplanes were being
careful to go after only "military targets and narcotrafficking network
targets." But he acknowledged that the bombing could not be precise in all
circumstances.

"Unfortunately accidents can happen," he told reporters today, noting that
hundreds of sorties had been conducted. The International Committee of the Red
Cross said it had transported five wounded civilians today to the San Vicente
Hospital, along with three bodies. The victims had come from a jungle hamlet
called El Rubi, where some of the bombing apparently took place.

James LeMoyne, the United Nations special envoy to Colombia, said that he had
received "reports of civilian casualties, civilian deaths, wounded people who
cannot be attended in outlying areas and hundreds, maybe thousands of people,
being displaced."

Mr. LeMoyne also said the United Nations was concerned that, with the departure
of the rebels, rightist paramilitary groups would enter the zone and kill
civilians. The paramilitaries -- outlawed militias that human rights groups
accuse of collaborating with the army -- have often killed shopkeepers, local
officials and others they have accused of collaborating with rebels.

"The people of the zone were not consulted on the creation of the zone," Mr.
LeMoyne said, "but they participated in it and it's unfair that they now be
punished for a decision that was not their own."

Colombian officials, meanwhile, say the guerrillas have been busy across the
country, setting off bombs an electrical installation in the south and a gas
pipeline in the north. Many Colombians, while supporting Mr. Pastrana's decision
to break off talks, feared that the rebels might embark on terror bombings in
the largest cities, which have been spared much of the violence that has plagued
the countryside.

Fears have also spread beyond Colombia about the possible spillover of violence.
The Ecuadorean president, Gustavo Noboa, has declared a state of emergency in
one northern province bordering Colombia, which will allow the central
government in Quito to release funds quickly in case of a crisis. In Brazil and
Venezuela, the governments announced that troops along Colombia's border had
been placed on alert.

The rebels have neither denied nor taken responsibility for the various attacks,
but they have blamed Mr. Pastrana for the rupture in the talks. Today they said
in a statement that they would still be willing to negotiate, but only with the
winner of the presidential election in May. Mr. Pastrana is constitutionally
barred from re-election.

Rebel activities and pronouncements have drawn little but scorn from most
Colombians and the international community, which in the past has played a
vigorous role in trying to keep the troubled peace process alive.

Those familiar with the rebel group said it was hard to believe that the top
leaders in the organization had no advance knowledge of the hijacking this week.
The guerrilla commandos who took over the plane are members of the Teofilo
Forero front, which is led by Joaquin Gomez, a key rebel negotiator.

"There is no way a high-level operation of this kind was committed without the
direct knowledge of the secretariat," said a diplomat who has spoken with rebel
leaders several times.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told reporters today that Washington
supported Mr. Pastrana's decision to retake the zone.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sergio Delgado, above, wept for his wife, whose body was
brought to San Vicente del Caguan, Colombia, yesterday. At least three people
were reported killed Thursday in bombing nearby in El Rubi. Near Granada,
soldiers, below, checked the goods of people going to Bogota. (Associated
Press); (Reuters) Map of Colombia highlighting Florencia: Colombian soldiers
occupied a former base north of Florencia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%); ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HELICOPTERS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); AIR FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); HIJACKING (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (86%); ARMIES (78%);
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); AIRLINES (71%);
LANDMINES (70%); DISPLACED PERSONS (60%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (50%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  KIDNAPPING;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%) REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (72%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  FLORENCIA (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             843 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Rebels Sabotage Peace Hopes

BYLINE:  By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: SAN VICENTE DEL CAGUAN, Colombia, Feb. 24


Just a month ago, there was a breakthrough in troubled peace talks here between
the rebels and the government. But in the last week, the rebels hijacked a plane
and kidnapped a senator, prompting President Andres Pastrana to take back a big
block of land granted to the rebels as a kind of fief free of army intervention.

On Saturday, the very day that the president visited this formerly rebel-held
town to demonstrate the government's authority, the rebels struck again,
kidnapping a high-profile presidential candidate.

These events, Colombians are well aware, mean an intensification of the 38-year
civil war.

People in this gritty jungle town and across much of Colombia have cast blame
squarely on one group: the rebels, whose string of bombings, kidnappings and
other violations eventually led President Pastrana to break off negotiations
abruptly last week. The kidnapping on Saturday of the presidential candidate,
Senator Ingrid Betancourt, long a critic of the rebels, was like an exclamation
point on the week's events.

"The government was making offers, but the guerrillas did not reciprocate, they
just were not willing," said Jorge Alberto Gonzalez, a 45-year-old pharmacist.
"They did not understand everything that they had been given at that moment."

What the rebels had was a prize that no other Latin American guerrilla
organization had ever enjoyed: its own dominion, granted by the government.

To induce the rebels to negotiate, in November 1998 President Pastrana ceded
this town and a vast region around it as a venue for talks. The military was
withdrawn, and the rebel group, which had its origins in a peasant uprising
nearly four decades ago, was granted control of everything from the courts to
road-paving to the municipal police force.

But almost from the beginning, the process that began with such high hopes began
to unravel. On the first day of talks, Jan. 7, 1999, the rebel leader, Manuel
Marulanda, failed to show up, leaving Mr. Pastrana alone on a dais in the center
of town. Such lapses persisted for three years, while the rebel group, the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (or the FARC, its Spanish acronym), was
increasingly accused of using the enclave to plot military offensives, hide
kidnapping victims and store arms.

The end came last Wednesday when Mr. Pastrana, who had promised to make peace
his top priority, broke off talks after rebels hijacked an airliner and
kidnapped a senior senator on board. The air force followed up with bombing runs
aimed at dispersing the rebels, and soldiers are moving in to establish
government authority.

For many residents, people accustomed to hardships like power failures and
indifference from the central government, the demise of the peace process has
been taken in stride. They had hoped the region would serve as an incubator for
talks, but several concluded early on that the rebels were not really committed
to negotiations.

"I do not think they ever had a willingness for peace," said Robert Hermosa, 26,
a farmer. "Across the country, all we saw them do was acts of violence and
terrorism."

Unlike many of their countrymen outside the zone, residents are not bitter at
the guerrillas.

This region was spared much of Colombia's violence because the army was banned
and the overwhelming guerrilla force prevented renegade death squads from
establishing a presence.

But the people here said they had expected more from a guerrilla group that
called itself the Army of the People. "They never came out with any proposals,
anything," said Jairo Cuellar, 35, another farmer.  "So it was their fault. The
government put it all in their hands, and they did not do anything with it."

The outlook, in Colombia and abroad, was far different in 1998, when the zone
was ceded. Foreign diplomats, particularly from European countries, saw some
justification then for rebellion within Colombia, a highly stratified and often
corrupt country that has shut most people out of any say in government.

Urban Colombians, though long suspicious of the rebels, were cautiously
optimistic that the group was serious about negotiations. After all, Mr.
Marulanda, the group's leader, had met with Mr. Pastrana when he was running for
president in 1998, an encounter that helped solidify Mr. Pastrana's image as the
peace candidate.

"They were considered, in many quarters, legitimate interlocutors working on a
peace process that was something necessary," said Eduardo Gamarra, director of
the Latin American and Caribbean Center at Florida International University in
Miami.

But, he added, the rebels quickly lost that legitimacy by stepping up their
violence while failing to take advantage of the pulpit that the demilitarized
zone provided to offer their political proposals to restructure Colombia.

Marc Chernick, a Georgetown University professor who has studied the peace
process here and elsewhere, said the rebels could have gained political capital
by setting up agricultural programs, for example, to highlight the flaws in
rural development in the rest of the country.

"The FARC are very resistant to the politics of gestures, symbols, unlike the
Zapatistas, who are masters of that," explained Mr. Chernick, referring to the
media-savvy rebels of Chiapas, in southern Mexico. "They say it's not up to them
to give gestures of peace, and it's not up to them to play symbolic politics."

The group did make it difficult for outsiders to see much of the region past San
Vicente. Rebel commanders did little to dispel government reports about murders
and the growing of coca, the raw material of cocaine. Critics like Human Rights
Watch were lambasted by the rebels as puppets of Washington.

The rebels, who have been dispersed from this town and other areas by the army
offensive, have continued to insist that they remain interested in negotiating.
"We maintain our will for peace," Marcos Leon Calarcar, a rebel representative
in Mexico, said in a report by the Reuters news agency. "We still hold in our
hands the flag of peace."

Today, though, few people seem to believe this.

"One has to conclude," said one foreign diplomat who has strongly supported the
peace process, "that the FARC are primitive and perhaps never committed in good
faith to negotiations."

And even if the group were willing to open a dialogue with Mr. Pastrana's
successor, the winner of presidential elections in May, as guerrilla commanders
said in a recent communique, the political climate has changed considerably.

Colombian society has shifted sharply to the political right, with polls showing
most people here having lost faith in the peace process and in the rebels. Polls
also show that most Colombians will vote in May for Alvaro Uribe Velez, who has
harshly criticized the rebels as terrorists and drug traffickers.

Internationally, the outlook is also different for the rebels. European
governments have refused visas to the same guerrilla commanders who once toured
their capitals. the United States is considering offering intelligence on rebel
activities to the Colombian Army; until now Washington has been barred from
involvement in counterinsurgency operations.

"They lost the international political battle, in this country and abroad," Mr.
Pastrana said recently. "Today, there is a complete union of forces against
them, from all institutions and the international communi ty."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ingrid Betancourt, the presidential candidate who was
kidnapped. (Associated Press); Colombian soldiers and a motorcyclist at the
former rebel enclave San Vicente del Caguan. President Andres Pastrana took back
the land. (Reuters) Map of Colombia highlighting San Vicente del Caguan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); HIJACKING (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (77%); AIR FORCES (77%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); AIRLINES (72%); POLICE FORCES (71%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (70%); POWER FAILURES (61%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (50%) CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  KIDNAPPING;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); LATIN AMERICA (76%)

REGION: COLOMBIA

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             846 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

State Restricts Data on Internet In Attempt to Thwart Terrorists

BYLINE:  By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1344 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Feb. 25


The Pataki administration has quietly ordered state agencies to restrict
information available on the Internet and limit its release through New York's
Freedom of Information Law to prevent terrorists from using the material, which
includes maps of electrical grids and reservoirs as well as building floor
plans.

The new policy, laid out in a confidential memorandum to agency heads from the
state's director of public security, James K. Kallstrom, is one of the most
far-reaching and restrictive in the nation, according to research librarians and
advocates for open government.

Mr. Kallstrom, a former high-ranking official of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, said the order was aimed at preventing details about potential
targets, like bridges and nuclear power plants, from falling into the hands of
terrorist groups like Al Qaeda.

"The intent, clearly, is to remove from the public Web sites that information
that serves no other purpose than to equip potential terrorists," Mr. Kallstrom
said. "This is not an attempt just to shield legitimate information from the
public."

Some state agencies had removed material in the immediate aftermath of the World
Trade Center attack. But in the memorandum Mr. Kallstrom issued last month, he
said the Pataki administration was concerned "that there is a disconcerting
amount of potentially compromising information still publicly accessible."

The agency commissioners were not only instructed to review again what might be
accessible, but were also asked to classify as "sensitive" and make exempt
"information related to systems, structures, individuals and services essential
to the security, government or economy of the state." He directed agency heads
to remove things like data about electrical power, gas and oil storage,
transportation, banking and finance, water supply, emergency services and the
continuity of government operations.

The state's new policy guidelines to restrict information and tighten security
are occurring in lock step with the national debate over how to balance the need
for safety and the public's right to information.

While acknowledging the need for protections against terrorism, Donna Lieberman,
the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said the Pataki
administration's new policy "raises serious concerns about the future of open
government" and would allow, in the worst case, the government to become "a
series of secret operations."

Federal officials have removed information, like the operational status of
nuclear plants and certain maps of the nation's infrastructure, that was once at
the fingertips of anyone with a computer.

The Environmental Protection Agency, for example, has blocked access to the
toxic-release inventory, a listing of all factories and other sources that emit
poisonous pollution, and has taken information about dangerous pesticides off
its site, environmentalists say.

Some other states have also taken action to limit the free flow of information.
Florida, for instance, has stopped posting records of drivers' licenses on the
state Web sites.

In New York, the Public Service Commission stopped posting the locations of
power plants, including nuclear reactors. The state's Energy Department erased a
detailed map of power lines and substations from its site. Directions to
stockpiles of water pumps and generators used by the state's Emergency
Management Office during floods or other disasters are gone from the Internet.
So are the locations of wastewater treatment plants, floor maps of state
buildings and some mapping databases used to analyze everything from
demographics to infrastructure.

A spokeswoman for Governor Pataki said the administration was still writing more
concrete guidelines on what information would be classified and no longer
available. "It's a work in progress," said Mollie Fullington, the spokeswoman.
"We are putting together a team to review these very issues."

Some advocates of open government contended that New York's new rules were too
broad and could cover information -- like the locations of chemical factories
that emit toxic pollution -- that fuels debates at the core of modern democracy.

"No one would argue that the Pataki administration has been transparent," said
Blair Horner, the chief lobbyist for the New York Public Interest Research
Group. "I think there is a real danger that this directive could be used to
further block from public view information the public should have access to. The
decision on what should be on the Internet or not on the Internet should be a
public discussion, not a private edict."

Robert J. Freeman, the executive director of the State Committee on Open
Government, said the Freedom of Information Law in New York State allows
officials to censor some information if releasing it would endanger people's
lives or compromise criminal investigations.

The administration's new directive to block the release of what it deems
sensitive information to people who file requests under the law could easily be
justified under those rules, he said. "All they are saying is be careful, be
wise," Mr. Freeman said. "All the memo says is comply with the law."

Ms. Fullington, the governor's spokeswoman, said such requests would be
determined in the future on a "case-by-case basis."

Mr. Kallstrom's directive also ordered agency heads to review requests made
under the state's Freedom of Information Law over the last year to determine if
anyone had requested information that might be useful to terrorists. The
purpose, he said, was to find leads for investigators trying to thwart terrorist
plots.

"We are concerned that terrorism -- a very serious issue -- doesn't get used to
take away information from the public," said Rachel Leon, a lobbyist for Common
Cause. "You have to have a balance between security and the public's right to
information. We have to make sure the government doesn't overstep."

Mr. Kallstrom says his directives are not intended to keep the public in the
dark on policy matters. He said the diameter and location of a suspension
bridge's cables and fasteners, for instance, should not be made public. Neither
should details be available about the fencing and gates around nuclear plants or
the access roads leading to water reservoirs.

One example of the new policy is that fuel delivery schedules and the locations
of fuel storage tanks used by state agencies are no longer posted on the Web,
aides to Mr. Pataki said. Nor are many details about the state's National Guard
posts and units available.

The memorandum also directs agencies to set up security systems using passwords
and other devices to protect the information they deem sensitive. Mr. Kallstrom
has also led an effort to improve defenses against computer hackers, offering
agencies help in constructing stronger fire walls against intruders.

As a practical matter, winnowing the information available on the Internet will
force more people to request documents under the Freedom of Information Law,
state officials said. Since the law requires a written request, a paper trail
would be created for any release of information, making it easier for law
enforcement officials to find out who had sought the documents.

New York's open-records law does not require public information to be posted on
the Internet, though some bills have been circulating in the State Legislature
that would do just that. Other laws require that campaign contributions,
payments to lobbyists and information about doctors be published on the
Internet.

Experts on Internet security say the state's crackdown on information may not be
immediately effective. Once something has been published on the Web, it is hard
to control who copies it or where those copies end up. Some search engines save
information from old Web sites, for instance, so a terrorist might still be able
to find a map of New York's power grid.

"It's a bit of a horse out of the barn," Mr. Kallstrom acknowledged. "But you
have to start somewhere. We don't want to unnecessarily and stupidly aid people
who want to kill us."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(90%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); POWER PLANTS (89%);
PUBLIC POLICY (89%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL
DEPARTMENTS (78%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (77%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (77%); WATER
POLLUTION (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES
(73%); AL-QAEDA (72%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS
(72%); ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%);
LIBRARIANS (70%); NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (69%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (68%);
ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (63%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (54%);
INFRASTRUCTURE (50%); DRIVERS LICENSES (50%) TERRORISM;  GOVERNMENT INFORMATION
POLICIES;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%)

PERSON: PATAKI, GEORGE E (GOV); KALLSTROM, JAMES K; MCKINLEY, JAMES C JR

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK STATE

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             847 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 27, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Eliminates a Barrier to Job Discrimination Plaintiffs

BYLINE:  By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The Supreme Court today removed a legal obstacle to bringing employment
discrimination suits, ruling unanimously that an initial complaint offering a
bare-bones statement of the case is sufficient to withstand an employer's motion
to have the case thrown out for lack of specific facts.

Although technical, the decision had considerable practical importance, enabling
employees to proceed to the discovery stage of the lawsuit and acquire the
information like personnel records that is usually necessary to win an
employment discrimination case.

The decision, written by Justice Clarence Thomas, was particularly important for
job discrimination cases in the New York area. The court overturned a ruling by
the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which covers New
York, Connecticut and Vermont and was one of a minority of federal courts to
apply what is known as a "heightened pleading" standard for cases brought under
the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Title VII of that law imposes the basic federal prohibition against workplace
discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion or national origin. The Age
Discrimination Act of 1967 was modeled on Title VII and follows the same rules.

In his opinion today, Justice Thomas said the Second Circuit had confused the
rules the Supreme Court has devised for actually litigating a Title VII case
with the much more lenient rules, set in 1938 by the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, for filing the initial complaint.

The appeals court, ruling last March, affirmed the dismissal of a lawsuit
brought by a 52-year-old Hungarian-born insurance company executive against his
employer. The plaintiff, Akos Swierkiewicz, maintained that Sorema N.A., a New
York reinsurance company owned by a French corporation, discriminated against
him on the basis of national origin and age when he was frozen out, demoted and
eventually dismissed. The company's chief executive, after saying he wanted to
"energize" the underwriting department, replaced Mr. Swierkiewicz as chief
underwriting officer with a 32-year-old from France.

The appeals court said the complaint was based only on "conclusory allegations"
that were "insufficient as a matter of law to raise an inference of
discrimination."

The Supreme Court's decision to hear Mr. Swierkiewicz's appeal, Swierkiewicz v.
Sorema N.A., No. 00-1853, attracted attention from employers and civil rights
organizations alike. Employers said the Second Circuit's approach would help
weed out frivolous lawsuits at a preliminary stage before defense costs mounted.
Civil rights groups told the Supreme Court that it was unrealistic to require
employment discrimination plaintiffs to be able to marshal specific facts in
advance of the discovery process, the only way plaintiffs could get access to
company personnel files and records of hiring and promotion decisions. The
rights groups emphasized that weak cases could still be thrown out before trial
through the use of summary judgment motions when, after discovery, no factual
disputes remained.

The Bush administration entered the case for Mr. Swierkiewicz. Calling the
Second Circuit's approach "fundamentally flawed," the brief filed by Solicitor
General Theodore B. Olson said the appeals court "erroneously conflates the fair
notice owed a defendant at the outset of the litigation with the standards
governing the plaintiff's presentation of proof in court."

In his opinion, Justice Thomas said the federal rules incorporated, and the
Supreme Court had long since endorsed, the concept of "notice pleading," under
which the complaint has to do no more than provide a simple and clear statement
of the claim. That test was met in this case, he said, because Mr.
Swierkiewicz's complaint both alleged discrimination and provided details of the
events and individuals involved in his termination. This gave the company "fair
notice," Justice Thomas said.

Eric Schnapper, a civil rights specialist at the University of Washington Law
School, said today that the only surprise in the case was not the Supreme
Court's decision but that "the lower courts were getting it so wrong in the
teeth of crystal-clear law." He called the decision "a thoughtful and
appropriate use of the court's supervisory power."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMPLOYMENT (97%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (95%); DISCRIMINATION
(92%); LITIGATION (91%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GENDER &
SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (89%); SUMMARY JUDGMENT (89%); APPEALS COURTS (89%); APPEALS (89%);
PRETRIAL DISCOVERY (89%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); TRIAL &
PROCEDURE (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (78%); CIVIL PROCEDURE (78%); VERDICTS
(78%); AGE DISCRIMINATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); LEGISLATION (73%);
EXECUTIVES (69%); REINSURANCE (64%); COMPANY STRUCTURES & OWNERSHIP (64%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); RELIGION (52%) LABOR;  DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS;  DISCRIMINATION;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT (US)

PERSON: CLARENCE THOMAS (73%) GREENHOUSE, LINDA

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); CONNECTICUT, USA (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             854 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRISONERS;
Detainees Stage Protest at Base Over a Turban

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


Scores of Al Qaeda and Taliban prisoners being held at the United States Naval
Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, began a protest on Wednesday after guards removed
a makeshift turban from the head of a praying prisoner, military officials said
today.

Today, prisoners chanted "God is great!" and banged water bottles and buckets
inside their chain-link cages to register their anger over the incident.
Military officials said guards took no action to quell the protest, which lasted
45 minutes.

On Wednesday, 159 prisoners protested by refusing to eat lunch and 109 refused
dinner, military officials said. Today, 107 would not eat breakfast and 194
declined lunch. But the number who refused to eat dinner tonight dropped to 88,
officials said.

The actions were the first organized protests by the prisoners, some of whom
have been at the base since Jan. 11. There are 300 prisoners at the camp, but
that number is likely to increase after a prison is built.

The men appeared to be responding to an incident on Tuesday when guards ordered
a prisoner who was praying in his cage to remove a turban he had fashioned from
a towel or sheet, said Capt. Alan Crouch, a spokesman for the American forces
running the prison camp. When the prisoner did not respond, the guards removed
the turban.

Captain Crouch said the prisoners were not allowed to wear turbans because they
might be used to conceal makeshift weapons. Prisoners will be issued
tight-fitting prayer caps if they request it, he added.

Late tonight, Brig. Gen. Mike Lehnert, the Marine general running the detention
mission, used the camp loudspeaker to tell inmates they would be allowed to wear
turbans, but that authorities reserve the right to inspect them at any time.

Some prisoners said they were upset that the guards interrupted the man while he
was praying. Others expressed concern about "the uncertainty of their future,"
Captain Crouch said. Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said earlier this
week that some might be sent home and others might be held indefinitely.

Organizing the hunger strike would have required prisoners to communicate with
each other through the chain-link fences; they are not allowed to congregate.

Vienna Colucci, program director for Amnesty International USA, said that under
the Geneva Conventions, prisoners should be given complete latitude to practice
their religions.

Captain Crouch said, "Security needs take precedence over other concerns."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); NAVIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RIOTS (78%); POWS & MIAS
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); RELIGION (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (76%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE
(CUBA);  DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;  PRISONERS OF WAR;  APPAREL

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP);
TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: DAO, JAMES

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (91%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 1, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Raid Fails to Catch Former Bosnian Serb Leader

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, Feb. 28


NATO troops mounting their first major operation to arrest Radovan Karadzic, the
former Bosnian Serb leader indicted for war crimes, failed today to find him in
a remote Bosnian village that they raided around dawn.

Dr. Karadzic, accused of committing genocide against Muslims in the war in
Bosnia, was first indicted almost seven years ago, and his freedom as a fugitive
has long been criticized as a failure of resolve on the part of Western leaders.

But NATO officials said the operation today, though unsuccessful, was proof of a
determination finally to act decisively against him, as well as others indicted
for war crimes.

"The message to Karadzic is: You got away this time but there will be another
time unless you turn yourself in," Mark Laity, a spokesman for NATO in Brussels,
said tonight. "So the best thing you can do is turn yourself in now."

This was the first time NATO has ever even acknowledged an attempt to arrest Dr.
Karadzic. Details were scant, but the operation appeared to have been
significant: At least two helicopters swooped into the village of Celebici, some
45 miles southeast of Sarajevo near the border of Montenegro, the Yugoslav
republic where Dr. Karadzic was born. Residents reported armored vehicles in the
area, and outages in electricity and telephone service.

Bosnian Serb television reported gunfire and explosions, and villagers later
said dozens of soldiers in camouflage uniforms had barged into about 40
buildings, including a church, school and houses. Officials said the operation
had involved soldiers from countries including the United States, France,
Germany and Britain in a zone commanded by French soldiers.

The multinational force in Bosnia since the war there ended in 1995 said in a
statement that the raid had been prompted by information that Dr. Karadzic was
hiding there. They did not find him, and it was unclear whether he had in fact
been there recently.

Dr. Karadzic's freedom, along with that of the Bosnian Serb military commander,
Ratko Mladic, has long been considered an obstacle to international efforts at
rebuilding Bosnia after four years of ethnic warfare.

Both men were indicted for war crimes in July 1995; each was then charged
separately with genocide in the killings of roughly 7,000 Bosnian Muslims in
Srebrenica.

But nations with soldiers in Bosnia squabbled over which ones might conduct the
raids, and there were fears, largely among American officials, that soldiers
might die in the attempt. Western officials also said they feared engendering an
uprising by Bosnian Serbs, which could endanger the lives of peacekeepers.

Yet many were heartened by the lack of turmoil over the transfer of Slobodan
Milosevic to The Hague for his war crimes trial. This, coupled with the
realization that peacekeepers might be forced to stay indefinitely unless the
men are captured, has helped forge a new resolve.

In addition, experts point out, it seemed contradictory for Americans not to act
against Dr. Karadzic and General Mladic in the face the overwhelming force used
against Afghanistan. "The willingness was there before the 11th of September,"
said Mark Wheeler, the Bosnia director for the International Crisis Group, "but
events since then have convinced people in Washington of the feasibility of
this."

There were no reports of demonstrations among Bosnian Serbs after the raid
today. Four shots were fired at the headquarters of the international police
force in the northern town of Bjeljina, though it was unclear whether they were
related to the raid. Even so, Bosnian Serb leaders issued angry words.

"It is impermissible that such an operation take place without the knowledge of
any institution of the Serb Republic," Mladen Ivanic, prime minister of the
self-proclaimed Bosnian Serb Republic, told its Parliament in Banja Luka.

Dr. Karadzic's brother, Raco, told a radio station in Montenegro that his
brother was "safe," as well as "well and in good health," the Serbian news
agency Tanjug reported.

General Mladic is reported to live in Belgrade, the capital of Serbia, protected
by heavily armed guards. --------------------

New U.S. Attack on Court Plan

WASHINGTON, Feb. 28 (Reuters) -- The Bush administration intensified its attack
on the European-backed international justice process today, calling for an end
to ad hoc United Nations war crimes tribunals by 2008 and signaling fresh
opposition to a proposed permanent criminal court.

The criticism was delivered in congressional testimony by the American
ambassador at large for war crimes, Pierre-Richard Prosper.  Criticizing the ad
hoc tribunals prosecuting war crimes and genocide in the Balkans and Rwanda, Mr.
Prosper said the administration was conducting a high-level review of how to
carry out its policy of opposition to the permanent International Criminal
Court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Radovan Karadzic, right, with Slobodan Milosevic in Belgrade in
1994. Both have been charged with war crimes; Dr. Karadzic remains at large.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); POWER FAILURES (78%);
CIVIL WAR (78%); RELIGION (77%); HELICOPTERS (52%); TELEPHONE SERVICES (51%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%) NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; KARADZIC, RADOVAN; MLADIC, RATKO

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); UNITED STATES
(93%); FRANCE (92%); NETHERLANDS (89%); SERBIA (79%); GERMANY (79%); BELGIUM
(59%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             856 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE MILITARY;
U.S. Broadens Terror Fight, Readying Troops for Yemen

BYLINE:  By MICHAEL R. GORDON and JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1320 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


President Bush has approved plans to send as many as 100 troops to Yemen to help
train that nation's military to fight terrorists, senior administration
officials said today.

While American officials said the details were still being worked out, they said
the troops could leave as early as next week. They would consist predominantly
of Special Forces, but could also include intelligence experts and other
specialists. The main target would be Al Qaeda fighters who are hiding in Yemen.

Yemen is just the latest partner in an increasingly broad campaign that has
expanded well beyond Afghanistan to the Persian Gulf, the Philippines and
potentially to Georgia and Indonesia as well.

It comes as Democrats have become increasingly restless about the military
moves, complaining that the administration has demanded virtually unlimited
funds without providing a clear road map of the worldwide military effort.

"If this administration believes as strongly as I know it does about its conduct
in the war thus far, I would think they'd look forward to answering the
questions that the Congress necessarily must ask," Senator Tom Daschle, Democrat
of South Dakota and the majority leader, told reporters today.

Administration officials have rejected the charge, saying it does not take
account of the scope of Al Qaeda's operations and the need to combat the terror
network on a global basis.

The military campaign appears to be expanding by the week. While Washington has
been rife with speculation about a major military campaign against Iraq, the
operations being planned are very different.

They involve military training by American Special Forces and donations of arms
and military equipment to nations struggling to crush isolated but potent
Islamic insurgencies that have possible links to Al Qaeda.

Special Operations forces played a central role in Afghanistan, where they
called in air strikes and sometimes fought alongside anti-Taliban Afghans. In
this next phase of the war on terrorism, the Special Forces' role is largely
limited to training and equipping nations that have asked for American
assistance, not calling in air strikes. Indeed, American commandos will be
discouraged from even firing their weapons, except in self-defense, military
officials said. The missions vary from nation to nation.

In the former Soviet republic of Georgia, for instance, Washington is
considering sending about 200 Special Forces soldiers and more than $50 million
in equipment to aid the feeble Georgian military, which has been unable to
establish control over the Pankisi Gorge near Chechnya.

A senior American official said that several dozen Qaeda extremists may be
hiding in the Pankisi Gorge and that most, if not all of them, had been there
for months and had not fled from Afghanistan.

The American official said there was no current plan for United Statessoldiers
to go into the gorge on combat operations with the Georgians.

Officials say there is now only one American soldier in Georgia, where he was
sent to help the Georgians operate 10 UH-1 transport helicopters the United
States is providing.

Other training efforts are under discussion as well. Senior military officials
are pushing Congress to allow a resumption of military to military relations
with Indonesia to help its armed forces root out Islamic extremists with
possible ties to Al Qaeda.

Algeria has also asked the United States for night-vision goggles and other
military assistance so that it can fight extremists there.

Of the new operations, the one in the Philippines is the most ambitious. About
600 American troops, including 160 Special Forces soldiers, are already in the
Philippines advising and training local troops that are trying to surround a
Muslim separatist group called Abu Sayyaf on the southern island of Basilan.

The Pentagon has long viewed Yemen as a center of support for Osama bin Laden,
the Qaeda leader. His father was born there. Yemen was also the site of the
terrorist attack on the destroyer Cole, which killed 17 American sailors in
October 2000.

Western investigators have said Yemen, where well-armed tribal militias are more
powerful than the government along parts of the Saudi border, is home to at
least 20 senior Qaeda officials and scores of fighters trained in Qaeda camps in
Afghanistan.

Brig. Gen. John W. Rosa Jr., deputy director of operations for the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, said today that it was likely that some Qaeda fighters slipped back
into Yemen from Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban. "I think it would be
common knowledge that that would be a refuge that one might expect them to go
to," he told reporters.

While the government in Yemen has said it wants to work with Washington to track
down Qaeda units, it has also expressed concerns about having American troops on
its soil.

In an interview today, the Yemeni ambassador to the United States, Abdulwahab
Alhajjri, said one solution would be to have Yemeni soldiers come to the United
States for training, and to keep the number of American soldiers in Yemen to a
minimum.

"We need to examine the whole issue and whether we need to bring people to Yemen
or to be trained in the United States," he said. "We're more in need of
equipment and financial help."

Asked what kind of equipment Yemen was seeking, the ambassador said: "We are
asking the U.S. to assist us in any way they can. We're in need of everything,
anything. You name it, we want it."

A senior administration official said the type of equipment being discussed
included helicopters, night-vision goggles and other kinds of sensors, and small
arms.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of American forces in Afghanistan and Central
Asia, told Congress this week that Yemen had worked "hand in glove" with the
United States to help fight terrorism since the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11.
He also mentioned Sudan and Somalia as countries where terrorism has been
allowed to breed.

"I think the approach that our government may take in any one of these countries
will not be like what we have seen," General Franks told the House Armed
Services Committee on Wednesday. "We will not use the Afghanistan model."

Senior military officials say they are also looking to build stronger military
ties to Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation, in the hope of
encouraging that country to root out terrorist cells. For the last two years,
Mr. bin Laden has been working to establish a foothold there, American and Asian
officials contend, using the archipelago as a base for training, fund-raising
and recruiting.

In the view of the Pentagon, Indonesia has been slow to crack down on
terrorists, declining to search hard for the cleric Riudan Isamuddin, better
known as Hambali, who is thought to be the mastermind of a plot to blow up the
American Embassy in Singapore. But many senior Pentagon officials contend that
closer military ties to Indonesia would strengthen that nation's ability to
track down terrorists.

"We are looking for ways to cooperate with Indonesia against this common enemy,"
Adm. Dennis C. Blair, the head of the United States Pacific Command, said in an
interview this week.

At the Pentagon's behest, Congress late last year eased restrictions on the
training of Indonesian military officers in the United States that had been
imposed in 1999 after human rights abuses by government troops in East Timor.
Many military and Congressional officials say they expect the Pentagon to
propose sending Special Operations troops to Indonesia next to train military
units in counterterrorism tactics.

The training is likely to draw opposition from critics of Indonesia in Congress,
led by Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the
Senate appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations. Admiral Blair met with
Mr. Leahy this week in an effort to ease some of his concerns that the
Indonesian military had done little to reform itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (79%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); APPROVALS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); MILITARY TRAINING (78%); TALIBAN (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); RELIGION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%)

PERSON: TOM DASCHLE (57%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (57%)

COUNTRY: YEMEN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); GEORGIA (92%);
IRAQ (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); INDONESIA (79%); GULF STATES (72%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             858 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Soldiers Again Fail To Find Ex-Bosnia Serb Chief

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 1


NATO troops returned empty-handed again today after conducting a second
high-profile raid to arrest Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader
indicted on war crimes charges.

Using helicopters and armored vehicles, dozens of soldiers scoured remote
villages in southeastern Bosnia near Celebici, which they had searched the day
before. Officials with the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Bosnia,
known by its initials as SFOR, said troops returned after receiving intelligence
that Dr. Karadzic was still in the area.

Though they did not find him, NATO officials rejected any suggestion that the
failure to capture him was an embarrassment. In Brussels, Lord Robertson, the
NATO secretary general, said today's operation underscored the new commitment to
catch Dr. Karadzic, as well as others indicted on war crimes charges.

"Obviously I was disappointed that Karadzic was not detained this time," he told
reporters. "But this is not the end of the story. Time is running out. One day,
whether it is tomorrow, or next week or next month, SFOR will come for you."

"The net is closing in," he added. "And there is no way to escape. There is no
final place to hide."

NATO has faced criticism for its failure to capture Dr. Karadzic, as well as
Ratko Mladic, the former Bosnian Serb military leader, both of whom were charged
with genocide and other war crimes in 1995. General Mladic is reportedly living
in Belgrade, the capital of Serbia, and protected by heavily armed guards.

Many experts say the men's freedom stands as a major block to stability in
Bosnia, and the new resolve to apprehend them comes at a time when American
officials say they want to scale down their commitments in postwar Bosnia.

In the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terror attacks, American officials have
discussed paring their peacekeeping troops to 1,800, from the current 3,000, by
this fall.

NATO released few details of the raid. But villagers, reporting the use of four
helicopters and several armored vehicles, told reporters that about 40 soldiers
had searched the villages of Borje and Hocevo in a mountainous area near the
border with Montenegro.  Dr. Karadzic, 56, was born in Montenegro. In today's
raid's, unlike Thursday's, the troops did not use explosives to break into
houses, the residents said.

There were no reports of injuries.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A newspaper in Banja Luka yesterday featured a photo of Radovan
Karadzic, who is being sought on war crimes charges. (Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
HELICOPTERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (72%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%);
TERRORISM (63%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); MONTENEGRO
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (59%); BELGIUM (59%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             862 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial Centers on Role of Press During Rwanda Massacre

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1365 words

DATELINE: ARUSHA, Tanzania


A trial is unfolding far from the spotlight in this East African town, but its
outcome may one day ring out around the world. It is the trial of three
journalists that focuses on the question, can freedom of speech degenerate into
genocide? Or put differently, can journalism kill?

According to prosecutors of the United Nations war crimes tribunal for Rwanda,
the answer to both questions is a forceful yes.

The three men in the dock, all former Rwandan news media executives, stand
accused of genocide and incitement to genocide through their use of radio
broadcasts and newspapers.

Their trial is also examining the full scope of the role played by the news
media in the massacre of more than 800,000 people in Rwanda in 1994.

It is the first time since Julius Streicher, the Nazi publisher of the
anti-Semitic weekly Der Sturmer, appeared before the Nuremberg judges in 1946
that a group of journalists stands accused before an international tribunal on
such grave charges.

Prosecutors have drawn stark parallels between the vitriolic campaigns against
the Jews by Der Sturmer before World War II and the actions of some Rwandan
media organizations before and during the 1994 slaughter of the Tutsi. At
Nuremberg, the charge of genocide did not yet exist.

Legal specialists believe that the outcome of the current trial may set a
crucial precedent for future international cases, in particular for the
permanent International Criminal Court, which is expected to open later this
year to handle accusations of grave rights violations.

"A key question will be what kind of speech is protected and where the limits
lie," said Stephen Rapp, an American lawyer, who is the senior prosecutor in the
case. "It is important to draw that line. We hope the judgment will give the
world some guidance."

National laws inevitably vary, and as for international legal standards, "there
has been no decision since Nuremberg," Mr. Rapp said.

The Allies' military court at Nuremberg, which sent Julius Streicher to the
gallows, may seem far away and the Rwanda tribunal has no death sentence. But
questions about the effects of hateful propaganda and whether journalists should
exercise self-restraint or even self-censorship in dangerous moments are
topical.

"This is very much a living issue," said a judge at the Rwanda tribunal.
"People have found Osama bin Laden's hate talk against Americans objectionable.
So why did some American media use self-restraint or even self-censorship in his
case? Clearly because there were larger values involved."

The accused in what is informally called here "the media trial" are Ferdinand
Nahimana and Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, who the prosecutors say founded and
controlled a Rwandan radio station and directed its news coverage, and Hassan
Ngeze, a former newspaper publisher and editor. Prosecutors charge that all
three were part of a well-prepared plan to use their outlets first to spread
ethnic hatred and then to persuade people to kill their enemies, the Tutsi and
moderate Hutu. That required demonizing the Tutsi, prosecutors said, and the
media played a key role in accomplishing this.

To make their case, prosecutors have armed themselves with some 50,000
documents, more than 600 audiotapes of what they say are inflammatory broadcasts
from Radio Mille Collines and stacks of copies from the pictorial newspaper
Kangura, peppered with vicious cartoons and nasty texts.

The radio, nicknamed Radio Hate, was the mouthpiece of the extremist Hutu Power
movement. At first, it addressed its Tutsi opponents with warnings like "You
cockroaches must know you are made of flesh. We won't let you kill, we will kill
you." But once the massacres had begun, the prosecution said, the broadcasts
goaded Hutu militia groups to "go to work" and kept inciting people with
messages like "the graves are not yet full."

Defense lawyers have rejected the genocide charges and the defendants have
pleaded not guilty. John Floyd, an American lawyer defending Mr. Ngeze,
denounced the indictments as a "vulgar farce" and "dangerous stuff."

"What's really on trial here is freedom of the press and intellectual freedom,"
he said. "These people should never have been indicted. They've already been
locked up for five years. Just with these indictments, the U.N. is already
defending press censorship."

Other lawyers have been more circumspect, among them Jean-Marie Biju-Duval, the
French defense counsel for Mr. Nahimana. In his view, the central question of
the trial is, "At what point, if any, does political propaganda become
criminal?"

That issue, however it is defined, may soon also apply to songs.

Simon Bikindi, a well known Rwandan singer, has been indicted by the tribunal on
charges of genocide. Arrested in the Netherlands, where he was living, Mr.
Bikindi is about to be transferred to Arusha. According to his indictment, Mr.
Bikindi composed songs that helped foment fear and hatred of the Tutsi. He is
also charged with joining militia gangs on their killing sprees.

The media trial, one of the tribunal's high profile cases, has been going on
since October 2000, plagued, as other cases here, by management problems. Its
prosecutors have changed several times and it may still be months from
completion. Some 40 witnesses have already been heard.

Complicating matters, two of the defendants opened their own Web sites, and they
are reported to have leaked some confidential court data. One defendant, Mr.
Barayagwiza, a former government information official, is refusing to show up in
court, although his two court-appointed lawyers are attending. He became
outraged because other judges had ordered his release, ruling that the
prosecution had violated his rights. But after a public outcry in Rwanda and an
appeal by the prosecution, that ruling was reversed. He said he would not bother
to attend a trial in a court that was politicized and biased.

Prosecutors argue that their case is not about freedom or excess of the press,
but about a criminal conspiracy. They say Radio Mille Collines and the newspaper
Kangura were as much part of the well-prepared plan to kill Tutsi as was the
creation of extremist militias and the importation and distribution of machetes
well before the killing began. In Rwanda, a nation of few televisions, radio has
enormous power, the prosecutors say.

Witnesses told the court that once the slaughter had begun -- it lasted about
100 days -- Radio Mille Collines was vital in steering the militia and calling
direct hits. They said the station would broadcast the names and addresses of
people who were targets along with their vehicle license plates and the hiding
places of refugees.

"There was an FM radio on every roadblock, there were thousands of roadblocks in
Rwanda," a police investigator said. He told the court that in prison interviews
"many people told us they had killed because the radio had told them to kill."

Mr. Rapp, the American prosecutor, said that even in the United States, with its
fierce protection of freedom of speech, "if you ordered a hit, using the media,
that would not be protected." He drew the analogy of a newspaper that became
part of a stock fraud. In such a case, he said, "the issue is not freedom of
expression but the crime of fraud." But Mr. Floyd, the American defense lawyer,
insisted that "this media trial" was the "most dangerous trial I have ever been
in because it may give comfort to despots in the future."

The three judges trying the case, led by Navanethem Pillay of South Africa, will
be looking at how hate speech is dealt with in various nations, like the United
States, Germany, France and South Africa, "because there is very little
precedent in the international field," according to a legal researcher.

The panel is likely to study the Streicher judgment at Nuremberg, the researcher
said, but also cases like the United States Supreme Court decision allowing a
Nazi group to march through a Jewish neighborhood. An unusual case on the books
involves a journalist in France. After World War II, the main announcer of Radio
Paris, Jean Herold Paquis, was tried for committing treason with his pro-German
broadcasts during the Nazi occupation. He was given the death sentence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza is accused of inciting ethnic hatred.
(Agence France-Presse); Prosecutors accuse Rwandan media executives of genocide
in 1994 when 800,000 people were massacred. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CENSORSHIP (89%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (77%); NEWS REPORTING (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); WORLD WAR
II (76%); LAWYERS (75%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (75%); PUBLISHING (75%);
BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (75%); JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(68%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS
AND MINORITIES

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%) SIMONS, MARLISE; STREICHER, JULIUS

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (78%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%); EASTERN AFRICA (92%); TANZANIA,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%); GERMANY (78%)

REGION: RWANDA;  NUREMBURG (GERMANY)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             863 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 3, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic On Offensive, Ever Mindful Of History

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 2


The key detail is not the nice navy suit, the patriotic tie or even the
irritated frown that Slobodan Milosevic brings with him into court here most
mornings at 9:30 sharp. What is important is the briefcase.

In that floppy leather bag, Mr. Milosevic, the former leader of Yugoslavia,
carries the documents, the reports, the scribbled notes from long telephone
calls with "associates" that he uses to rebut, with anger, the most minute
accusations against him. Three weeks into his trial on charges of war crimes, it
is an understatement to say he is merely defending himself. He seems laboring to
construct history -- almost atom by atom -- against a case that brands him,
essentially, one of the worst men on the planet.

"He's 60," said Adam LeBor, a British author writing a biography of Mr.
Milosevic. 'He's thinking about how he is going to be remembered. History has
always been important to the Serbs. And he's built his career on manipulating
history."

Mr. Milosevic appeared to sum up his motives for fighting so vigorously as he
argued to judges this week to be released during his trial -- to ensure, he
said, "an equality of arms" without the help of a lawyer in the courtroom. "All
of you know full well that I am not going to run away from this place of force
and injustice, where my people and where my country are being defended," he
said.

There are many reasoned criticisms of the war crimes tribunal itself, whether it
can be fair and outside the realm of politics that created it amid the darkness
of the Bosnian war that raged from 1992 to 1995. But Mr. Milosevic's decision to
engage actively in his defense -- as opposed to remaining mute and rejecting any
role -- seems to have made this a trial that functions, more or less, as
envisioned.

He may be talking mostly to his fellow Serbs back home, seeking rehabilitation
after they forced him from office in disgrace in October 2000, while the
prosecutors aim largely at the three judges who will decide his fate. But the
result is the same.

Mr. Milosevic sits quietly as witnesses, most of them ethnic Albanians who lost
family and friends in the war in Kosovo in 1999, describe slayings of civilians
and deportations. Then he cross-examines them, usually for hours, to make his
case that NATO bombing and soldiers from the Kosovo Liberation Army, the ethnic
Albanian guerrilla group, were responsible for any atrocities.

While the judges have given Mr. Milosevic much room to maneuver, many lawyers
say he has still shown a supple understanding of how to use such questioning
within the basic rules. He also uses his questions, victims of the war say, to
intimidate and harass.

"I would give him an A but not an A plus," said Anthony D'Amato, a law professor
at Northwestern University who defended a client at the tribunal here. "He's
bringing to the trial something no lawyer could possibly bring, which is
attention to everything he says."

So far, it has been playing well at home, and that is what is important to Mr.
Milosevic. A recent poll in Serbia showed that almost 42 percent of respondents
rated his performance a 5 out of 5, even if their rating of him as a politician
remained low, 2.5.

"Milosevic is quite successful in standing against The Hague by supporting the
fear Serbs have of this institution," said Srdjan Bogosavljevic, who runs
Strategic Marketing, which conducted the poll. "He is defending Serbia there,
rather than himself."

Whether Mr. Milosevic can sustain that support as evidence mounts in a trial
that has only just begun is an open question, however. He has, on one hand, had
some success in exploiting the ties that some witnesses had to the rebels. But
he has also shown a grasp of detail that could come back to haunt him, given
that the standard for his guilt is whether he knew or should have known what
underlings were doing. He has had some trouble rebutting witnesses who describe
specific atrocities by Serbian forces.

"He is accused of very serious criminal offenses without connection to NATO
bombardment," said Natasa Kandic, a Serbian human rights lawyer who documented
abuses by Serbs in Kosovo. "NATO bombardment cannot be an excuse for committing
crimes."

At one point this week, Mr. Milosevic asked Agron Berisha, an Albanian doctor
who said he saw two relatives shot to death next door, whether the Serbian
police had in fact been looking for weapons at that house.

"The police who came did not come to look for weapons," Dr. Berisha said. "They
came to kill Albanian civilians, men and women, children and pregnant women. The
sole reason was because they were Albanians."

Mr. Milosevic said: "You're Albanian too. They didn't kill you."

Dr. Berisha: "Fortunately, no."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (78%); WRITERS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
DEPORTATION (70%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (68%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (53%)
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY
(59%) KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY; NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

PERSON: FISHER, IAN; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (54%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); ALBANIA (92%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); NETHERLANDS (68%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             865 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths;
HOLLOMAN, DR. JOHN L. S. JR.

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Classified; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 185 words


HOLLOMAN-Dr. John L. S. Jr. Columbia University's Health Sciences Division and
the Columbia University Affiliation at Harlem Hospital Center salute the life
and mourn the loss of Dr.

John L. S. Holloman Jr., physician, servant of the Harlem community and Harlem
Hospital Center, and leader in the quest for social justice and proper health
care for all. Dr. Holloman exemplified the unswerving physician advocate as a
devoted practitioner in the personal care of his patients in the Harlem
community, a determined participant in civil rights demonstrations againt racial
discrimination, an effective critic of organized medicine's failure to
adequately address racial discrimination in health care, the distinguished
President of the National Medical Association, the noble President of the New
York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, and as the Medical Director of the
William F. Ryan Community Health Center. We cherish the life and work of Dr.
Holloman, a tireless champion of human rights and justice in medical care.
Gerald E. Thomson, M.D. Columbia University Harlem Hospital Center Affiliation

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); HOSPITALS
(88%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (87%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); DISCRIMINATION
(87%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (86%); CLINICS & OUTPATIENT SERVICES (72%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (71%); COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAMS (71%); RACE & RACISM (69%)

ORGANIZATION: COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (94%); NEW YORK CITY HEALTH & HOSPITALS CORP
(56%); NATIONAL MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (56%)

PERSON: HOLLOMAN, DR. JOHN L. S. JR.

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             868 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 6, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Nation Challenged: The Detainees;
Law Change Sought to Set Up DNA Databank for Captured Qaeda Fighters

BYLINE:  By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 5


Attorney General John Ashcroft said today that the Justice Department would ask
Congress to change a federal law to allow the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
maintain a DNA databank of profiles taken from Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters
detained in Afghanistan and Cuba.

Mr. Ashcroft endorsed legislation proposed by the F.B.I. to permit the bureau to
build a DNA database for suspected terrorists. He said that blood samples were
being taken from detainees in Cuba but that under current law, the authorities
could not put them in the F.B.I.'s database.

"These samples are not currently among those that would be allowed," Mr.
Ashcroft said at a news conference to announce formation of a new committee to
coordinate law enforcement efforts in the war against terrorism.

"There is no category in the system for inclusion of detainees in a war or
conflict," he said, "and we believe that that would be an appropriate amendment
in the interests of the public safety of the United States."

The government is proposing to create DNA profiles of the 300 detainees at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the 7,500 to 8,000 prisoners in Afghanistan.



The profiles would be stored in the national database to be used for comparison
purposes.

In part, the proposal reflects the problems the authorities have experienced in
positively identifying the captured fighters.

During a visit to Guantanamo on Sunday, the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller
III, said DNA samples from the detainees there and in Afghanistan would help
identify any of the prisoners who might be released and arrested again later.

The proposal is moving ahead as some detainees are beginning to provide the
authorities with intriguing accounts of their experiences as Al Qaeda fighters,
although the authorities are uncertain of their truthfulness, in part because
they are not sure who the prisoners are.

The proposal appears likely to raise concerns in Congress and among civil
liberties groups that have opposed efforts to expand DNA profiling to include
people who have not been convicted of crimes.

Currently, the national database includes profiles of convicted sex offenders
and other violent felons as well as genetic information from crime scenes and
missing person cases.

The proposal could raise new complaints about the treatment of the prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay.

Civil rights groups have objected to the confinement of prisoners in 8-foot by
8-foot chain link enclosures topped with corrugated metal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft is seeking an antiterrorist tool.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (93%); TERRORISM (92%); DNA (92%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); DNA TESTING (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); FORENSICS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); VIOLENT
CRIME (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); FELONIES (76%); CIVIL WAR (74%); MISSING PERSONS (73%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;
CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  DNA (DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC
ACID);  PRIVACY;  BLOOD

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AL-QAEDA (91%); US
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%) TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (73%) ;JOHNSTON, DAVID; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             869 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

GROUND ZERO: DETAINEES;
Civil Liberties Groups Sue U.S. On Closed Immigration Hearings

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, March 6


Several civil liberties groups sued the federal government today, challenging
its closed immigration hearings for those detained in New Jersey in the
investigation of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.

New Jersey is home to hundreds of immigrants who were taken into custody after
the attacks, and this lawsuit is the second over the detentions filed by the
state chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union -- this time on behalf of
two newspapers seeking to attend the hearings.

An unspecified number of unidentified detainees from Jersey City, Paterson and
other immigrant population centers in North Jersey have been held in the area's
county jails since being rounded up in the wake of the attacks six months ago.
Passaic County has acknowledged that its jail houses about 150 detainees under a
contract with the federal Immigration and Naturalization Service.

This morning, the New Jersey A.C.L.U., the Center for Constitutional Rights in
New York and other legal groups filed suit in Federal District Court here,
challenging the constitutionality of hearings that have been ordered closed by
Michael J. Creppy, the nation's chief immigration judge. Essentially, the suit
asserts that the First Amendment protects access to government proceedings.

Judge Creppy, following a directive from the United States attorney general,
John Ashcroft, issued a Sept. 21 memo on these so-called special interest cases,
instructing his subordinates to "hold the hearings individually, to close the
hearing to the public and to avoid discussing the case or otherwise disclosing
any information about the case to anyone outside the Immigration Court."

The A.C.L.U. named Mr. Ashcroft and Judge Creppy as defendants in the suit filed
today, which was brought on behalf of The New Jersey Law Journal and The Herald
News, which is based in West Paterson.

Stephen McCarthy, a managing editor for The Herald News, which has a daily
circulation of 38,000, said the lawsuit was intended "to ensure the free flow of
information to which our readers are entitled."

A hearing on the lawsuit is scheduled for April 5.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); PRISONS (76%); CORRECTIONS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%);
REFUGEES (73%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (72%); AIRLINES (61%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL
ALIENS;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  SUITS
AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (56%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (96%); NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  NEW JERSEY

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             872 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing World: Criminal Court Nears Reality

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 76 words


With Mauritius, Macedonia and Cyprus acting this week, 55 of the required 60
nations have ratified the treaty creating the International Criminal Court,
which would be the first permanent tribunal set up to try individuals charged
with genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations said he expected the court to
be established by July. The Bush administration opposes it.   Barbara Crossette
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (85%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (83%) UNITED
NATIONS; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); MAURITIUS (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE BOMBING;
Pentagon Says U.S. Airstrike Killed Women And Children

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


Women and children were among 14 people killed six days ago when American
fighter aircraft attacked a vehicle traveling from a suspected Qaeda sanctuary
in eastern Afghanistan, the military said tonight.

Most of those killed in the air strike were "adult males, but some were women
and children," the United States Central Command said in a statement tonight. A
spokesman for the command, Maj. Brad Lowell, said he had no more details on the
dead. A child wounded in the attack was taken to a military hospital for
treatment and was listed in stable condition, the statement said.

The attack took place at about 11 a.m. on March 6 near Shikin, a tiny village in
the highlands of eastern Afghanistan just south of the crux of the 11-day-old
offensive against Al Qaeda fighters in the Shah-i-Kot Valley.

American warplanes have dropped more than 2,500 bombs during the operation, and
Major Lowell said the vehicle struck six days ago was made a target because
military planners believed it was carrying Al Qaeda fighters. He said he did not
have any details on the sanctuary where the vehicle had come from.

"Clearly, this is an area where the bad guys are," Major Lowell said.  "We have
no indication to suggest these were not Al Qaeda. We think this was a good
target."

Major Lowell said he did not know whether military planners were aware that
women and children were traveling in the vehicle that was attacked.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld last week seemed to prepare the American
public for casualties among noncombatants, specifically the families of Al Qaeda
or Taliban fighters, who had taken their families with them to the battle zone.

Two days after Operation Anaconda began, Mr. Rumsfeld said that the women and
children were in the battle zone "of their own free will, knowing who they're
with and who they're supporting and who they're encouraging and who they're
assisting."

Civilian casualties caused by American attacks have gained greater attention
recently, especially since Mr. Rumsfeld acknowledged last month that 16 Afghan
fighters killed by American troops north of Kandahar in January were not members
of the Taliban or Al Qaeda.

In rare cases in which a bomb has malfunctioned and caused casualties, the
Pentagon has quickly owned up to its mistakes, such as in early October when an
errant bomb struck the Kabul office, financed by the United Nations, of an
operation to remove land mines. Four people were killed.

Human error was blamed when a Navy F/A-18 attack aircraft missed a Taliban
military target at Kabul airport and the 2,000-pound satellite-guided bomb
blasted civilian houses near Kabul. As many as four people were killed and eight
others injured. The target coordinates were apparently entered incorrectly,
military officials said.

Also in October, B-52's and FA-18's mistakenly attacked warehouses used by the
Red Cross for relief supplies when military officials forgot to take the
buildings in Kabul off a target list.

But the Pentagon has also been accused of relying on faulty intelligence,
sometimes provided by rival warlords, to attack targets, a charge military
officials deny.

Senior military officials have defended a missile attack by a Central
Intelligence Agency drone over eastern Afghanistan last month, calling the
strike "appropriate" and sharply questioning assertions by Afghans that the
missile killed as many as three peasants who were merely scrounging for scrap
metal.

Last Dec. 20, American warplanes attacked a convoy in Paktia Province, killing
as many as 50 to 60 people on the road and in surrounding villages. The Pentagon
said that Taliban leaders were in the vehicles and that the enemy fired first,
using anti-aircraft missiles. Survivors claimed the convoy was bringing tribal
elders to Kabul for the inauguration of the interim president.

Most often, Mr. Rumsfeld and military spokesmen have dismissed accusations of
mistakes as enemy propaganda. They express confidence in their targets and
regret for any "collateral damage." They maintain that extraordinary efforts
have been taken to minimize civilian losses.

Researchers from Human Rights Watch are in Afghanistan this month to examine the
attacks and to estimate the number of civilians killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); FIGHTERS
& BOMBERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); MILITARY
AIRCRAFT (78%); HIJACKING (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(76%); LANDMINES (73%); AIRLINES (73%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (72%); ARMED FORCES
(72%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: SCHMITT, ERIC; RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (85%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (85%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (96%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             882 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 969 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

U.S. Says Powell Demands Israel Withdraw Forces
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell delivered a private demand to Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon to withdraw from Palestinian-controlled areas, officials said. The
Bush administration's special envoy, Anthony C. Zinni, arrived in Jerusalem.
A1

Mr. Sharon said the army would withdraw from Ramallah.   A9


Lockerbie Appeal Rejected
Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, a Libyan intelligence official convicted of
murder in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, lost his appeal.   A3

A New Balkan Entity
Yugoslavia was officially declared dead when leaders from the two remaining
republics agreed to form a looser federation under the name Serbia and
Montenegro.   A3

Bush Proposes Aid Increase
President Bush proposed a three-year, $5 billion increase in American foreign
aid to nations that support human rights, adhere to strong legal systems and
have open markets.   A8

World Briefing   A6

NATION CHALLENGED   A10-11

Chief Suspect in Pearl Case Is Indicted by the U.S.
A federal grand jury indicted a British-born Muslim militant, Ahmed Omar Sheikh,
on charges that he orchestrated the kidnapping Daniel Pearl, who was killed by
his captors. The indictment was sought in the event the Pakistani case
collapsed.   A1

DNA Testing in Afghanistan
American forensic experts have begun testing the DNA of human tissue found in
the battlefield around Shah-i-Kot Valley to help determine whether any senior
leaders of Al Qaeda or the Taliban were killed.   A10

Cheney in Talks in Yemen
Vice President Dick Cheney flew to Yemen under extraordinary security and
pressed for joint efforts against remnants of Al Qaeda.   A10

Immigration and Local Police
A growing number of law enforcement agencies say they have begun to equate
immigration enforcement with protecting national security, and they want to be
involved.   A11

NATIONAL   A12-20

Senate Democrats Derail Bush Judicial Nomination
The Senate Judiciary Committee, in 10-to-9 party line votes, shut the door on
President Bush's efforts to promote Judge Charles W. Pickering Sr. to an appeals
court post.   A1

Meat Standards Sought
House and Senate Democrats introduced legislation that would restore the
Agriculture Department's authority to set and enforce standards for salmonella
in meat and poultry.   A12

U.S. Assails Tax Theory
The government sued a former accountant, Douglas P. Rosile Sr., saying he helped
more than 200 wealthy Americans try to avoid $36 million in taxes by asserting
that Americans who work for American companies need not pay income taxes.   A19

Findings in EgyptAir Crash
American investigators are approaching final approval of a report that concludes
that EgyptAir 990 crashed because of the deliberate actions of a co-pilot.   A20


Move to Void Gay Adoption Ban
Advocates of gay and civil rights announced a campaign to overturn a Florida law
barring homosexuals from adopting children.   A12

Fog Leads to Traffic Pileup
Four people were killed in a 125-vehicle morning pileup on Interstate 75 in
northwestern Georgia.   A12

WEEKEND   E1-32; E33-44

EDUCATION

Cutbacks in Wisconsin
A state budget crunch has led the University of Wisconsin to freeze
undergraduate admissions.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Nuns Say Brooklyn Diocese Fell Short in Abuse Inquiry
Three Roman Catholic nuns who told the diocese in 1996 about accusations of
pedophilia involving three parish priests in the 1970's expressed
dissatisfaction with the church investigation. One priest denied any misconduct
and one was already dead. The third was sent to Florida with the admonition to
stop working as a priest. He disputes diocesan assertions that he confessed to
molesting a child.   A1

Police Reducing Overtime
The city's fiscal crisis is forcing the Police Department to cut back on
overtime spending in programs that the Giuliani administration once described as
essential. Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the force would be able to police
the city effectively despite the cuts.   B1

Upgrading Public TV
New York State's nine public television stations have won support from
legislators in Albany for aid in converting to digital signals, a plan that
could cost taxpayers $50 million.   B1

OBITUARIES   A21

Thomas Winship
The editor who propelled The Boston Globe to regional leadership and national
stature during his tenure from 1965 to 1984 was 81.   A21

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Infections and Knee Surgery
Federal officials said they had turned up 25 cases of serious bacterial
infections in the last several years in people who had knee operations of the
sort that led to the death of a young Minnesota man four months ago. The surgery
involves donated tissue.   A15

Prize for Scientist-Priest
The Rev. Dr. John C. Polkinghorne, 71, a particle physicist who resigned his
Cambridge professorship 23 years ago to become an Anglican priest, was awarded
the $1 million Templeton Prize, which honors achievement in spiritual matters.
A18

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Arthur Andersen Indictment
The accounting firm has been indicted on a single count of obstruction of
justice involving the destruction of thousands of documents related to the Enron
investigation. The firm intends to fight the charge.   A1

Report on Traders' Losses
The currency trader who hid losses of $691 million over five years, John M.
Rusnak, was "unusually clever and devious" and bold, according to an internal
report by his employer.   C1

'Celebrity Boxing' Pulls 'Em In
Fox's special drew 15.5 million viewers -- more than almost any other Fox
entertainment show this season.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

SPORTS   D1-8

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: A failure of energy; the stolen election in Zimbabwe; reviewing
Harvard's Business Review; Tom Winship's Boston newspaper.

Columns: Nicholas D. Kristof, Paul Krugman.

Crossword   E5
TV Listings   E32
Public Lives   B2
Weather   B8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FORENSICS (90%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); AIRLINES (89%); GAY PARENTING (88%);
AL-QAEDA (87%); ACCIDENT INVESTIGATIONS (86%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (79%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); MURDER (76%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(76%); APPEALS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TALIBAN (75%); TAX LAW (74%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (74%); LGBT RIGHTS (73%); BIOETHICS (73%); POULTRY (73%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (73%); LEGISLATION (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); APPROVALS
(72%); BOMBINGS (71%); APPEALS COURTS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%);
GENETIC SCREENING (70%); DNA (70%); FOOD SAFETY REGULATION (68%); ADOPTION LAW
(68%); CIVIL RIGHTS (68%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (68%); IMMIGRATION LAW (68%); GRAND
JURY (67%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); DNA TESTING (65%); MEATS (65%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (63%); ADOPTION (60%); INCOME TAX (50%); BACTERIA (50%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

COMPANY: EGYPTAIR HOLDING CO (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (50%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (77%); DICK CHENEY (58%); CHARLES W PICKERING (57%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (94%); YEMEN (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%);
SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             884 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Plans to Raise Foreign Aid and Tie It to Reforms

BYLINE:  By ELISABETH BUMILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


President Bush today proposed a three-year, $5 billion increase in American
foreign aid to poor nations that support human rights, adhere to strong systems
of law and have open markets.

The new money represents a roughly 15 percent annual increase in America's
existing $10 billion annual foreign aid budget, which has not grown in a decade
and is at its lowest level since World War II. International development experts
called the additional $5 billion significant, although not nearly as much as
they said was needed.

Mr. Bush made the promise of aid, which must be approved by Congress, contingent
on the recipients' undertaking a broad range of economic, political and social
reforms.

"We will reward nations that have more open markets and sustainable budget
policies -- nations where people can start and operate a small business without
running the gantlets of bureaucracy and bribery," Mr. Bush said in a speech at
the Inter-American Development Bank.

Mr. Bush also linked foreign aid to the eradication of terrorism, at least as a
prescription to help "failed states" that harbor terrorists.

"Poverty doesn't cause terrorism," Mr. Bush said. "Being poor doesn't make you a
murderer. Most of the plotters of September the 11th were raised in comfort. Yet
persistent poverty and oppression can lead to hopelessness and despair. And when
governments fail to meet the most basic needs of their people, these failed
states can become havens for terror."

Mr. Bush was joined on the bank's stage by Bono, the lead singer of the Irish
rock band U2 and an advocate for the poor, who met with the president in the
Oval Office just before the speech. Development experts said that in recent
weeks Bono had worked extensively with senior administration officials,
including Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser, to push for the increase in aid.

"As you can see, I'm traveling in some pretty good company today -- Bono," Mr.
Bush said, gesturing to the singer, who had on his signature sky blue wraparound
sunglasses. Mr. Bush said that Bono "is willing to lead to achieve what his
heart tells him, and that is nobody -- nobody -- should be living in poverty and
hopelessness in the world."

Mr. Bush's speech was in essence a pre-emptive strike before a conference he
will attend next week in Monterrey, Mexico, on global aid to the poor.

The United States has come under increasing criticism from Europe and
development agencies for its foreign aid budget, which is the smallest, relative
to the size of the economy, of any rich nation.

"He had to step forward and assert leadership," said C. Fred Bergsten, the
director of the Institute for International Economics and an advocate of
increased spending on development assistance. "It takes him to Monterrey in a
much more positive vein. Otherwise he would have gone down there as the target
of criticism and attacks from everybody else."

Nonetheless, Democrats and some development agencies said that the $5 billion
increase, which would not take effect until 2004, was too little, too late, and
that it paled beside Mr. Bush's proposed $48 billion increase in military
spending.

"Where's the beef?" said George Soros, the billionaire philanthropist and
longtime donor to developing nations. "It's totally inadequate as far as the
amounts involved -- a token gesture instead of something that could successfully
impact most of the poor countries. This is unfortunately not receiving the kind
of priority that other things are receiving in the government."

Mr. Bush's speech was praised by James D. Wolfensohn, the president of the World
Bank, even though the $5 billion increase fell short of what Mr. Wolfensohn has
asked for, which is a doubling of foreign aid spending by all rich nations. Mr.
Wolfensohn and the Bush administration have been locked in a confrontation over
the bank's effectiveness.

Today, with Mr. Wolfensohn on the stage, Mr. Bush called once again for reforms
at the bank. Mr. Bush's Treasury secretary, Paul H. O'Neill, has said that the
bank has driven poor countries "into a ditch" by lending instead of donating
funds.

"We applaud the president for his statement on the importance of increasing
development assistance," Mr. Wolfensohn said in a brief statement.

In his speech, Mr. Bush said that the additional $5 billion would expand his
administration's fight against AIDS, bring computer instruction to young
professionals in developing countries and help African businesses sell their
goods abroad.

"The goal is to provide people in developing nations the tools they need to
seize the opportunities of the global economy," he said. "In return for this
additional commitment, we expect nations to adopt the reforms and policies that
make development effective and lasting."

Mr. Bush said that Mr. O'Neill and Secretary Powell would develop "clear and
concrete and objective criteria" for determining if a nation met the American
standards for foreign aid, and that the standards would then be applied
"rigorously and fairly." Mr. Bush was not more specific, and development experts
said they could not judge the effectiveness of the criteria until the
administration determined how they would be defined, monitored and enforced.

Other administrations as well as the World Bank have set preconditions for
foreign aid, but this is the first time that Mr. Bush has announced a clear-cut
policy that he wants to make a cornerstone of his administration's foreign aid.

Mr. Bush called it a "new compact for global development" that is to be defined
by "a new accountability" for both rich and poor nations. "Greater contributions
from developed nations must be linked to greater responsibility from developing
nations," he said.

Mr. Bush is to leave next Thursday for Monterrey, followed by visits to Lima,
Peru, and El Salvador before returning to Washington on March 24.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (95%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); FAILED &
FRAGILE STATES (90%); BUDGETS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (90%);
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (89%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%);
TERRORISM (87%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); POOR
POPULATION (78%); TRENDS (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (73%); SMALL BUSINESS
(73%); APPROVALS (73%); MUSIC (69%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (64%); POP & ROCK
(64%); WORLD WAR II (56%) ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  FOREIGN AID;
FINANCES;  BUDGETS AND BUDGETING;  THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

COMPANY: INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (83%)

ORGANIZATION: INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (83%) INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK

INDUSTRY: NAICS921130 PUBLIC FINANCE ACTIVITIES (83%); NAICS521110 MONETARY
AUTHORITIES - CENTRAL BANK (83%); SIC6082 FOREIGN TRADE & INTERNATIONAL BANKING
INSTITUTIONS (83%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); BONO (89%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) BUMILLER,
ELISABETH; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); BONO (MUSICIAN); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); RICE,
CONDOLEEZZA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); MEXICO (79%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             886 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Poverty's Tragic Price

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 152 words


To the Editor:

"Children as Barter in a Famished Land" (front page, March 8) recounted the
unspeakable misery of Afghan boys sold by their starving families -- a tragedy
of poverty and war. But the article barely mentions girl-selling, only observing
the practice of selling young girls into marriage.

Translation: forced labor and sexual slavery.

Taliban and mujahedeen factions also engage in sex-trafficking of women and
girls without even bothering to disguise it as marriage.

Child-selling to people who use children for sex and/or labor is a worldwide and
domestic problem.

Refugees fleeing Afghanistan report countless girls and women sold by their
families or kidnapped.

We need a public spotlight on this global problem, stronger antitrafficking laws
and foreign aid to alleviate the poverty that exacts such a terrible price.

KIM GANDY
President
National Organization for Women
Washington, March 13, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STARVATION (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING
(90%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (90%); WOMEN (90%); FAMILY (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (88%); FAMINE (88%); TALIBAN (88%); FORCED
LABOR (87%); SLAVERY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); REFUGEES (71%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (70%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(50%) CHILDREN AND YOUTH;  WOMEN;  SLAVERY;  FAMINE

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (83%) NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR
WOMEN

PERSON: GANDY, KIM A

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             889 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED;
Qaeda's Grocery Lists And Manuals of Killing

BYLINE:   By DAVID ROHDE and C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4498 words


On Aug. 17, 1995, Amir Maawia Siddiqi, the son of a bookshop owner in a small
village in Pakistan, set down his oath of allegiance to the jihad.

"I, Amir Maawia Siddiqi, son of Abdul Rahman Siddiqi, state in the presence of
God that I will slaughter infidels my entire life," he wrote. "And with the will
of God I will do these killings in the supervision and guidance with Harkat
ul-Ansar."

He accepted a code name, Abu Rashid, signed his name and concluded, "May God
give me strength in fulfilling this oath."

The oath, found in a house in Kabul used by a Pakistani Islamist group, was part
of an extensive paper record that fleeing Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters left
behind last fall at sites across Afghanistan. Reporters for The New York Times
collected over 5,000 pages of documents from abandoned safe houses and training
camps destroyed by bombs.

It is a rare collection, the raw, unmediated stuff of the jihadis' lives.
Individually, the documents are shards -- as mundane as a grocery list and as
chilling as notes for the proper positioning of a truck bomb. But taken
together, they tell a rich inside story of the network of radical Islamic groups
that Osama bin Laden helped assemble in Afghanistan.

The documents show that the training camps, which the Bush administration has
described as factories churning out terrorists, were instead focused largely on
creating an army to support the Taliban, which was waging a long ground war
against the Northern Alliance.

An estimated 20,000 recruits passed through roughly a dozen training camps since
1996, when Mr. bin Laden established his base of operations in Afghanistan,
American officials say. Most received basic infantry training that covered the
use of various small arms, as well as antiarmor and antiaircraft weapons and, in
some cases, basic demolition, the documents show.

"The vast majority of them were cannon fodder," a United States government
official said.

A smaller group of recruits was selected for elite training that appeared to
prepare them for terrorist actions abroad. "Observing foreign embassies and
facilities," was the subject of one Qaeda espionage course. Another taught
"shooting the personality and his guard from a motorcycle."

Above all, the documents show how far Mr. bin Laden progressed in realizing his
central vision: joining Muslim militants, energized by local causes, into a
global army aimed at the West. From the mid-1990's on, recruits came to
Afghanistan from more than 20 countries, as varied as Iraq and Malaysia, Somalia
and Britain.

The young men arrived in Afghanistan under the auspices of several different
militant groups, each of which ran training camps. But once there, they received
strikingly similar courses of religious indoctrination and military training.
Parts of the same Arabic-language terrorist manual were found in houses of three
of those groups: Al Qaeda, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and Harkat
ul-Ansar, the Pakistani group that changed its name to Harkat ul-Mujahadeen and
has been linked to the killing of the American journalist Daniel Pearl.

Commingled under that umbrella was a mix of spoken and written languages; in the
documents translated by The Times, there were more than half a dozen: Arabic,
Urdu, Tajik, Dari, Pashto, Uzbek and Russian. A few documents were in English.

This community of militants had progressed so far that it took on the feel of a
bureaucracy. There were forms to keep track of ammunition, spending and more. Al
Qaeda commanders, like middle managers everywhere, griped about the bosses. In
one letter, a commander commiserated with another about their boss's lack of
support, and tried to bolster his friend's flagging morale, reminding him,
"Jihad is, by definition, surrounded by difficulties."

Reporters came upon the documents in musty basements and yards strewn with trash
and grenades and mines. Some were streaked with mud, others partly burned. They
hardly present a complete picture of Al Qaeda. They show no specific plans for
terror operations abroad, and while hinting at an ambition to use nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons, they contain no evidence that the groups possess
them.

They are a decidedly eclectic amalgam. In a house used by the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, an Islamist publication inveighed against "the phenomena of the
Beatles and the hippies," which had "caused a great danger against the security
of America and Europe." A National Rifle Association target was found in a
Harkat house in Kabul. A few miles away, in a Qaeda house, a sign implored, "My
brother the mujahid, my brother the visitor, please keep the guest house clean."


Resumes of Holy Warriors

The letter, dated Feb. 26, 1995, was addressed to "respected emir for ministry
of ammunition" and it announced the arrival at a Harkat safe house of another
recruit.

"Brother, Muhammad Afzal, who is with this letter, is coming for the training,"
said the letter from a Harkat official in Pakistan. "He is master in karate. You
can try to take full advantage of him, very hard-working fellow. Blessings to
all other fellows."

Throughout the late 1990's, young men streamed through the Khyber Pass and on to
dusty training camps operated by Al Qaeda and other Islamic radical groups. Many
carried letters of introduction as proof of their trustworthiness.

Lists found in houses around Afghanistan show that the men came from countries
in the Islamic world and beyond: Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan,
Kyrgyzstan, Syria, Egypt, Morocco, Algeria, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, Libya, Sudan, Somalia, Bosnia, Bangladesh, China, the
Philippines, Russia, Britain, Canada and the United States.

The imported military force turned middle-class homes in Kabul, Mazar-i-Sharif,
Kandahar and other cities into headquarters and guest houses, crammed with
recruits. Derelict Afghan military bases and fallow fields became training
grounds.

A variety of documents, mostly handwritten, offer glimpses of the young men, and
of what drew them to the jihad. One document, found in a Kabul house used by
Harkat, contains short biographical sketches of 39 recruits. They were all
unmarried. Few had gone beyond secondary school. But quite a few, the
interviewers noted, had studied the Koran. Several had previously been connected
to fundamentalist groups at home. Many, it appears, were asked if their parents
had given them permission to join the jihad. Twelve, the document noted, had
permission. Fifteen did not.

The list gave this information about a man with the code name Sultan Sajid: "Son
of Mr. Muhammad Anwar, owner of sweet store. Age: 18 years. Status: Unmarried.
Education: Matriculate and learned Koran by translation. Knows how to make
sweets, and can hunt birds and fish. Five brothers and four sisters. Address:
Kamoke District Gujranwala, at Saboki dandian. Got permission from home
happily."

Of a man code-named Hafiz Abu Muhammad, the document says: "Education:
Matriculate, memorized Koran. Knows how to embroider. Served in military for
three and a half years. He is fond of jihad; that is why he came to us."

Sixteen-year-old Hafiz Muhammad Arif was the son of a customs officer and had
five brothers and four sisters, one in medical school. "No permission from
home," the list says. "His family wanted to send him to America. Impressed by
the speech of Mr. Maulana Fazal-ur-Rehman Khalil," Harkat's leader.

Across Kabul, near the Intercontinental Hotel, an ornate, two-story home with a
fireplace in the living room had been converted into a Qaeda safe house. There,
the lists revealed less personal information; code names were primarily used.
But they did record the weapons the men carried.

A man from Yemen, code-named Abu Labath, was armed with a Kalashnikov assault
rifle and three hand grenades. He arrived on May 7, 1999. Abu Qatada al-Madani,
a code name suggesting he came from the Saudi city of Medina, arrived on Nov.
29, 1998, armed with a Kalashnikov, an ammunition pouch and hand grenades. He
had memorized through the "second part" of the Koran and completed "half of the
foundational course."

Afghanistan was the embodiment of Mr. bin Laden's vision of a global jihad.
Radical leaders and foot soldiers met there, networked and bonded, sharing
military tactics and religious tracts. The abandoned houses and camps were
strewn with inspirational pamphlets, books, videos and CD's, all sounding the
call to arms. Central to their message was the re-establishment of the
Caliphate, the era of Islam's ascendancy after the death of Muhammad in the
eighth century.

The Caliphate "is the only and best solution to the predicaments and problems
from which Muslims suffer today and indubitable cure to the turbulence and
internal struggles that plague them," said one English-language treatise. "It
will remedy the economic underdevelopment which bequeathed upon us a political
dependence on an atheist East and infidel West."

There was a publication for every count in Mr. bin Laden's indictment of the
West.

The cover of a magazine called The Window shows a woman weeping as a cobra
bearing the Star of David looms over Muslim protesters at the Dome of the Rock,
the holy Islamic site in Jerusalem. A pamphlet with an American soldier
superimposed over the holy city of Mecca urges readers, "Fight until there is no
discord and all of religion is for God." A yellow paperback book, "Announcement
of Jihad Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Holy Places," shows a
map of Saudi Arabia encircled by American, French and British flags. Its author
was "Sheik Osama bin Laden."

Diverse Muslim groups joined Mr. bin Laden's global jihad. Sometimes, they also
came seeking help in pressing their own causes back home.

In a Qaeda house in Kabul, there was a public statement from the "Islamic
Battalion, Kurdistan, Iraq," dated Nov. 20, 1999, calling on "the movement for
Islamic unity" to help in the jihad against President Saddam Hussein. There was
also a handwritten letter to Mr. bin Laden from an unidentified Russian who said
his group needed training for two attacks in Russia.

Harkat members fought alongside the Taliban in Afghanistan, but their true
obsession was India's control of the disputed territory of Kashmir. In the
moldering basement of the group's Kabul house, amid rocket-propelled grenades,
ammunition boxes and land mines, sat boxes of glossy green labels for a
recruiting cassette featuring "sermons of distinguished Muslim scholars" and
"jihadi poems."

Fighters from Uzbekistan and Tajikistan had a different agenda: installing an
Islamic government in Uzbekistan, and ultimately uniting Central Asia and
Xinjiang, a predominantly Muslim region of western China, into an sprawling
Islamic theocracy called Turkestan.

"All the Muslim people of Turkestan have lost their patience and have chosen the
holy road to emigration for preparing for jihad-in-the-way-of-God," said a flier
found in the headquarters of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan in
Mazar-i-Sharif. "Thank God that all these new immigrants have completed jihad
training and are prepared for practical jihad."

Push-Ups and Sit-Ups

A sprawling training camp in the serene farming village of Rishkhor, 20 miles
south of Kabul, is mostly rubble now. Walls are still painted with Koranic
verses and slogans invoking the jihad. "All the Christians, Jews and infidels
have joined hands against Afghanistan," one poster begins. Bombing by American
fighters last fall destroyed all but two of the dozen or so buildings and turned
fields into a landscape of craters. The ground is littered with unexploded mines
and unspent ammunition. Everywhere there is paper.

Documents from Rishkhor -- where Afghans, Pakistanis and Arabs trained -- along
with records, notebooks and manuals found elsewhere in Afghanistan, show that
recruits received the kind of regimented, demanding basic training that infantry
soldiers get in much of the world, but with steady infusions of Islamic fervor.
This is reflected in the "Rules for the Day" found at a Harkat house. It
declares:

"Follow all Islamic principles.

"Pray five times a day.

"Punctual for food.

"No ammunition training without the permission of the teacher.

"Cleanliness.

"Clean beds and tents once a week.

"Clean the environment.

"Do not leave compound.

"No political discussions.

"No arguments.

"No drugs.

"Go to bed early."

Physical training began at 6 a.m., according to a schedule found at the house.
Calisthenics performance was scrupulously monitored. One morning, a recruit
named Abu Turab led his class of 38, knocking off 45 push-ups and 40 sit-ups and
crawling 25 meters in 21 seconds, according to a chart.

Abu Rashid was in the middle of the pack, with 30 push-ups, 30 sit-ups and 35
seconds in the crawl. Even injured men took part. Abu Hanza, who the chart noted
had a wounded hand, and Asad Ullah, with a wounded leg, did 30 sit-ups each and
crawled 25 yards in 23 seconds. (They skipped push-ups.)

Others struggled to make the grade. Saif Ullah took a full 60 seconds to crawl
those 25 yards. Others labored to complete a group run. Khalid was "slightly
behind," Abdullah "cannot run along," and Asad Ullah "stopped three times,"
according to the chart. Tipu Sultan appeared to be the worst of all, managing
only 11 push-ups and 10 sit-ups and skipping the group run. His name was
scratched off the list.

After their workout, recruits took a break, presumably for breakfast, and
returned for basic infantry classes from 8:30 to 9:10, 9:15 to 10:40 and 11:10
to 12:35. After lunch and prayers, the afternoon was for Koran study, sports and
lectures. Students answered essay questions. "It is not easy to write on martyrs
such as these," one said in answering a question on the lives of the great
Muslim martyrs. "The pen does not give them their due."

Classes at the different camps followed the same basic infantry lesson plan. A
training notebook from a recruit named Muhammad Rashid Arghany moved through the
use of the Kalashnikov, rocket-propelled grenades, mortars, map reading and
celestial navigation. The course was highly detailed, and the recruit appears to
have taken handwritten notes every step of the way.

Military instruction drew on religious doctrine. "Without a sign from the leader
you should not retreat," read the notes of a student in a class on ambush
tactics. "Because the Koran says: 'Do not retreat, but stay steady; in time of
war there is no death. My only power is the power of Allah.' "

The instructor emphasized the importance for gunmen to remain completely still
while laying in wait. "This is very difficult work, and therefore in order to
save oneself from melancholy, and selfishness and confusion, you must remain in
prayer and meditation on Allah," the class notes say.

The notebook goes on to describe how to carry out a coordinated infantry
assault, a carefully timed maneuver in which infantrymen advance while support
troops on their flank fire directly in front of them. If the timing is off, the
advancing soldiers can be killed by the fire of their comrades.

"If he is hit by their own bullets or if the enemy's fire becomes intense, do
not become upset, but do your work with patience and care," the notes say. The
lecturer explained that a soldier killed by his own forces would still be
considered a "shahid," or martyr, and be granted immediate entrance to heaven.

Like any army, though admittedly with its own religious and political
vernacular, the jihadi network was constantly indoctrinating and building esprit
de corps. A quick summary of the "Goals and Objectives of Jihad" was found in a
Qaeda house:

"1. Establishing the rule of God on earth.

"2. Attaining martyrdom in the cause of God.

"3. Purification of the ranks of Islam from the elements of depravity."

Another document described the two "illegitimate excuses for leaving Jihad" --
"love of the world" and "hatred of death."

The Qaeda Media Committee made sure past victories were remembered. A flier from
one guest house advertised a screening of a new film, "The Destruction of the
American Destroyer Cole."

"Please let us know your comments and suggestions," the committee wrote.

Other notebooks depicted an entirely different type of training: espionage and
explosives classes, perhaps for more advanced recruits or those headed to terror
cells abroad. (Ahmed Ressam, a Qaeda member convicted of plotting to blow up Los
Angeles International Airport during millennium celebrations, testified at a
trial in New York last year that he first attended a basic infantry camp and
then received advanced training.)

An espionage class notebook, written in neat Arabic but not signed, had the
following headings: "How to use a code, security of operations, security plan,
intelligence, intelligence gathering, surveillance, methods of communication,
methods of opening envelopes, persuasion, planning for intelligence operations,
recruitment, managing assets, choosing an asset."

"Persuasion," for instance, involved "obtaining information from a person
through conversations with him without his realizing the importance of what he
is saying."

There were step-by-step instructions on surveillance: "Get complete description
of person, his habits, his daily errands, his children and his wife, his
standing in the community, his skills and educational goals, his income, when he
wakes, the best times for inspecting his house, places he goes regularly."

An Arabic-language explosives curriculum found in the Harkat house gave detailed
instructions on how to make and handle a range of substances: nitroglycerin,
HMDT, RDX, C-4, C-3, dynamite and ammonium nitrate.

A final section dealt with "major poisons and poison gasses," which "can be
extracted in various ways, and we shall, God willing, review these various ways
later." The document listed the toxins -- including ricin, botulism and cyanide
-- and described how to manufacture and use them.

There were syllabuses for a variety of advanced classes. For one class, a Harkat
document listed these "standards to be achieved":

"1. Follow the armed person, and kill him quietly.

"2. To be able to patrol closely.

"3. To penetrate at enemy positions with expertise."

Another Harkat class, this one 65 days long, involved instruction in such
matters as "hit teams" and "hijacking of air, bus, ship." For yet another, the
fourth item on the syllabus was "Movie, 'Great Escape.' "

Among the students at one elite 10-day program was a Qaeda recruit named Atta
al-Azdi. On his first day, a Sunday, he learned "shooting the personality and
his guard from a motorcycle," his class schedule shows. On Monday, he moved
along to "shooting at two targets in a car from above, front and back."

The training, which included strict limits on the range and number of bullets he
could use, wound up with lessons in "killing personality using R.P.G.," a
rocket-propelled grenade, and "killing personality and guards from car."

An instructor scribbled a one-word evaluation of Mr. Azdi's performance during
the final two sessions: "Good."

Bureaucracy and Paperwork

Behind the sprawling network of camps lay an extensive bureaucracy. And like
every bureaucracy, it churned out paper: expense forms, finance notebooks,
computer parts inventories, lists of rented houses.

"Twenty-Second Jihad Division -- Kabul Front" had its own forms for tracking
soldiers and expenses, with the name of its commander, "Abdul Wakil from
Somalia," printed in the lower left-hand corner. "Al Qaeda Ammunition Warehouse"
forms kept an inventory of weapons and munitions.

Officials were hounded to monitor spending. In a testy note dated June 19, 2001,
a Qaeda official named Abdel Hadi el-Ansary wrote to a colleague, "El Shaikh Abu
Abdalla had personally emphasized for the second time the necessity of
absolutely sending the budget expenditure tables."

Even the most common expenditures were recorded. "Bread, vegetables, cooking
oil, medicines," one expense form read. "Potatoes, onions, tea, rice," read
another.  One document accounted for an assistant chef's salary of $20 a month.

There were even inventories of martyrs. A computer-generated list found in the
Harkat house enumerated each man's "time of death," "place of death," "cause of
death," "where buried," and "number of grave."

The groups even produced organizational guidelines, including a 28-page
Arabic-language document, "Forming Military Units at the Behest of the Ministry
of Jihad," found in a Qaeda house.

One page devoted to command structure listed three divisions under the
"executive officer": "administrative affairs," "personnel issues" and "social
work." It went on to enumerate various administrative responsibilities,
including "monitoring young men," "attention to administrative affairs of
brothers staying for periods of longer than six months," and "undertaking basic
services -- food, cleaning clothes, making sure meals are served on time."

Another page showed how to set up a camp for a battalion of soldiers, with a
diagram showing placement of the entrance gate, sleeping quarters, ammunition
warehouse, water tank, mosque and headquarters. The camp, the document said, "is
like a beehive," where soldiers should "check and maintain their weapons,"
"train for combat," receive "moral guidance" and have "pure, clean competitions
between the various units for excellence."

There were equipment specifications. Each "mujahid," according to a Harkat
document, should get "uniform, boots, army belt, hat, handkerchief, flashlight,
batteries, soap, pencil, jackets, gloves, medicines."

Mr. bin Laden, who has effectively used the media to fashion an image and spread
his message, was also quite interested in what the press was saying about him
and his cause. The March 2001 issue of the Qaeda Media Committee's monthly press
packet included news articles culled from the Internet with these headlines:

"Taliban Halt Production of Opium."

"Belgian Intelligence Service Stops Bin Laden Smuggling of Russian Missiles."

"Jordan: 9 Indictments Against 2 Leaders of Bin Laden's Organization."

"Taliban Execute 2 Women Accused of Prostitution."

Under a headline that read "American State Department: Israel Used Excessive
Force" was a picture of a Israeli soldier picking up the body of an Arab man.
The soldier resembled former Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel. Under the
picture was a note: "Barak murdering a Muslim."

If the jihadi army operated like other organizations, it also displayed much of
the usual internal bickering.

Recruits complained about their instructors. "Thank God for the opportunity to
take this course," a recruit named Rami wrote in what appeared to be an
evaluation of one of his classes. But then he pointed out that "I'm not sure
about the requirements of this course, since the trainer pressures the trainees
and stresses their nerves."

Commanders griped about their bosses. In an Aug. 27, 2001, letter, a commander
named Abd al-Hadi al-Ansari commiserated with a colleague, Abd al-Wakil, about
how their superior did not support them. He said he had noticed a recent loss of
morale in Mr. Wakil and counseled him on how to navigate the frustrations of the
bureaucracy.

"Don't let anyone put pressure on you. Don't accept an assignment you cannot
implement," he wrote. "Whenever you are given a new assignment, try to create
your own team and never choose brothers that are older than you."

Even the big bosses carped.

"I think that there are no more people who truly trust in good any more," said a
memo dated June 15, 1998, from a Qaeda house. "Everyone has trained his
followers so that they are only concerned about their own status, name and rank,
that they have forgotten everything about following orders and respecting their
main leader."

It was signed "the servant of Islam Mullah Muhammad Omar."

Chain of Command

Mr. bin Laden's dream took shape on the desolate Shamali Plain, a broad plateau
just north of Kabul where years of trench warfare have turned a belt of
vineyards into a maze of wilted vines and jagged stumps.  Hundreds of young
Muslim men who came from around the world for indoctrination and training in
Afghanistan were sent to the front to fight for the Taliban in a grinding war
with the Northern Alliance.

Defending the Taliban's hold on Afghanistan was the primary mission of the
jihad, and Northern Alliance soldiers spoke with awe of the willingness of
Arabs, Pakistanis and other volunteers to die for the cause.

Mr. bin Laden, in a long dispatch to the Muslim faithful found in a house used
by Al Qaeda in Kabul, urged them to recognize Mullah Omar, the head of the
Taliban, as "the leader of the faithful."

But for many fighters, the deepest inspiration was Mr. bin Laden himself.

In a handwritten Arabic letter from the trenches north of Kabul, a commander
named Oma al-Adani described a dream "one of the brothers" had about Mr. bin
Laden. "I was in my bedroom, and I saw the Prophet Muhammad," he wrote. "He
looked to his left and saw Fahd, the king of Saudi Arabia, and said, 'Those are
not from me, and I am not from them.' "

"Then he walked and saw Sheik Osama and the martyrs," a reference to Mr. bin
Laden and his followers, "and said, 'Those are from me, and I am of them.' "

The machinery that Mr. bin Laden had assembled answered his call to defend the
Taliban. Ledgers, notebooks and letters found in houses used by Al Qaeda and
Harkat detailed the movement of soldiers to units stationed north of Kabul. A
notebook entitled "Kabul front" and written in Arabic appeared to record
fighters sent to the front: Bilal, 20, who went to Afghanistan in 1998, and
Amir, 23, who arrived in 2000.

Left behind in the trenches of the Shamali Plain are crumpled scraps of paper
that reflect the diversity of fighters Mr. bin Laden had drawn to the jihad. In
one bunker, Lufti, an Arab recruit, left a note written by two friends,
imploring, "Don't forget us in your prayers while you're gone." Pakistani
newspapers and cassettes with sermons by radical Pakistani clerics were found a
few hundreds yards away. A pay stub for a young Pakistani man named Ahmad
Bakhtair lay on the ground outside one bunker. His job title was "helper,"
according to the stub, and his net salary in May 2001 was 2,655 rupees, or
roughly $40.

In another trench, a volunteer left another scrap: a page from Newsday, the Long
Island newspaper, dated April 19, 2001.

Today, the young men of Mr. bin Laden's jihad are again in combat, this time
against American troops.

The end of their story has not yet been written, but the words of a Harkat
recruit who fought against the Northern Alliance in an earlier battle may
suggest one.

"I was wounded," he wrote in a diary found in a Harkat house. "Out of four of
us, three of us were wounded and the fourth one, Brother Muhammad Siddiq, was
martyred. . . . We were taken to the hospital, and there we said farewell to
Brother Siddiq. We three are still in search of our home."

The Jihad Files

Future articles will further examine documents left behind in Afghanistan by
Islamic militants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

SERIES: THE JIHAD FILES: Life in bin Laden's Army

CORRECTION-DATE: March 22, 2002



CORRECTION: A front-page caption on Sunday for an illustration of an
Urdu-language document left behind by Islamic militants in Afghanistan
identified it incorrectly. The document was an oath signed by Muhammad Sajid
Ali, a recruit from Pakistan. (The caption referred to another recruit's oath,
previously considered for publication.)

GRAPHIC: Photos: This 1995 oath of allegiance by Amir Maawia Siddiqi,
handwritten in Urdu, was one small piece of a trove of documents from sites
abandoned by Al Qaeda and other militant Islamic groups in Afghanistan. (pg. 1);
A training camp near Mazar-i-Sharif. (Chang W. Lee/The New York Times); A Kabul
house used by Al Qaeda. (Tyler Hicks/Getty Images, for The New York Times);
Osama bin Laden on video in June 2001. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. 18); Cased
rockets in a Qaeda house in Kabul. (Tyler Hicks/Getty Images, for The New York
Times); Bags of books left in a Kunduz building. (Chang W. Lee/The New York
Times)(pg. 19) ChartVarious documents found in training camps and safe houses in
Afghanistan. Recruiting 1. A blank oath of allegiance to the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan found in the home of the group's military commander in
Mazar-i-Sharif. The final passage reads, "I give my oath with Allah as my
witness to you that I am ready to be a martyr in order to attain the high goals
jihad has striven for and fight with all my heart to the last drop of my blood
with a pure mind and patient resoluteness and endure every kind of difficult
condition in this jihad movement." 2. A cassette tape found in a house in Kabul
used by Harkat-ul-Mujahedeen, a Pakistani Islamist group. The cassette features
"sermons by distinguished Muslim scholars" and "jihad poems." The top line says,
"Battle has been fixed as your duty." 3. A computer-generated sign found in the
Harkat house that reads, "Live with Honer, Die with Honer." 4. A declaration of
jihad in Dari from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan found in the home of its
military commander in Mazar-i-Sharif. One passage reads, "To release these
innocent people from the claws of the oppressors, to return the thousands of
closed mosques and schools to the Muslims, for our higher goals to erect and
impose the rule of Islam and Islamic law, we mention this only solution, jihad."
5. A book found in a house used by Al Qaeda in Kabul: "Announcement of Jihad
Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Holy Places," by Sheik Osama bin
Laden. Life in the Camps 6. A 1999 Harley-Davidson motorcycle calendar found in
a house used by Al Qaeda in Kabul. 7. A handwritten sign found in a Qaeda house
in Kabul: "Dear mujahid, without insisting, no admittance." 8. A diagram from a
Qaeda manual on establishing an encampment for an infantry battalion, showing
the proper placement of sleeping quarters, headquarters, ammunition storage,
horse grounds, mosque and training fields. 9. A registration form for Harkat's
Khalid bin Whalid training camp. The form says "Jihad" on the top of the page,
and common Islamic prayers cover the group's seal. The form asks for a recruit's
name, age, nationality, religious education, code name, skills, languages,
military experience and blood type. 10. A sign found in a Qaeda house in Kabul
that says, "My brother the mujahid, my brother the visitor, please keep the
guest house clean." 11. A copy of Al Murabitan, an Arabic-language magazine
published in Kabul named after the Arab and Berber warriors who conquered Spain
in the eighth century. 12. A handwritten Nov. 21, 2000, letter from an Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan official urgently requesting boots for "mujahid
soldiers," "madrasa students" and "the elderly and the sick." 13. A March 21,
2001, receipt for "onions, carrots, yogurt, cooking oil and apples," found in an
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan house. 14. A notebook from an espionage class
found in a Qaeda house in Kabul. Some notebooks sold in the region are made out
of scrap paper from other countries. Organization 15. A list of bullets,
grenades and other munitions, found in an Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan house.
16. A "22nd Jihad Brigade" expenditure form found in a Qaeda house in Kabul.
Thank you is printed in the lower right corner. 17. A "monthly expenses" form
dated May 22, 2001, listing "sweet potatoes, onions, tea, rice," found in a
Qaeda house in Kabul. 18. An Aug. 8, 2001, receipt for petroleum, found in an
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan house. 19. An inventory listing mines, antitank
weapons, fuses and grenades, found in an Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan house.
20. Harkat letterhead stationery found in a house in Kabul. 21. A Dec. 28, 1999,
receipt for elementary school textbooks for children of Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan fighters. 22. The cover page of "Various Selections," a packet of
news articles culled from the Internet by the "Qaeda Media Committee." The March
2001 cover page promotes articles with headlines like "Barak Kills a Muslim,"
"Taliban Halt Production of Opium," and "Russian and Indian Weapons Go to
Opposition." 23. A May 29, 2001, news roundup published by the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan that cites a report accusing Uzbekistan and other Central Asian
countries of human rights abuses. A second item describes a new Taliban decree
ordering Hindus "to wear a badge and dress in yellow clothes so they are
distinguished from others." The report adds that the American and Indian
governments and other "opposition forces" criticized the decree. 24. A page from
a Qaeda media packet showing a British Broadcasting Corporation Web site article
about the release of one of the group's training videos. Letters 25. A
handwritten letter describing a recruit's dream about Osama bin Laden, found in
a Qaeda house in Kabul. It says the Prophet Muhammad appeared in the dream, and
"he walked and saw Sheik Osama and the martyrs," and said, "'Those are from me,
and I am of them."' 26. A June 15, 1998, letter from Mullah Muhammad Omar to
"all Taliban members young and old," found in a Qaeda house in Kabul. Mullah
Omar complains that his orders are not being followed. 27. A letter from Osama
bin Laden, found in a Qaeda house in Kabul, urging Muslims to recognize Mullah
Omar as "the leader of the faithful." It adds, "I send you this call at a time
when the blood of innocent children is being shed and where Muslim holy sites
continue to be violated in more than one place under the supervision of the New
International Order." American Sources 28. An official National Rifle
Association target found in a Harkat house in Kabul. 29. A page from a United
States Marine Corps manual describing sniper training, found in a Harkat house
in Kabul. 30. An owner's manual for an American-made Maverick 88 pump action
shotgun found in a training camp south of Kabul. 31. An English-language
children's book about two boys' adventures with George Washington, found in a
Qaeda house in Kabul. 32. The table of contents for The Poisoner's Handbook,
found in a Harkat house in Kabul. 33. A flight simulator manual made by a
company in Willowbrook, Ill., found in a Harkat house in Kabul. 34. A sheet of
scrap paper found in a Harkat house in Kabul used to print a computer test page
and a list of martyrs.(pg. 18) Chart/Map: "A Network of Networks"Various
Islamist groups operated and shared camps across Afghanistan where they made
contacts, shared tactics and bonded with one another. Guest house for members
and trainees Map of Afghanistan highlighting training camp locations of Al
Qaeda, Harkat ul Mujahedeen, Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and other groups.
(pg. 19)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); RELIGION (89%); ARMIES
(88%); MILITARY TRAINING (88%); BOMBINGS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%);
HIJACKING (74%); BOOKSTORES (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (70%); PROPERTY VACANCIES (69%); MOTOR VEHICLES (66%);
ARMED FORCES (64%); ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS (62%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (61%);
ESPIONAGE (50%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
TERRORISM;  SURVEYS AND SERIES;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%); ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (94%); NATIONAL
RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA (59%); UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (59%) TALIBAN
(AFGHAN GROUP); AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); NORTHERN ALLIANCE (ANTI-TALIBAN
FORCE)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (94%) ROHDE, DAVID; CHIVERS, C J; BIN LADEN, OSAMA;
BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (93%); NEW YORK, NY,
USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); MALAYSIA
(92%); IRAQ (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); SPAIN (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CENTRAL
ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  IRAQ;  MALAYSIA;
SOMALIA;  GREAT BRITAIN

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             893 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Killer Songs

BYLINE:  By Donald G. McNeil Jr.;  Donald G. McNeil Jr. is a correspondent in
the Paris bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 1185 words


Simon Bikindi is Rwanda's most famous musician. He is also one of the country's
most famous accused war criminals. He was arrested last July at a center for
asylum seekers in the Netherlands, and he sits now in a Dutch jail awaiting
extradition to Tanzania, where the tribunal investigating Rwandan war crimes is
convened. The "statement of facts" in his six-count indictment runs to 46
paragraphs, but the charges against him focus on his music: in essence, Bikindi
is accused of inciting genocide with his songs.

Bikindi, 47, grew up in a broken little village called Akanyirabagoyi in
Rwanda's mountainous Gisenyi Province, five miles from the nearest paved road.
He was a child prodigy on the inanga, a sort of guitar, and the iningiri, a
one-string violin with a calabash tone box. From the village priest, he learned
to do the ntore, Rwanda's signature war dance, in which two fighters with short
spears, small shields and white manes hanging to their knees feint and thrust at
each other. At 22 he was hired by the Ministry of Youth and Sports to act as the
ministry's head cheerleader, organizing massive North Korea-style song-and-dance
displays for honored visitors, including the pope.

He became a popular songwriter; a United Nations official who has followed his
career calls him "Rwanda's Michael Jackson." His style was to infuse old folk
songs with new rhythms and ideas. He wrote powerful rap lyrics that mixed
English, French and Kinyarwandan and set them to traditional tunes. He
supplemented his government income by working at weddings, where he would sing
and lead folk dances like the caller at a hoedown. His first cassette, released
in 1990, was of traditional wedding songs.

At the time, Rwanda was in the midst of a tense but officially tolerant standoff
between the Hutu majority and the Tutsi minority. Inciting racial hatred was
illegal and a social faux pas. But in 1990, the army of the Tutsi-led Rwandan
Patriotic Front invaded Rwanda from Uganda, quickly capturing some territory in
the north. For the next four years the R.P.F. fought a guerrilla war, punctuated
by sporadic massacres of Hutus, and slowly advanced toward the capital, Kigali.

The invasion radicalized the Akazu, a secret elite Hutu corps within President
Juvenal Habyarimana's inner circle. The Akazu's view quietly but quickly
hardened into an official government doctrine: All domestic Tutsi were fifth
columnists for the Rwandan Patriotic Front. They had to be wiped out.

It was in that context that the songs of the government's hired cheerleader, the
wedding singer who had celebrated love, Lake Kivu and the beautiful Virunga
volcanoes, began to change.

The two songs mentioned in Bikindi's indictment, songs for which he stands
accused of inciting genocide, are "Bene Sebahinzi" ("Sons of the Father of the
Farmers") and "Nanga Abahutu" ("I Hate Hutus"). The latter, written in 1992, is
the most troubling of Bikindi's songs. He never mentions Tutsis by name but
attacks Hutus who break ranks with other Hutus. The delivery is spoken-word, a
driving, almost shouted Gil Scott-Heron style, not quite rap, and the power of
his poetry is obvious even in translation. The song lists the types of Hutus the
singer detests:

I hate these Hutus, these de-Hutuized Hutus, who have renounced their identity,
dear comrades.

I hate these Hutus, these Hutus who march blindly, like imbeciles.

This species of naive Hutus who join a war without knowing its cause.

I hate these Hutus who can be brought to kill and who, I swear to you, kill
Hutus, dear comrades.

And if I hate them, so much the better.

"For a Rwandan, it's easy to see the virulence in the text," says Ephrem
Rugiririza, a Hutu journalist. "Renouncing identity" implies marrying a Tutsi,
Rugiririza explains, and "naive Hutus" is a reference to an army colonel who
defected to the invasion force with his men.

Alison DesForges, the lead specialist on Rwanda for Human Rights Watch, says
that Bikindi's songs are subtle, using poetic language and oblique references.
"There's a Rwandan proverb," she says. "A message is given to many, but those
who are meant to understand, understand.' There's always a subtext in Rwanda.
You don't have to resort to brutal language. People understand."

At the beginning of the orgy of killing that engulfed Rwanda from April to July
1994, Bikindi wasn't even in the country. He was in Europe, arranging a tour for
his ballet troupe. But his voice dominated the airwaves. Radio Milles Collines
-- the radio station that coordinated the genocide, that gave death tolls like
weather reports and exhorted murder squads to hurry to villages where "the work"
wasn't going fast enough -- played Bikindi's music constantly during the 100
days of killing. In Rwanda, almost no one reads newspapers or owns a television,
and radio is king. According to eyewitness reports, many of the killers sang
Bikindi's songs as they hacked or beat to death hundreds of thousands of Tutsis
with government-issued machetes and homemade nail-studded clubs.

Although he is also accused of taking part in some killings himself after he
returned to Rwanda toward the end of the 100 days, the prosecution is trying Mr.
Bikindi primarily as a lyricist. Had he only killed, he would not be a target of
the International Criminal Tribunal, according to a United Nations official
familiar with the case. "He's a big fish because of his musical compositions,"
the official says.

Back in Akanyirabagoyi, Tharcisse Twasenga, a former neighbor of Bikindi's,
blames the government. "Bikindi was an artist," he says. "But as an artist
working for the Ministry of Youth and Sports, he had to follow the rules set by
the former government. But that shouldn't be a reason to be imprisoned. An
artist shouldn't be jailed."

That excuse dovetails neatly with Bikindi's planned defense: he says he never
wrote a song advocating killing anyone, never made a speech advocating it and
never killed anyone. He entertained government rallies, as required. He couldn't
help it if the ruling party, which he served, switched its policy to genocide,
nor could he stop stone-cold killers from singing his songs.

"The songs I wrote in the 1990's were not for the government; they were what I
felt inside myself," he told me during an interview in a Dutch jail last month.
"The peasants were blind. They were killing each other, and the politicians were
giving them 10 francs to go kill someone. When I sang 'Nanga Abahutu' and the
rest, I was saying 'Stop!' I was asking everybody to stop the chaos, stop the
killing."

His former mistress, Angeline Mukabanana, says he hated no one. She points out
that she is a Tutsi herself and that Bikindi adopted her first son, who had a
Tutsi father, and defended their Tutsi neighbors against Hutu thugs before the
genocide.

She sees him as a romantic opportunist, too eager to please. "After he wrote 'I
Hate Hutus,"' she said, "I asked him: 'Why did you write that? What if the
R.P.F. wins the war?' He said: 'The government obliges me to write these songs.
If I hear the R.P.F. is coming to Kigali next month, I'll write a song for
them."'

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bikindi with his interpreter at his extradition hearing in The
Hague in January. He faces six counts of genocide, murder and persecution.
(Karim Ben Khelifa)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSIC (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (86%); SONG WRITING (78%); ARRESTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (78%); STRINGED INSTRUMENTS (78%); FOLK & WORLD MUSIC (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (77%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (75%); HIP HOP CULTURE (73%); RAP MUSIC (73%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); DANCE (67%); WRITERS (64%) WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS;  HUTU TRIBE;  TUTSI TRIBE;  MUSIC

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: MCNEIL, DONALD G JR; BIKINDI, SIMON

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (93%);
KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); UGANDA (79%)

REGION: RWANDA;  TANZANIA

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             914 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rwanda Genocide Charges

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: ARUSHA, Tanzania, March 23


A former Rwandan Catholic priest charged with involvement in the genocidal
massacres of 1994 has been arrested in Cameroon and will be transferred to a
United Nations tribunal in Tanzania, the Internews agency said today.

The former priest, Hormisdas Nsengimana, 48, was a rector in Butare province in
southwestern Rwanda and is accused of playing a leading role in the killing of
ethnic Tutsi in the province. He was arrested on Thursday, the news agency said,
and faces charges of genocide, conspiracy to commit genocide and crimes against
humanity.

Around 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutus were massacred in Rwanda by extremist
Hutus in the three months from April to June 1994.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); ARRESTS (90%); CONSPIRACY
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (85%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  TUTSI TRIBE;
HUTU TRIBE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

PERSON: NSENGIMANA, HORMISDAS

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (93%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             918 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Try Suing Saddam

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; Paul Krugman is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 696 words


Whether or not we invade Iraq to topple Saddam Hussein, let's go about this the
American way. Let's sue him.

The United States should launch an effort to prosecute Saddam for crimes against
humanity. This would destabilize his regime at home, encourage more defections
of Iraqi officials and military officers, and increase the prospect of a coup
that, in the best-case scenario, would render an invasion unnecessary.

I came across this idea in references in books by Richard Butler, who led the
United Nations inspection effort in Iraq, and by Kanan Makiya, author of the
leading account of Saddam Hussein's Iraq. It also turns out that a British
organization, Indict, is already pursuing an indictment against Saddam for war
crimes.

Mr. Makiya writes that the best way to topple an Iraqi leader is to make him
lose face. As an example, he cites the Ottoman-era practice of the people of
Takrit (Saddam's hometown) of seizing the governor for the area, humiliating him
(often by sexually abusing his women) and then releasing him unharmed.

I would not recommend this precise approach. But a drive to indict Saddam for
genocide against the Kurds, along with other crimes, suggesting that he will end
his days in a prison cell, will humiliate him in a similar way, squeezing him
and encouraging those around him to look for an exit while there is still time.

"In Washington, you either have the war hounds who want to bomb Iraq and take
Saddam out, or the folks who just want to contain Saddam because at least he
keeps Iraq together," said Joost Hiltermann, who has examined 18 tons of Iraqi
documents seized in Kurdistan and brought to the United States, and who is now
writing a book about Iraq and its use of chemical weapons. "But there is a third
option" -- a legal case, with or without a military attack.

(Along with those 18 tons of documents were audio tapes of speeches by Ali
Hassan al-Majid, a cousin of Saddam and his former lieutenant for northern Iraq.
In one tape he says of the Kurds: "I will kill them all with chemical weapons!")

The Bush administration is interested in the idea of prosecuting Saddam, and it
has two lawyers sitting in the State Department gathering evidence against him.
But the thinking there has been that the prosecution would begin after Saddam is
in custody, rather than before.

Why? An administration official, acknowledging that there may be advantages to a
pre-emptive indictment and adding that no decision has been made, expressed
concern that a legal effort might distract from the task of "regime change," a
term that means "squash Saddam like a bug."

It's a fair concern. But in Yugoslavia Slobodan Milosevic was indicted when he
was still in power, in 1999. The indictment was one factor that helped result in
his ouster from power in 2000. And in 2001 he was sent to The Hague for trial.

In short, firing lawyers at Saddam would bolster our military options, not
weaken them.

One of the constraints that Washington faces in organizing an attack on Iraq is
cold feet everywhere else on the planet (except those under Tony Blair). To
forge a coalition against Saddam, we must build a case against him very publicly
to demonstrate that he is not just another two-bit tyrant but a monster almost
without parallel in recent decades.

Police in other countries use torture, but there are credible reports that
Saddam's police cut out tongues and use electric drills. Other countries gouge
out the eyes of dissidents; Saddam's interrogators gouged out the eyes of
hundreds of children to get their parents to talk. Plus, he has tons of VX gas
and defies the U.N.

There are three ways we can pursue legal action against Saddam:

* An international tribunal can be established, like the one now trying Mr.
Milosevic. This would require Security Council approval, which would be
difficult.

* Several countries could launch a case before the International Court of
Justice, without Security Council agreement. This would be against Iraq as a
country, not Saddam as a person.

* An individual country could indict Saddam. This would be a country claiming
universal jurisdiction in genocide cases.

Now's the time. Let's throw the book at Saddam.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); EVIDENCE
(77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(77%); COUPS (76%); WRITERS (75%); SEX OFFENSES (74%); LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); SUITS & CLAIMS (66%) Terms
not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             920 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Court For War Crimes Inches Closer To Reality

BYLINE:  By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 483 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 25


The world's first permanent international court to try individuals charged with
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity may become a reality within the
next few weeks, much sooner than expected, legal experts said today.

"We're creeping very close to the 60 ratifications needed," the United Nations
spokesman, Fred Eckhard, told reporters today.

The leader of the nongovernmental Coalition for the International Criminal
Court, William Pace, said in an interview that the remaining ratifications --
four more are needed -- could take place during the opening days of a meeting to
discuss the court's budget and other matters, beginning on April 8. Some
officials say the finish line could be crossed earlier.

At the end of last week, the 1998 treaty establishing the court had been signed
by 139 nations and ratified by 56. Countries are now jockeying to be the 60th to
ratify, thus technically bringing the court into existence. Based in The Hague,
the International Criminal Court will take at least a year to begin to function.

The Bush administration, breaking with European and NATO allies, strongly
opposes the court and has vowed never to send the treaty to the Senate for
ratification. The treaty, adopted by a conference of nations in Rome in 1998,
was signed by the United States in the waning days of the Clinton administration
over the objections of the Pentagon and conservatives in Congress who feared
that Americans would be easy targets as they carried out missions abroad.

The United States has demanded that no United Nations money be spent on the
first organizational meeting of nations that have ratified the court treaty,
tentatively set for September. Washington wants an exemption for its citizens
from the court's reach.

If the 60 ratifications are received in April, the court's jurisdiction will
begin on July 1 in the sense that any crime committed after that date is
eligible for prosecution. There is no ex post facto jurisdiction.

Mr. Pace, who leads a coalition of more than 1,000 legal and other organizations
supporting the court, said events of the last four years had moved faster than
anyone had predicted.

"When we started in the mid-90's, and even right up until Rome in 1998, people
thought it was going to take 50 or 100 years before governments would be willing
to create a permanent international criminal court," he said.

"After the treaty was adopted -- because of the opposition of the U.S., China,
India and other countries -- it was thought that it would probably take at least
15, 20, 25 years for 60 ratifications. Many countries, like Germany and France,
have had to change their Constitutions to ratify. Yet here, less that four years
later, we will have achieved the 60 ratifications.

"It's a real demonstration how much the mobilization of democracy and justice
and the rule of law is also proceeding in international affairs," he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
JURISDICTION (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); RULE OF LAW
(77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); BUDGETS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); CONSERVATISM (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE
(79%); NETHERLANDS (75%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             923 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Briefly Noted;
RULING ON DETAINEES

BYLINE:  By Steve Strunsky (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 105 words


A New Jersey judge ruled yesterday that the Hudson and Passaic County jails
should turn over the names and incarceration dates of immigration detainees held
there under contract with the federal government in the wake of the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks.

The ruling, which the government plans to appeal, stems from a lawsuit filed in
January by the American Civil Liberties of New Jersey in State Superior Court,
after the government began detaining immigrants anonymously. A similar suit
against the government is pending in federal court, but the New Jersey group
sued the jails directly under state laws.   Steve Strunsky (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); IMMIGRANT
DETENTION CENTERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (88%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (88%); JUDGES
(88%); APPEALS (88%); VERDICTS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); TERRORISM (87%); HIJACKING (87%); REFUGEES (85%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (55%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION

PERSON: STRUNSKY, STEVE

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  HUDSON COUNTY (NJ);  PASSAIC COUNTY
(NJ)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             931 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Trials

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 120 words


To the Editor:

The International Criminal Court that is proposed for The Hague is one potential
way "to try individuals charged with genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity" (news article, March 26). But a much better way to do that is already
being carried out: temporary courts located as near as feasible to the scene of
the crime.

Such trials, which are now under way in Sierra Leone and under consideration in
Cambodia, provide both the victims and the supporters of the accused with the
opportunity to see that justice is done. Also, in the case of international
crimes, they can build respect for the law and strengthen the local institutions
that enforce it.

BILL TUCKER
Palo Alto, Calif., March 26, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%);
GENOCIDE (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: TUCKER, BILL

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); CAMBODIA
(53%)

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             938 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Litigating the Legacy of Slavery

BYLINE:  By Charles J. Ogletree Jr.;  Charles J. Ogletree Jr. is a professor at
Harvard Law School and co-chairman of the Reparations Coordinating Committee.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Last Tuesday, a group of lawyers filed a federal class-action lawsuit in New
York on behalf of all African-American descendants of slaves. The lawsuit seeks
compensation from a number of defendants for profits earned through slave labor
and the slave trade.

This lawsuit is limited to FleetBoston, Aetna, CSX and other to-be-named
companies. The broader reparations movement seeks to explore the historical role
that other private institutions and government played during slavery and the era
of legal racial discrimination that followed. The goal of these historical
investigations is to bring American society to a new reckoning with how our past
affects the current conditions of African-Americans and to make America a better
place by helping the truly disadvantaged.

The Reparations Coordinating Committee, of which I am a co-chairman, will
proceed with its own plans to file wide-ranging reparations lawsuits late this
autumn. The committee is a group of lawyers, academics, public officials and
activists that has conducted extensive research and begun to identify parties to
sue and claims to be raised.

The shape of a reparations strategy can already be seen. Among private
defendants, corporations will be prominent, as last week's lawsuit shows. Other
private institutions -- Brown University, Yale University and Harvard Law School
-- have made headlines recently as the beneficiaries of grants and endowments
traced back to slavery and are probable targets. Naming the government as a
defendant is also central to any reparations strategy; public officials
guaranteed the viability of slavery and the segregation that followed it.

A number of recent examples illustrate the possibilities for making reparations
claims nationally and internationally. In South Africa, reparations have been
part of the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which seeks to
compensate people with clear material needs who suffered under apartheid because
of their race. It was also in South Africa that, in the final documents of a
racism conference sponsored by the United Nations, slavery was defined as a
"crime against humanity," a legal determination that may enable the reparations
movement to extend its reach to international forums.

In the United States, just three years ago the federal government reached a
consent decree with a class of over 20,000 black farmers to compensate for years
of discrimination by the Department of Agriculture. The case represents the
largest civil-rights settlement by the government ever, with a likely payout of
about $2 billion. Previously, the government also approved significant
compensation for Japanese-Americans interned during World War II and paid
reparations to black survivors of the Rosewood, Fla., race riots.

Although these precedents differ from a slavery-based reparations claim in that
they involved classes of individuals who were both alive and easily identified,
they nonetheless indicate government willingness to acknowledge past wrongs and
remedy them. It is important that in each case the government waived its
immunity from suit, thereby lifting the ordinary bar that prevents lawsuits
against a sovereign.

Bring the government into litigation will also generate a public debate on
slavery and the role its legacy continues to play in our society. The
opportunity to use expert witnesses and conduct extensive discovery, to get
facts and documentation, makes the courtroom an ideal venue for this debate.

A full and deep conversation on slavery and its legacy has never taken place in
America; reparations litigation will show what slavery meant, how it was
profitable and how it has continued to affect the opportunities of millions of
black Americans.

Litigation is required to promote this discussion because political
accountability has not been forthcoming. In each Congressional session since
1989, Representative John Conyers has introduced a bill to study slavery
reparations and it has quickly died each time.

Though claims for slavery reparations have moved near the front of national and
international policy discussions in the past few years, the movement has deep
historical roots. Those roots go back at least as far as the unkept promise in
1864 of "40 acres and a mule" to freed slaves, which acknowledged our country's
debt to the newly emancipated.

Indeed, the civil rights movement has long been organized, in part, around the
notion that slavery and the century of legal discrimination that followed have
had enduring and detrimental effects on American minorities.

The reparations movement should not, I believe, focus on payments to
individuals. The damage has been done to a group -- African-American slaves and
their descendants -- but it has not been done equally within the group. The
reparations movement must aim at undoing the damage where that damage has been
most severe and where the history of race in America has left its most telling
evidence. The legacy of slavery and racial discrimination in America is seen in
well-documented racial disparities in access to education, health care, housing,
insurance, employment and other social goods. The reparations movement must
therefore focus on the poorest of the poor -- it must finance social recovery
for the bottom-stuck, providing an opportunity to address comprehensively the
problems of those who have not substantially benefited from integration or
affirmative action.

The root of "reparations" is "to repair." This litigation strategy could give us
an opportunity to fully address the legacy of slavery in a spirit of repair.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Miriam Bossard and Amy Unikewicz/Jelly Associates)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); LITIGATION (93%); SLAVERY (91%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (90%); CLASS ACTIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(89%); CONSENT DECREES & ORDERS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); ASIAN AMERICANS (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (68%); APPROVALS (67%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (67%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (65%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (65%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (64%); RIOTS (50%); SPONSORSHIP (50%);
WORLD WAR II (50%) SLAVERY;  BLACKS;  REPARATIONS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;
CLASS-ACTION SUITS

COMPANY: BANK OF AMERICA CORP (58%)

ORGANIZATION: BROWN UNIVERSITY (55%); YALE UNIVERSITY (55%) FLEET BOSTON CORP;
AETNA INC; CSX CORP

TICKER: BAC (NYSE) (58%); BAC (LSE) (58%); 8648 (TSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (58%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (58%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (58%)

PERSON: OGLETREE, CHARLES J (PROF)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             939 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indicting Hussein

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 128 words


To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's idea of suing Saddam Hussein for crimes against humanity
committed against his own people ("Try Suing Saddam," column, March 26) is a
good one.

Rather than establishing an ad hoc international tribunal for his crimes or
charging Iraq at the International Court of Justice, Mr. Kristof suggests having
a national court indict him under universal jurisdiction for crimes against
humanity.

The appropriate forum, however, would be the permanent International Criminal
Court, whose charter the United States refuses to ratify. Quickly ratifying the
charter and making Saddam Hussein the court's first order of business -- now
that would be international leadership in the war against terror.

DAVID BACH
Berkeley, Calif., March 28, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);
WAR & CONFLICT (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE (58%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) BACH, DAVID; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES); KRISTOF,
NICHOLAS D

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: IRAQ

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             940 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 1, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Delays Extradition Of War Crimes Suspects

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE, March 31


Leaders in Serbia were still promising to comply but took no concrete steps
today to meet an American-imposed deadline of Monday morning local time for
greater cooperation with the tribunal trying suspects for war crimes.

The Yugoslav foreign minister, Goran Svilanovic, was quoted tonight on Serbian
television as saying that he did not expect any immediate extraditions.

The Serbian justice minister, Vladan Batic, said he too did not believe anyone
would be handed over to The Hague today, but he issued arrest warrants for four
close aides to Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president now on trial in
The Hague for war crimes. The four were indicted along with Mr. Milosevic in
1999 for crimes during the war in Kosovo, the southern province of Serbia, in
1999.

Mr. Batic said it was up to the Serbian police to make the arrests.

Serbs are divided over the mission of the tribunal in The Hague, and the issue
has led to mounting rancor as the deadline has approached.

The United States Congress said Yugoslavia must show greater cooperation by
midnight March 31, in Washington, or face a freeze on $120 million in badly
needed financial assistance. Last week, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said
that, to comply, the nation would have to hand over indicted war crimes suspects
as well as war documents.

Tonight, it seemed unlikely that either would happen in time, even as top
government officials had promised to hand over one or several suspects in the
coming days.

A State Department spokesman, Frederick Jones, said tonight in Washington that
Secretary Powell had "made no decision with respect to certification."

"We have repeatedly made clear," he said, "that Yugoslavia must cooperate with
the International Criminal Tribunal, take steps to support the Dayton peace
accord, and take steps to implement policy with respect to minority rights and
rule of law."

Mr. Jones said Yugoslavia had worked to meet some of the demands outlined by
Congress and in recent weeks had offered more cooperation with respect to war
crime tribunals.

The issue has once again exposed the rift between the two major political forces
in the post-Milosevic era: Zoran Djindjic, the prime minister of Serbia, the
major republic remaining in Yugoslavia, and Vojislav Kostunica, Yugoslavia's
president.

As the Serbian government met tonight, a major question loomed: whether
cooperation would be delayed for a short time or whether it would be stalled
indefinitely in the context of a larger political crisis.

Mr. Djindjic, widely viewed as a pragmatist, has argued that losing American
support would be a devastating blow, not only because of the loss of direct aid
from the United States but because of the American influence in lending programs
from international institutions like the International Monetary Fund.

Mr. Kostunica, a self-described "moderate nationalist," has never hidden his
distaste for the tribunal or for extraditing suspects in the absence of a law
governing such extraditions. His opposition to cooperation as an affront to
Serbian dignity is supported by many who see extraditions as trading people for
money: a headline today in the newspaper Blic said, "Everything is for sale."

Vojin Dimitrijevic, the director of the Belgrade Center for Human Rights, said
Mr. Djindjic -- who faced heavy criticism for engineering the extradition of Mr.
Milosevic -- might have decided to allow the deadline to pass to show Serbia how
much a cutoff of aid would hurt.

"Maybe the only way to convince people is to show them what the disaster means
and not to speak theoretically," he said.

Officials at The Hague say about 15 people indicted for war crimes now live in
Serbia. Most speculation in the news media centers on three of the men indicted
with Mr. Milosevic: Nikola Sainovic, Mr. Milosevic's top security adviser and
former deputy prime minister; Dragoljub Ojdanic, a former Yugoslav Army
commander; and Vlajko Stojiljkovic, a former Serbian interior minister.

A fourth is Milan Milutinovic, the Serbian president, but he is unlikely to be
extradited because he is covered by presidential immunity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (87%); PRIME MINISTERS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(77%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%); ARRESTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); RULE OF
LAW (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  EXTRADITION;  BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; FISHER, IAN; SVILANOVIC, GORAN (MIN); BATIC, VLADAN
(MIN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); UNITED STATES (96%);
NETHERLANDS (93%); KOSOVO (92%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             942 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 2, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Boomerang Syndrome

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;   E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 711 words


Beyond the daily heartbreak of the Middle East is a larger tragedy in
international relations, the boomerang syndrome.

It is the impatient young Palestinians who in effect turned Ariel Sharon into
the prime minister of Israel. And with each additional suicide bombing, they
increase the prospect that Mr. Sharon will be succeeded by the only person who
could make him look like a pacifist wimp: Benjamin Netanyahu.

The Palestinians have even made respectable in Israel the hard-line view
(supported by 46 percent in a recent poll) that Palestinians should be kicked
out of the West Bank -- a sort of ethnic cleansing of the Holy Land.

Yet the same boomerang effect applies to Mr. Sharon's policies as well. Each
time he bulldozes more Arab homes, each time he kills Palestinians and their
hopes, he creates more terrorists.

It was telling that when Mr. Sharon blocked Yasir Arafat from going to Beirut
for the Arab summit meeting last week, Mr. Arafat's role was filled by Farouk
Kaddoumi, a hard-liner who took the opportunity to meet with the leader of
Hezbollah, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah.

In theory it would be hard to imagine a worse Palestinian leader than Mr.
Arafat. But the Palestinians could manage that.

Still, the symmetry goes only so far. In the end, Palestinian terrorism may be
succeeding in some twisted, shortsighted way, while Mr. Sharon's incursions into
the occupied territories are probably doomed to failure.

One of the lessons of recent history seems to be that brutality rarely works for
a government, especially a democratic one like Israel's, while terrorism often
works just fine for insurgents. In Algeria, for example, both the French and the
Algerians employed terror; the result was a catastrophe for the French and
victory for the Algerians. Likewise, in Colombia in recent years, terror has
arguably been successful for guerrillas but a failure for the government.

Among Palestinians today, the terror attacks are perceived as successful, and
Mr. Sharon has turned Mr. Arafat into a Palestinian hero in a way he never could
have himself.

In contrast, for Mr. Sharon, tanks seem to work no better in the West Bank than
they did in Lebanon. Putting aside the debate about the ethics of Israeli policy
in the territories, as a practical matter, from Israel's own standpoint, Mr.
Sharon's policy so far has been worse than ineffective; it is aggravating the
terrorism.

While Mr. Sharon talks about removing the "infrastructure" of terrorism, the
real infrastructure is simply the rage and frustration of ordinary Palestinians.
Many of the suicide bombs are made of sugar and fertilizer and cost less than
$150 to produce. In such circumstances, a Syria or an Iraq is ruthless enough
that it can squash unrest by exterminating everything that moves, but a
democratic and more squeamish Israel cannot.

As Haaretz, the Israeli paper, noted Sunday in an editorial about the military
operation: "It will not end the confrontation and will not destroy terrorism."

The Israeli press is becoming increasingly critical of Mr. Sharon's adventure
and has noted that the prime minister seems to have a habit of getting into
messes without working out how to extricate himself. He pushed into Lebanon in
1982 in response to provocations and terrorism. The result was that Israel found
itself stuck in an unpopular, failed low-level war for 18 years. Once again,
where is Mr. Sharon's exit strategy?

That leaves the tough question of what Israel can possibly do. After all, it
also tried peace, under Ehud Barak, and that failed as well -- because of Mr.
Arafat's indecisiveness and lack of leadership.

Still, failure is relative. Mr. Barak's policy did not fail as wretchedly and
bloodily as Mr. Sharon's has. There are no optimal outcomes here, only some that
are less horrendous than the one toward which we are now spinning out of
control.

Avraham Burg, speaker of the Knesset, was quoted as saying in Haaretz: "Just
because the position of the Palestinians is a stupid one, just because they
cannot overcome terrorism and they fled the peace process in a violent manner,
does that require us to enter this insane cycle?"

The answer is no. Let's hope that Mr. Sharon realizes this soon, because the air
will be thick for years with returning boomerangs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HEZBOLLAH (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); ETHICS (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%) PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (55%)

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (72%); HASSAN NASRALLAH (57%) SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME
MIN); NETANYAHU, BENJAMIN; KRISTOF, NICHOLAS D

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ALGERIA (93%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAQ (79%); LEBANON (79%); COLOMBIA (79%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             945 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 3, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: CAPTIVES;
U.S. Says a Key Detainee Had Planned More Attacks

BYLINE:  By PHILIP SHENON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 2


An important lieutenant to Osama bin Laden, Abu Zubaydah, was organizing new
attacks on American targets when he was captured in Pakistan last week, Bush
administration officials said today in confirming his arrest.

The White House said Mr. Zubaydah, a 30-year-old Palestinian, had emerged as the
new chief of operations for Al Qaeda and was being interrogated in hope of
preventing the new attacks.

American officials would not disclose his whereabouts, but they said he could be
taken to the American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he may be the
first suspected leader of Al Qaeda to face an American military tribunal.

"This represents a very serious blow to Al Qaeda," said Ari Fleischer, the White
House spokesman, in confirming news reports of Mr. Zubaydah's arrest. "Al Qaeda
has many tentacles, but one of them was cut off."

A senior administration official said that although there had been no final
decision, it seemed certain that Mr. Zubaydah would be tried before one of the
military tribunals established under rules approved by the Pentagon last month.
The official said his capture could end a debate simmering within the
administration over whether any of the prisoners now in custody in Guantanamo
would be suitable candidates for a tribunal.

The tribunal system, established by the administration over the fierce
objections of civil liberties groups and some lawmakers, is intended for senior
Qaeda leaders apprehended abroad, and Mr. Zubaydah appeared to be "an ideal
candidate," the senior official said.

The tribunal would have the authority to impose the death penalty.

At the Pentagon, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Mr. Zubaydah was
receiving medical treatment for several gunshot wounds suffered during his
capture that "appear not to be life-threatening."

He described Mr. Zubaydah as "a very senior Al Qaeda official who has been
intimately involved in the range of activities for the Al Qaeda."

"There is no question but that having an opportunity to visit with him is
helpful," Mr. Rumsfeld said of the interrogation, adding, "Sometimes I
understate for emphasis."

Mr. Fleischer said Mr. Zubaydah would be "interrogated about his knowledge of
ongoing plans to conduct terrorist activities."

The United States has linked Mr. Zubaydah directly to the planning of the Sept.
11 attacks and others that were to have taken place since then, including a plot
to blow up the American embassies in Paris and Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.

The United States was especially eager to apprehend him because he was
understood to be one of the few Qaeda leaders to know the identities of the
thousands of terrorist recruits who passed through the network's training camps.
Most recruits have returned to their home countries, where they are assumed to
be awaiting instructions from Mr. Zubaydah and other Qaeda leaders.

"We believe the sleeper cells were under his control," one official said, adding
that it was hard to overestimate the significance of the capture.

The Pakistani police arrested Mr. Zubaydah on Thursday in Faisalabad, 170 miles
south of Islamabad, the capital, in an operation with agents of the Central
Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Documents were
seized in the raid, officials said, and computer equipment that could be helpful
in preventing new attacks.

According to administration officials, several of Mr. Zubaydah's associates in
Al Qaeda were also caught last week in Pakistan.

American law enforcement and intelligence officials say Mr. Zubaydah took over
as Al Qaeda's chief of military operations from Muhammad Atef, who was killed in
the American bombing raids in Afghanistan in November.

Until Mr. Zubaydah's capture, military and law enforcement officials had been
debating strategies that would allow them to bring some of the other Guantanamo
prisoners before military tribunals, even though there was no evidence linking
them to specific acts. One possibility under discussion was to charge an
individual with membership in a particular Qaeda unit, then show that the unit
took part in killing civilians.

"They would be charged with furthering the goals of a criminal group," said one
official who took part in the discussions. It would be analogous to charging a
German soldier from World War II with war crimes if he had been a member of a
Nazi unit that took part in atrocities.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); AL-QAEDA (92%); TERRORISM (91%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); APPROVALS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
MILITARY BASES (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); WOUNDS
& INJURIES (73%); SHOOTINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); NAVIES
(70%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (66%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (64%); MEDICAL
TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (63%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (63%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%) RUMSFELD, DONALD H (SEC); ZUBAYDAH, ABU; BIN
LADEN, OSAMA; SHENON, PHILIP; LEWIS, NEIL A

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  PAKISTAN;  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             947 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 3, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Genocide Defendants Boycott Trial

BYLINE:  By Marc Lacey (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 90 words


The trial of four senior Rwandan military officers charged with genocide began
at the United Nations tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania, with the defendants
boycotting the proceedings.

Prosecutors say that the officers played a central role in the 1994 killings,
which left hundreds of thousands of Tutsi and many Hutu dead. Lawyers
representing Col. Theoneste Bagosora and three subordinates argued that the
tribunal was violating the officers' rights by failing to provide documents
within the specified time and in French.   Marc Lacey (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
BOYCOTTS (87%); WAR CRIMES (85%); LAWYERS (85%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: LACEY, MARC

COUNTRY: AFRICA (92%); RWANDA (91%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (90%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             953 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL;
In Bush's Words: 'Break Free of Old Patterns'

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1667 words


Following is a transcript of President Bush's speech yesterday on the Middle
East, as recorded by the Federal News Service Inc.:

Good morning. During the course of one week, the situation in the Middle East
has deteriorated dramatically.

Last Wednesday, my special envoy, Anthony Zinni, reported to me that we were on
the verge of a cease-fire agreement that would have spared Palestinian and
Israeli lives. That hope fell away when a terrorist attacked a group of innocent
people in a Netanya hotel, killing many men and women in what is a mounting toll
of terror.

In the days since, the world has watched with growing concern the horror of
bombings and burials and the stark picture of tanks in the street. Across the
world, people are grieving for Israelis and Palestinians who have lost their
lives.

When an 18-year-old Palestinian girl is induced to blow herself up and in the
process kills a 17-year-old Israeli girl, the future itself is dying, the future
of the Palestinian people and the future of the Israeli people. We mourn the
dead and we mourn the damage done to the hope of peace, the hope of Israel's and
Israelis' desire for a Jewish state at peace with its neighbors, the hope of the
Palestinian people to build their own independent state.

Terror must be stopped. No nation can negotiate with terrorists, for there is no
way to make peace with those whose only goal is death.

This could be a hopeful moment in the Middle East. The proposal of Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, supported by the Arab League, has put a number of
countries in the Arab world closer than ever to recognizing Israel's right to
exist.

The United States is on record supporting the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a Palestinian state. Israel has recognized the goal of a
Palestinian state. The outlines of a just settlement are clear -- two states,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. This can be a
time for hope, but it calls for leadership, not for terror.

Since Sept. 11, I've delivered this message. Everyone must choose. You're either
with the civilized world or you're with the terrorists. All in the Middle East
also must choose and must move decisively in word and deed against terrorist
acts.

The chairman of the Palestinian Authority has not consistently opposed or
confronted terrorists.

At Oslo and elsewhere, Chairman Arafat renounced terror as an instrument of his
cause, and he agreed to control it. He's not done so. The situation in which he
finds himself today is largely of his own making. He's missed his opportunities
and thereby betrayed the hopes of the people he is supposed to lead.

Given his failure, the Israeli government feels it must strike at terrorist
networks that are killing its citizens. Yet Israel must understand that its
response to these recent attacks is only a temporary measure. All parties have
their own responsibilities, and all parties owe it to their own people to act.

We all know today's situation runs the risk of aggravating long-term bitterness
and undermining relationships that are critical to any hope of peace. I call on
the Palestinian people, the Palestinian Authority and our friends in the Arab
world to join us in delivering a clear message to terrorists. Blowing yourself
up does not help the Palestinian cause. To the contrary, suicide bombing
missions could well blow up the best and only hope for a Palestinian state.

All states must keep their promise, made in a vote in the United Nations, to
actively oppose terror in all its forms. No nation can pick and choose its
terrorist friends. I call on the Palestinian Authority and all governments in
the region to do everything in their power to stop terrorist activities, to
disrupt terrorist financing and to stop inciting violence by glorifying terror
in state-owned media or telling suicide bombers they are martyrs.

They're not martyrs. They're murderers. And they undermine the cause of the
Palestinian people. Those governments like Iraq that reward parents for the
sacrifice of their children are guilty of soliciting murder of the worst kind.

All who care about the Palestinian people should join in condemning and acting
against groups like Al Aksa, Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad and all the groups
which oppose the peace process and seek the destruction of Israel.

The recent Arab League support of Crown Prince Abdullah's initiative for peace
is promising, is hopeful, because it acknowledges Israel's right to exist.

And it raises the hope of sustained constructive Arab involvement in the search
for peace. This builds on a tradition of visionary leadership begun by President
Sadat and King Hussein and carried forward by President Mubarak and King
Abdullah.

Now other Arab states must rise to this occasion and accept Israel as a nation
and as a neighbor. Peace with Israel is the only avenue to prosperity and
success for a new Palestinian state. The Palestinian people deserve peace and an
opportunity to better their lives.

They need their closest neighbor, Israel, to be an economic partner, not a
mortal enemy. They deserve a government that respects human rights and a
government that focuses on their needs -- education and health care -- rather
than feeding their resentments.

It is not enough for Arab nations to defend the Palestinian cause. They must
truly help the Palestinian people by seeking peace and fighting terror and
promoting development.

Israel faces hard choices of its own. Its government has supported the creation
of a Palestinian state that is not a haven for terrorism. Yet Israel also must
recognize that such a state needs to be politically and economically viable.

Consistent with the Mitchell plan, Israeli settlement activity in occupied
territories must stop, and the occupation must end through withdrawal to secure
and recognized boundaries, consistent with United Nations Resolutions 242 and
338. Ultimately, this approach should be the basis of agreements between Israel
and Syria and Israel and Lebanon.

Israel should also show a respect, a respect for and concern about the dignity
of the Palestinian people who are and will be their neighbors. It is crucial to
distinguish between the terrorists and ordinary Palestinians seeking to provide
for their own families. The Israeli government should be compassionate at
checkpoints and border crossings, sparing innocent Palestinians daily
humiliation. Israel should take immediate action to ease closures and allow
peaceful people to go back to work.

Israel is facing a terrible and serious challenge. For seven days, it has acted
to root out terrorist nests. America recognizes Israel's right to defend itself
from terror. Yet to lay the foundations of future peace, I ask Israel to halt
incursions into Palestinian-controlled areas and begin the withdrawal from those
cities it has recently occupied. I speak as a committed friend of Israel. I
speak out of a concern for its long-term security, the security that will come
with a genuine peace.

As Israel steps back, responsible Palestinian leaders and Israel's Arab
neighbors must step forward and show the world that they are truly on the side
of peace. The choice and the burden will be theirs.

The world expects an immediate cease-fire, immediate resumption of security
cooperation with Israel against terrorism, an immediate order to crack down on
terrorist networks. I expect better leadership and I expect results.

These are the elements of peace in the Middle East, and now we must build the
road to those goals. Decades of bitter experience teach a clear lesson. Progress
is impossible when nations emphasize their grievances and ignore their
opportunities. The storms of violence cannot go on. Enough is enough.

And to those who would try to use the current crisis as an opportunity to widen
the conflict, stay out. Iran's arms shipments and support for terror fuel the
fire of conflict in the Middle East, and it must stop. Syria has spoken out
against Al Qaeda. We expect it to act against Hamas and Hezbollah, as well. It's
time for Iran to focus on meeting its own people's aspirations for freedom and
for Syria to decide which side of the war against terror it is on.

The world finds itself at a critical moment. This is a conflict that can widen
or an opportunity we can seize. And so I've decided to send Secretary of State
Powell to the region next week to seek broad international support for the
vision I've outlaid today. As a step in this process, he will work to implement
United Nations Resolution 1402; an immediate and meaningful cease-fire; an end
of terror and violence and incitement; withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah; implementation of the already
agreed-upon Tenet and Mitchell plans, which will lead to a political settlement.

I have no illusions -- we have no illusions -- about the difficulty of the
issues that lie ahead.

Yet our nation's resolve is strong. America's committed to ending this conflict
and beginning an era of peace. We know this is possible, because in our
lifetimes we have seen an end to conflicts that no one thought could end. We've
seen fierce enemies let go of long histories of strife and anger.

America itself counts former adversaries as trusted friends -- Germany and Japan
and now Russia.

Conflict is not inevitable. Distrust need not be permanent. Peace is possible
when we break free of old patterns and habits of hatred.

The violence and grief that trouble the Holy Land have been among the great
tragedies of our time. The Middle East has often been left behind in the
political and economic advancement of the world. That is the history of the
region. But it need not and must not be its fate.

The Middle East could write a new story of trade and development and democracy,
and we stand ready to help. Yet this progress can only come in an atmosphere of
peace, and the United States will work for all the children of Abraham to know
the benefits of peace. Thank you very much.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Israeli Army chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, gesturing
on Wednesday as his officers reviewed maps during operations at Tulkarm in the
West Bank. Yesterday, General Mofaz said Yasir Arafat supported terrorism and
called for his deportation from the West Bank. (Israel Defense Forces via
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); BOMBINGS
(71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (71%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM

COMPANY: FEDERAL NEWS SERVICE INC (91%)

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC); SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN);
ARAFAT, YASIR

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); MIDDLE EAST (97%);
UNITED STATES (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             954 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRISONERS;
Move Likely For Inmate Who May Be American

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


The Pentagon is making plans to airlift a prisoner from the Afghan war out of
the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he has been held for
several weeks while his captors were apparently unaware that he might be an
American citizen.

As of tonight, his citizenship has not been confirmed and no transfer has taken
place, but officials said they wanted to move the prisoner, identified by the
Pentagon as Yasser Esam Hamdi, as soon as possible to the United States for
legal reasons.

If Mr. Hamdi is an American citizen and remains in Guantanamo, he will have the
right to file a petition in federal court demanding that the government either
charge him with a crime or set him free. His case could affect the status of all
prisoners at Guantanamo.

Victoria Clarke, a Pentagon spokeswoman, said the Justice Department had found a
birth certificate in Baton Rouge, La., indicating that Mr. Hamdi was born in the
United States 22 years ago. "It's our understanding that his parents were
employed in Louisiana when he was born and returned to Saudi Arabia within a
very few years," Ms. Clarke said.

She said it had taken several months to determine his citizenship because, like
some of the other 299 prisoners at Guantanamo, Mr. Hamdi had refused to answer
questions about his identity."Many of these people who were with the Taliban and
the Al Qaeda were trained to resist interrogation," she said.

Other officials said that Mr. Hamdi had been telling his captors for weeks that
he was born in the United States but that no one had believed him. They also
said there had been a discrepancy over the spelling of his name.

In addition, one official said Mr. Hamdi had seemed to spurn his citizenship,
telling investigators at one point that he left the United States when he was 3
and never wanted to return. It is not clear if he has been back, whether he has
officially renounced his citizenship or whether he speaks English.

An official said tonight that confirmation of Mr. Hamdi's citizenship was almost
certain and that he could be moved as early as Friday. He would probably be
moved to a military base at Norfolk, Va., which would allow him to be tried in
the Eastern District of Virginia, the official said.

Mr. Hamdi would be the second American found on the Afghan battlefield. The
first was John Walker Lindh, a 21-year-old Californian who is being held in
Alexandria, Va. Both Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Lindh were captured in late November in a
prison revolt near Mazar-i-Sharif.

While Mr. Lindh faces charges in federal court, including conspiring to kill
Americans, providing support to terrorists and using destructive devices during
crimes of violence, it is not clear whether similar charges will be brought
against Mr. Hamdi.

"I think it's way too soon to speculate on what he may or may not be charged
with," Ms. Clarke said, adding, "As we've shown with John Walker, the U.S.
citizenship does make it a different case and a different kind of treatment."

If Mr. Hamdi remained at Guantanamo, experts say, he could become a test case
for challenging the detention of all prisoners there.

The United States picked Guantanamo because some lawyers believe that its status
as land leased from Cuba puts it beyond the reach of the United States judicial
system, although other experts say that is an open question. The United States
began leasing the 45-square-mile base in 1903 as a coaling station.

A federal judge in February rejected a court action filed on behalf of the
prisoners, saying he did not have jurisdiction because Guantanamo was legally
part of Cuba.

Human rights lawyers had filed a writ of habeas corpus to force the federal
government to bring formal charges against the prisoners. The judge, A. Howard
Matz of Federal District Court in Los Angeles, said that previous court rulings
had rejected legal attempts to give American bases abroad the status of being
virtually American soil, similar to that of embassies.

Eugene R. Fidell, a Washington lawyer and expert in military law, said that if
Mr. Hamdi was an American citizen and remained at Guantanamo, he would have
access to the federal courts.

"He would not be in the legal no-man's land that Guantanamo Bay constitutes for
enemy alien belligerents," Mr. Fidell said. "He could bring claims that
potentially affected not only himself but others at Guantanamo who could not
themselves gain access to the federal courts."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); TERRORISM (86%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); NAVIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
VIOLENT CRIME (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
CONSPIRACY (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); HIJACKING (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%);
PETITIONS (70%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (68%);
AL-QAEDA (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (62%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  TERRORISM;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE (CUBA);  PRISONERS OF
WAR;  CITIZENSHIP;  ENGLISH LANGUAGE

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(56%)

PERSON: SEELYE, KATHARINE Q; CLARKE, VICTORIA; HAMDI, YASSER ESAM

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (79%); BATON ROUGE,
LA, USA (79%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); LOUISIANA, USA (92%); DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN;  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  SAUDI ARABIA

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             961 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 9, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Ferocious Fighting, Sri Lanka Struggles With Peace

BYLINE:  By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1200 words

DATELINE: BATTICALOA, Sri Lanka, April 5


The reclusive Tamil rebel leader who has dispatched more suicide bombers than
anyone in the world, is expected to surface Wednesday for his first public
meeting with reporters in more than a decade -- the most remarkable sign of a
peace process now gathering momentum on the island once known as Ceylon.

Velupillai Prabhakaran, the leader of the Tamil Tigers, has battled the
government of Sri Lanka for 18 years. He has been branded a terrorist by the
United States and Britain and is wanted by India for the assassination of a
former prime minister.

Now, after a cease-fire he signed with the government in late February, the
guerrilla strategist is comfortable enough to surface without fear of government
arrest.

During three months of successive cease-fires by the separatist Tamil rebels and
the country's new government, no one has been killed on Sri Lankan soil. That in
itself is an achievement. The fighting here has claimed more lives -- at least
62,000 -- in this small nation of 19 million people than the United States lost
in Vietnam.

There have been many recent scenes that have Western diplomats shaking their
heads in amazement.

On the first visit in 20 years by a Sri Lankan head of government to the
northern Tamil town of Jaffna, Ranil Wickremesinghe, the new prime minister and
a practicing Buddhist from the Sinhalese majority, was mobbed by rapturous
Tamils last month when he showed his respect for Hindu tradition by taking off
his shirt to enter a revered temple. Most Tamils are Hindu.

In government-held cities in the north and east, which would constitute the
separate Tamil nation sought by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, large
crowds have rallied openly for the Tigers, who are still formally banned in Sri
Lanka.

The first face-to-face peace talks in seven years between the government and the
rebels -- brokered by Norwegian diplomats -- are expected to begin in May or
June. Sri Lankans of all ethnicities are relieved that the guns have fallen
silent -- the ruling party won strong endorsement for its strategy in an
overwhelming victory in local elections last month -- but a terrible anxiety
underlies the hope of a negotiated settlement.

Mistrust between the Tamil Tigers and the large Muslim minority in the east
could derail progress toward a settlement. Tiger leaders did not grant
interviews requested in a letter delivered to them in the rebel-held north or
through intermediaries here in Batticaloa in the east.

People in eastern Sri Lanka -- part of the territory rebels claim as the
separate Tamil nation they call Eelam -- say they know firsthand the brutalities
committed both by government troops and rebels.

In government-controlled areas, where Tigers are allowed ever greater freedom to
operate, many fear that the rebels will also have greater freedom to abuse their
power.

Any effort for peace is haunted by ghosts. In 1990, the Tigers massacred more
than 125 Muslims during evening prayers at two mosques here in the Batticaloa
district. That same year, the Tigers gave Muslims in the northern,
Tamil-dominated Jaffna peninsula 24 hours to get out. Tens of thousands who fled
are still homeless and living in camps.

Muslims, who say the Tigers have stepped up extortion of "taxes" from them since
the cease-fire, have no direct representative in the peace talks, though their
political support is crucial to the ruling coalition.

"Who will represent the needs and rights of Muslims?" asked Nawaz Muhammad, now
a human-rights activist, who said his 22-year-old sister was abducted and killed
by the Tigers in 1990.

Some Tamils, too, are fearful. A 19-year-old Tamil woman described her harrowing
escape earlier this month from a Tiger training camp after being conscripted at
gunpoint in February. She and three other young women -- one 17 and two 16 --
all had their long black hair crudely shorn. Despite threats of beatings if they
ran away, the foursome spent five nights hiking, hiding and sleeping by day,
until they stumbled on an army post.

The two youngest girls said they were kidnapped by the Tigers on March 26 as
they walked through their village to a math tutor.

All four say they cannot go home.

"It's very scary," said the 19-year-old, talking of the Tigers roaming
increasingly free. "If I go back to my village, I'll be spotted."

Many people wonder whether the Tigers, universally known by the initials LTTE,
can change from a totalitarian military organization to a political party that
submits to elections.

"Is the LTTE going to evolve into a Stalinist or Sandinista regime?" asked
Milinda Moragoda, one of the two key officials in the Sri Lankan government on
the peace talks. "I don't know."

Most analysts believe that the newly elected government is inclined to let the
Tigers rule the north and east of Sri Lanka for perhaps two to three years
without elections while negotiators try to resolve the conflict.

Mr. Moragoda said the government would seek to ensure democratic safeguards for
the substantial Muslim and Sinhalese populations in the east, as well as the
Tamils who dissent from Tiger domination. In any permanent settlement, the
government has ruled out giving the Tigers a separate state, but has been
willing to discuss much greater autonomy for Tamils within a democratic Sri
Lanka.

Both sides are continuing to recruit troops and maintain their arsenals. The
Tigers are a formidable, disciplined military force, with an estimated 4,000
trained soldiers. Suicide bombings are their trademark -- Mr. Prabhakaran has
sent forth some 220 suicide bombers, compared to about 70 from Hamas, said Rohan
Gunaratna, a researcher at the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political
Violence at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Under the cease-fire agreement, the Tigers have consolidated their position
because rival armed Tamil groups have been required to turn over their weapons.

The government is taking risks that would leave the Tigers refreshed and
strengthened for war if talks were to break down, as they have before.

The United States Embassy in Colombo recently warned the Tigers that they would
face further international isolation if credible reports of recruitment of
children and abduction and extortion continue.

Fear of the Tigers is palpable in Batticaloa. A leading citizen was plain-spoken
in an interview about the group's terrorist tactics, then pleaded not to be
quoted. "If I stick my neck out, they'll chop it off," he said.

One of the few fearless or foolhardy enough to comment publicly is the Rev.
Harry Miller, a 78-year-old Jesuit priest from New Orleans who came to
Batticaloa in 1948 and has been selected by the government to help monitor the
cease-fire.

He said no one would dare speak out against the Tigers for dread of a severe
retaliation. "They will get back at you one way or another and usually it will
be quite horrible," Father Miller said.

He told of a family he knew that was pressured by the Tigers to give up a son --
and sent a mentally retarded son. The Tigers beat the young man badly and dumped
him at the family's home. He had to be hospitalized.

"Will the parents make a report to the police?" the priest asked rhetorically.
"People do not report against the LTTE."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Velupillai Prabhakaran, who has led a violent Tamil insurgency,
agreed to a cease-fire with the Sri Lankan government in February. (Agence
France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS
OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ASSASSINATION (78%);
BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(76%); POLITICS (75%); LITIGATION (74%); ELECTIONS (71%); RELIGION (70%);
SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (64%); ETHNICITY (59%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
TAMILS (ETHNIC GROUP);  POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%)

PERSON: PRABHAKARAN, VELUPILLAI

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (79%); VIET NAM (79%);
NORWAY (79%)

REGION: SRI LANKA

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             962 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 9, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS TRAVEL;
ID Cards for 'Trusted Travelers' Run Into Some Thorny Questions

BYLINE:  By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1187 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


The idea seemed simple: figure out who the good guys are, give them
easy-to-recognize and hard-to-counterfeit ID cards and let them breeze past
airport security.

Everybody would win, advocates say. Holders of the "trusted traveler" cards
would save time. Screeners would have fewer bodies to inspect -- there were 1.8
billion in 2000, according to the Transportation Department -- and could
concentrate on identifying potential terrorists. And passengers would feel
safer.

There is only one problem: It is proving extraordinarily difficult to figure out
who would qualify for a card that would work as advertised.

"What makes a trusted traveler?" asked Richard P. Eastman, who writes software
for airlines and travel agencies. "The guy who travels all the time; who travels
on business; who has a reason to travel. Does that mean the terrorist can't
penetrate that group? Of course he can."

For weeks the new Transportation Security Administration has focused on more
pressing problems, like taking over the screening points, and officials have
equivocated on whether such a card is feasible. Now, though, with the summer
travel season approaching, lines will grow longer if the normal pattern holds
and millions of vacationers flood the airports. That will take frequent fliers'
frustration back up to the boiling point. Pressures on politicians to do
something are rising, and some experts say the only feasible solution will be
some sort of travel card.

Probably the biggest obstacle to creating the airport equivalent of an E-Z Pass
is doubt about its effectiveness. After all, terrorists can be adept at blending
into the society they plan to attack, so who can guarantee they won't fool the
gatekeepers? "The guys who did this exercise on Sept. 11 spent the better part
of four years becoming nondescript," Mr. Eastman pointed out.

The federal government seems to be of two minds. Tom Ridge, director of homeland
security, said the proposed cards would help reduce bottlenecks. And Norman Y.
Mineta, the secretary of transportation, said his department was open to some
type of trusted-traveler ID card system.

Yet John Magaw, the under secretary of transportation who is the head of the new
Transportation Security Administration, worries that the card might not be smart
enough to thwart hijackers."Terrorists are not in any hurry," he said. "For
them, the soup of revenge is best served cold."

Even if a risk-free card could be devised, civil libertarians would probably
fight it. The American Civil Liberties Union has ridiculed the trusted-traveler
concept as a "get out of security free" card. These critics argue that it would
be impossible to safeguard the confidential information travelers would have to
divulge about themselves. And they contend that a smart card would set a
dangerous precedent.

"Quickly enough, policy makers are going to say, 'If this works, let's require
everyone to go through background checks before they get on a plane,' " said
Barry S. Steinhardt, director of the A.C.L.U.'s program on science and
technology.

The card would be sophisticated but not technically difficult to produce. At a
minimum, experts say, a card should be able to store a fingerprint or a retina
scan and verify to a computer that the holder's finger or eye matched. The
computer should be able to check that the card had not been revoked. So far, the
government has not even been able to devise a card for flight attendants, pilots
or Secret Service agents.

Frequent travelers, however, create a commercial imperative. Though they are
mostly unorganized, they are voting with their feet and abandoning air travel in
droves to avoid the long lines. In a recent survey, fully 60 percent said they
had cut back on their flying purely to avoid airport problems.

Take Steven M. Fetter of Rumson, N.J. He runs his own energy consulting firm,
Regulation UnFettered, and makes frequent flights out of Newark International
Airport to destinations all over the United States and Europe. Before starting
his business, Mr. Fetter, 50, held a variety of jobs with states and the federal
government, including a stint as a senior official in the Labor Department.

He is an unlikely terrorist, but he gets the same scrutiny as everybody else at
security booths, and has the horror stories to show for it. To beat a three-hour
delay he heard about at the New Orleans airport in October, for example, he got
to the airport two and a half hours early, zipped through the lines in 20
minutes and had to kill more than two hours.

Mr. Fetter says he would happily give all kinds of information about himself in
return for a traveler's card that could spare him such frustrations. "Rather
than search people like myself, they should focus on people who want to go
nowhere near this card idea," he said.

Mr. Fetter, who is a platinum-class traveler on Continental Airlines, is
frightening for the airlines because he is typical. The dissatisfaction of
business travelers is creating alarm at airlines. The industry is awash in red
ink, with losses expected to approach $4 billion this year. Yet just a few
hundred thousand road warriors account for more than half their revenues.
Winning them back is the key to future profitability.

But the process of setting security rules has changed. When the Federal Aviation
Administration was in charge, the airlines had a sympathetic ear when they
raised commercial concerns. Now security is in the hands of a separate division
of the Transportation Department.

"This is the first test, really, for a new agency," said Senator Ron Wyden,
Democrat of Oregon, who is not known as a friend of the airlines. Congress set
up the Transportation Security Administration to be more independent of the
industries it regulates, he said.

After Sept. 11, relatively few politicians have been willing to second-guess the
agency. Representative John A. Culbertson, Republican of Texas, came out
strongly for a trusted-traveler card but could find only 13 colleagues to sign a
letter to Mr. Magaw in January calling for it.

Some consumer advocates are skeptical the card will work. "If they start letting
some people through security, it blows the whole security program," said Kathy
Lynch, the project manager at the Aviation Consumer Action Project, a group
founded by Ralph Nader in 1971. "Terrorists can get ID's of any sort."

Ms. Lynch predicted lines would become shorter as new technology and workers are
put in place, and the Transportation Department is already committed to a goal
of waits of no longer than 10 minutes.

But proponents say there must be an easier way than screening people who the
government knows are making routine trips.

"If you start having a behavior pattern that is outside the norm for you, and
inconsistent with your job, then even as a trusted traveler you bear further
looking," said Mr. Eastman, the airline software author.

Something has to happen, the airlines say. "We can't and won't lose focus on
security," said Leo F. Mullin, chairman of Delta Air Lines, in a recent speech
here. "But we must simultaneously reduce the hassle factor. It's possible and
necessary to do both."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven M. Fetter leaves his home in Rumson, N.J., for a business
trip. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRPORTS (92%); AVIATION SECURITY (90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY
(90%); AIRLINES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(77%); HIJACKING (77%); FREQUENT FLYER PLANS (74%); BUSINESS TRAVEL SERVICES
(74%); SMART CARDS (73%); COUNTERFEITING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); TRAVEL AGENTS (72%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
IDENTIFICATION DEVICES;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS;  AIRPORTS

ORGANIZATION: US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (55%)

PERSON: WALD, MATTHEW L

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             967 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE DETAINEES;
Court Weighs Opening of an Immigration Hearing

BYLINE:  By DANNY HAKIM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, April 10


A federal appeals court in Cincinnati agreed today to a speedy review of a lower
court's decision to open to the news media an immigration hearing for a man
seized in the government's terrorism sweep.

News organizations, including The Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News, are
seeking access to the hearings of the man, Rabih Haddad, the co-founder of a
Muslim charity that has come under federal scrutiny as having ties to terrorist
groups. The organizations, which have been joined in their efforts by the
American Civil Liberties Union, are also seeking transcripts and documents from
Mr. Haddad's past hearings.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit issued a temporary stay
of the lower court's order, meaning that the government is not required at this
time to release the transcripts and documents from past hearings. The court will
probably decide next week whether to issue a lengthier stay to keep the past and
future hearings closed while the appeals process continues.

Mr. Haddad's latest immigration hearing, originally set for today, was delayed
until April 24 to give the federal courts more time to consider the matter.

Mr. Haddad, a native of Lebanon who was living in Ann Arbor, Mich., was taken
into custody in December for overstaying his visa. His case is seen as the first
indicator of how the federal courts view the Bush administration's policy of
closing immigration hearings of Arab men rounded up in the terror investigation.
The A.C.L.U. has undertaken a similar effort to open immigration hearings of
terrorism suspects in New Jersey.

On Tuesday, Judge Nancy G. Edmunds of Federal District Court in Detroit rejected
new government arguments and stood by her previous decision that the hearing of
Mr. Haddad should be open to the news media.

The government has argued that opening the hearings could undermine its efforts
to prevent attacks.

"Bits and pieces of information that may appear innocuous in isolation can be
fit into a bigger picture by terrorist groups in order to thwart the
government's efforts to investigate and prevent terrorism," Dale L. Watson, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's executive assistant director of
counterterrorism and couterintelligence, said in an affidavit filed this week.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TRANSCRIPTS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); APPEALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(77%); HIJACKING (77%); CHARITIES (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); RELIGION (76%);
PHILANTHROPY (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (69%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (59%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;
ISLAM;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;  PHILANTHROPY

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%) ;GLOBAL RELIEF FOUNDATION

PERSON: HAKIM, DANNY; HADDAD, RABIH; EDMUNDS, NANCY G (JUDGE)

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (90%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); OHIO, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  DETROIT (MICH);  LEBANON

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             975 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turning a Blind Eye

BYLINE:  By Laura Secor;  Laura Secor is the deputy editor of The American
Prospect.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1430 words


"A PROBLEM
FROM HELL"
America and the Age of Genocide.
By Samantha Power.
Illustrated. 610 pp. New York:
A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $30.

Raphael Lemkin, a Jewish linguist who escaped Nazi-occupied Poland in 1941,
coined the term "genocide" as a kind of speech-act. He meant not only to name a
crime whose magnitude, combined with its sweeping singularity of motive,
distinguished it even in the annals of coldblooded mass murder. He meant for the
crime's very name to be a call for universal opprobrium -- one that would
inspire, if it did not mandate, punishment and prevention.

As Samantha Power recounts in " 'A Problem From Hell': America and the Age of
Genocide," it was Lemkin who devised and lobbied tirelessly for the Genocide
Convention, which the United Nations adopted in 1948. Defining genocide as the
commission of certain crimes with the "intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a
national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such," the convention called
for perpetrators to be punished and for contracting parties "to take such action
under the Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the
prevention and suppression of acts of genocide." Nervous about its own record on
race, however, the United States did not become a party to the Genocide
Convention until 1986, when President Ronald Reagan backed it as a face-saving
measure following his visit the previous year to Bitburg cemetery, where 49 Nazi
SS officers are buried. Even then, three Republican senators -- Jesse Helms,
Orrin Hatch and Richard Lugar -- attached so many reservations to the American
signature that the convention would not meaningfully bind the United States to
much of anything.

Yet those reservations could not prevent "genocide" from becoming the speech-act
Lemkin intended in popular parlance. Associated above all with Nazi horrors, the
term has become so powerful a talisman, and so unarguable a synonym for evil,
that its very invocation seems an incitement to act. By the same token, it is a
word loaded with demagogic potential. Paranoid tyrants, including perpetrators
of genocide, are fond of manipulating public emotions by claiming that their own
people are threatened with impending genocide. American political leaders go to
great lengths to avoid uttering the word in cases where they hope to remain
disengaged; they do not hesitate to use it, however, when they wish to stir up
public outrage in support of military action. Hence, Serbian war crimes in
Kosovo were quickly deemed genocidal, whereas in the more obvious case of
Bosnia, State Department officials carefully picked their way around the g-word.

It will hardly come as a surprise to most Americans who follow foreign affairs
that Bosnia, and not Kosovo, is the norm. In " 'A Problem From Hell,' " Power
expertly documents American passivity in the face of Turkey's Armenian genocide,
the Khmer Rouge's systematic murder of more than a million Cambodians, the Iraqi
regime's gassing of its Kurdish population, the Bosnian Serbian Army's butchery
of unarmed Muslims and the Rwandan Hutu militias' slaughter of some 800,000
Tutsi. (Power has room, in this substantial volume, for only passing mention of
the massacres of similar and larger scale in Nigeria, Bangladesh, Burundi and
East Timor, among other places.) This vivid and gripping work of American
history doubles as a prosecutor's brief: time and again, Power recounts,
although the United States had the knowledge and the means to stop genocide
abroad, it has not acted. Worse, it has made a resolute commitment to not
acting. Washington's record, Power ruefully observes, is not one of failure, but
of success.

Self-interest trumps humanitarian concern in United States foreign policy with
striking consistency, Power demonstrates. Cold-war calculations led the Nixon
and Carter administrations first to pave the way for the Khmer Rouge's ascent to
power, and then to continue to justify its right to rule Cambodia long after a
Vietnamese invasion dislodged Pol Pot. Business interests and the desire to
contain Iran's revolution induced the first Bush administration to support
Saddam Hussein economically as he gassed and bulldozed Kurdish villages. Of
Bosnia, former President Bush's secretary of state, James Baker, famously
proclaimed, "We don't have a dog in that fight." Rwanda, the subject of Power's
most shattering chapter, lay even farther from any vital interest of the United
States. There, the Clinton administration ignored early warnings of impending
catastrophe, declined to intervene and, according to many, opposed United
Nations peacekeeping efforts. When at last the Clinton White House was stirred
to action in Kosovo, it was, Power writes, largely out of concern for NATO's
credibility and the administration's own domestic image. "I'm getting creamed,"
she quotes President Clinton as saying when the lobby of opinion makers calling
for intervention in Bosnia had grown deafening. It would be too humiliating to
go through that again.

Power, the executive director of the Carr Center for Human Rights Policy at the
John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, gives us a Washington that is
vibrant, complex and refreshingly human. Within it, she finds an unlikely,
bipartisan collection of men and women whose courage and moral commitment she
admires. Among them are Henry Morgenthau, Charles Twining, Claiborne Pell,
Madeleine Albright, Robert Dole and a group of junior State Department officials
who resigned to protest American inaction in Bosnia. Senator William Proxmire
regaled the Senate with a "speech a day" for 20 years, urging that the United
States become a party to the Genocide Convention. Peter Galbraith, when he was a
staff member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, fought fruitlessly for
recognition and condemnation of the Iraqi Kurdish genocide, traveling at great
personal risk to northern Iraq.

The same Washington, of course, is a place of defeatism, inertia, selfishness
and cowardice. Warnings pass up the chain and disappear. Intelligence is
gathered and then ignored or denied. The will of the executive remains
steadfastly opposed to intervention; its guiding assumption is that the cost of
stopping genocide is great, while the political cost of ignoring it is next to
nil. President Bush the elder comes off as a stone-hearted prisoner to business
interests, President Clinton as an amoral narcissist. Perhaps nobody looks worse
than former Secretary of State Warren Christopher, on whose watch both Bosnia
and Rwanda self-destructed. "When innocent life is being taken on such a scale
and the United States has the power to stop the killing at reasonable risk,"
Power writes, "it has a duty to act." She objects not only to the fact that the
United States declines to intervene militarily in genocidal conflicts, but also
that frequently it declines to do anything -- even to rebuke perpetrators
publicly.

Where are international institutions in this picture? They depend on the
financing and political will of the United States. Unfortunately, like many
observers of the Bosnian peacekeeping fiasco, Power appears to have given up on
international institutions. She does not argue for empowering them, for
liberating them from the narrow interests of the powerful or for altering their
terms of engagement in genocidal conflicts. Instead, she presses for the United
States to act like something other than the self-interested superpower it is.

The most utopian among us will have difficulty imagining a United States that
functions as disinterested protector to the world's imperiled peoples. Outside
its borders, the country is even less frequently perceived as the white knight
it might imagine itself to be; rather, conflicts of interest, real or perceived,
trail it wherever it intervenes. Power does not take such concerns seriously. If
she did, she would not be so swift to dismiss the role of international
institutions in favor of American unilateralism. Are the world's powerful the
most trustworthy guardians of its powerless? Not on the evidence of this book.
Could it be otherwise? Samantha Power might say that this is an empirical
question, and it is on this ground that her idealism and her pragmatism meet.
She believes that Washington is made of individual wills, and that these wills
are open to suasion. Those who refuse cynicism, she insists, whether they are
journalists, politicians or ordinary citizens like Raphael Lemkin, have the
power substantively to alter our leadership's notion of what is, or isn't, in
the American interest.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: PROBLEM FROM HELL, A: AMERICA AND THE AGE OF GENOCIDE (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Thomas Fuchs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); LITERATURE (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); RELIGION (72%); US PRESIDENTS (65%) BOOKS AND
LITERATURE;  REVIEWS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: SAMANTHA POWER (90%); ORRIN HATCH (50%); RONALD REAGAN (50%) SECOR,
LAURA; POWER, SAMANTHA

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             976 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

April 7-13: INTERNATIONAL;
NEW COURT

BYLINE:  By Barbara Crossette

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 69 words


Since the defeat of Hitler and Japan's war machine, the world has looked for an
institution to deal with war criminals accused of genocide and other crimes
against humanity. The hope became reality with the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, which should be running by next year. Among
leading democracies, only the U.S. is staying away, fearful of politicized
prosecutions.   Barbara Crossette

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); GENOCIDE (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); NEWS
BRIEFS (86%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (91%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             977 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL;
Arafat's Stand on Terror; U.S. Reaction

BYLINE:  By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 670 words


Following is the statement issued yesterday by Yasir Arafat as carried in Arabic
on the news agency WAFA and translated by The Associated Press.

The Palestinian leadership and His Excellency President Arafat express their
deep condemnation for all terrorist activities, whether it is state terrorism,
terrorism by a group or individual terrorism. This position comes from our
steady principle that rejects using violence and terror against civilians as a
way to achieve political goals.

We declared this position beginning in 1988 and also when we signed the Oslo
accords at the White House, and we have repeated it several times before,
including our declaration on Dec. 16 last year. After that, we did not find any
Israeli response but more Israeli escalation, a tighter siege, further
occupation of our people, refugee camps, cities, villages and more destruction
of our infrastructure.

We strongly condemn all the attacks targeting civilians from both sides, and
especially the attack that took place against Israeli citizens yesterday in
Jerusalem.

We also condemn very strongly the massacre that was committed by the Israeli
occupation troops against our refugees in Jenin and against our people in
Ramallah, Nablus and Tulkarm and also the brutal aggression against the church
in Bethlehem during the last two weeks.

We call on the international community, the U.N. Security Council and Mr. Colin
Powell to undertake an international peace mission in the region to investigate
these massacres against our people because of the Israeli occupation and to
investigate the Israeli government's determination to kill the Palestinian hope
for liberty and freedom by using military forces, tanks, missiles and weapons.

On behalf of the Palestinian people, we once again emphasize our full commitment
to a fair and just peace between the two peoples and two states as a strategic
choice -- peace that could provide security for the Israelis and liberty and
freedom in an independent state for the Palestinian people. Only through peace
will security be achieved for everyone, not through occupation and military
operations, massacres and terrorist attacks, especially against civilians, which
will not provide peace and security for either Palestinians or Israelis.

We have to all work together, especially after the recent U.N. resolutions, the
statement of President Bush and his secretary of state, the statement that came
from the international committee overseeing cease-fire efforts, and also in
light of the mission by Mr. Colin Powell and his presence here among us to stop
this war and bring about an immediate Israeli withdrawal from the Palestinian
territories and immediate implementation of the Tenet understandings and
Mitchell report and the resumption of negotiations based on what was decided in
the Arab summit, and the Saudi Arabian initiative that was adopted by the Arab
summit in Beirut to protect Christian and Muslim holy places and the importance
of having international peace forces follow up and monitor the implementation of
all this. --------------------

Response by U.S.
(By Reuters)

 Following is a statement by the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher:

Secretary Powell will meet with Chairman Arafat tomorrow in Ramallah. The
statement issued earlier today by Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian leadership
contains a number of interesting and positive elements:

*Condemnation of all terrorist acts against Israeli and Palestinian civilians.

*A strong condemnation of yesterday's bombing in Jerusalem.

*A call to start immediate implementation of the Tenet understandings and the
Mitchell report.

*A reaffirmation of the Palestinian commitment to a negotiated peace.

*Support for Secretary Powell and his mission.

In his meeting tomorrow, the secretary will work with Chairman Arafat and the
Palestinian leadership to show leadership and to help make these statements a
reality with effective action to bring an end to terror and violence and an
early resumption of a political process.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); PEACE
PROCESS (76%); REFUGEES (74%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (70%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (69%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(65%) PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
LEBANON (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: ISRAEL

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             978 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbian Ex-Aide Dies In Protest Suicide

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 222 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, April 13


Serbia's former interior minister died today, two days after shooting himself in
the head to protest passage of a law that would have allowed his arrest and
extradition to the United Nations war crimes tribunal.

Vlajko Stojiljkovic, 65, had been indicted by the tribunal in The Hague,
Netherlands.

On Thursday evening, he walked out of the federal Parliament building hours
after passage of an extradition bill for suspects sought by the court, pulled
out a gun and shot himself in the temple.

He never recovered from a deep coma, said Dr. Branko Djurovic, the head of the
Belgrade hospital emergency ward.

The Hague tribunal indicted Mr. Stojiljkovic on charges of crimes against
humanity during the Kosovo war in 1999, when about 800,000 Kosovo Albanians were
driven from their homes and hundreds were killed by Serbian security forces. He
was one of about 20 suspects believed to be in Yugoslavia.

The law passed on Thursday removed legal obstacles for the arrest and
extradition of Mr. Stojiljkovic and the other suspects, including several top
associates of former President Slobodan Milosevic.

The United States has said financial aid to Yugoslavia, struggling after a
decade of wars and economic decline, is conditional on its cooperation with the
United Nations tribunal. Mr. Milosevic is now being tried by the tribunal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES
(91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); EMERGENCY ROOMS (78%); SUICIDE (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (65%) SUICIDES AND SUICIDE
ATTEMPTS;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (WORLD COURT) (THE HAGUE)

PERSON: STOJILJKOVIC, VLAJKO

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); KOSOVO
(93%); ALBANIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             980 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The World;
For Allies, 'I Do' Becomes 'Hey, Want to Dance?'

BYLINE:  By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1575 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ONCE upon a time, the United States felt it had to marry its allies -- pledge
fidelity and build an understanding that would last. Not so in the war on
terror. These days, the United States looks more like a serial dater -- lover of
many, husband of none.

And the consequences for American foreign policy are profound.

In the new world of American global diplomacy, the multifront war against
terrorism is being fought with partners, to be sure, but the relationships are
more like liaisons than marriages. They're not even being called alliances.
They're called coalitions.

As the administration announced early in the war on terrorism, the partners are
members of a shifting pickup team, depending on the battle being fought or
prepared for, or the political mood of the moment.

Coalitions do offer unrivaled flexibility for the American superpower, and they
may herald a new era of American assertiveness. They can be as big or small as
Washington wants, and be set to specific tasks -- like toppling the Taliban.
They will dissolve when the job is done and a new one -- like toppling Saddam
Hussein -- is at hand. Then a new coalition can be assembled. For these
partnerships, there is no Senate advise and consent to worry about, little red
tape, less dissent.

But coalitions are inherently unstable. Nations in a constant state of
realignment make for a dangerous and unpredictable landscape. Moreover,
coalitions threaten to undercut America's remaining formal alliances -- NATO,
for example, as Washington determines that working through Brussels seems overly
cumbersome or irrelevant, or the alliance with Israel, as potential Arab
partners against Iraq press the administration to rein in Israel's current
offensive.

The new partnerships throw open the door for new deals around the globe -- some
substantial, some fleeting, all of them tactically important. But one trouble
with such a world, in which allegiances are constantly shifting, is that one can
never be sure of one's friends.

Since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, administration officials have struggled
to knit a web of interlocking relationships from Russia to the Philippines.

"A lot of people are under the illusion that 9-11 changed the way the world
viewed the United States and terrorism," said Toby T. Gati, who was the State
Department intelligence chief in the Clinton administration. "But what it really
did was change the view we have of terrorism and everybody else."

The coalitions -- whether built around a counterterror strategy, an invasion of
Iraq or designs for peace between Israel and the Palestinians -- are not a new
phenomenon. Vice President Dick Cheney's recent tour of the Middle East was an
effort to reprise the gulf war coalition he helped muster a dozen years ago.

But the gulf war was a localized emergency with a clearly identifiable goal --
ousting Iraq from Kuwait. The problem now is that, in the war on terrorism, the
enemy is much more diffuse and the battle is much more open-ended. The
administration is counting on coalitions to carry its burdens over the long
term. And that represents not an exception to America's style of diplomacy, but
the new rule.

Such a strategy calls for a cold look.

In many ways, the coalition-building has recast, or at least confused, the terms
in which American foreign policy has been debated. Early on, the Bush
administration faced criticism for what were called unilateralist impulses -- a
preference to do things alone, rather than with any foreign partners at all.

Richard N. Haass, the State Department's director of policy planning, makes a
case that the administration never was under any illusions that it could prevail
over terrorism without international support. The transnational nature of the
threat has required coordination in intelligence, police work and financial
flows, he said.

The administration's outreach has highlighted a characteristic of the ad-hoc
approach. The United States is seeking out partners when its own interests are
at stake, as opposed to enlisting others against what they see as a common
threat. Partners will have their own reasons for cooperating with the United
States. For example, Yemen, in welcoming American troops, might seek to lessen
its isolation, while the former Soviet republics might want a hedge against
Russian power.

"We don't have to agree on everything before we can cooperate on anything," Mr.
Haass said. "At the heart of the coalition is pragmatism."

That style of pragmatism prompted a fierce embrace of Pakistan, which defied
Washington four years ago by conducting a nuclear test and whose president took
power in a military coup. It resulted in a warm White House reception for the
president of Uzbekistan, even as the State Department deplored its "very poor"
human rights record. It led the administration last week to allow the Pentagon
to rearm the bitter rivals of Armenia and Azerbaijan so they could fight terror.

Such newfound friends would hardly make an honor roll of civic role models, one
senior administration official conceded. But he added: "It's not like people
have been howling. There's now an overriding first question, which is President
Bush's first question: are you with us or against us when it comes to
terrorism?"

What does the administration hope to get out of these coalitions? On the
battlefield, the answer is: not much. The United States, with its vast
superiority, doesn't need much help in fighting conventional wars. But it does
need bases and overflight rights in front-line states like Pakistan. And
coalitions share the burden. As America contemplates getting involved in
military action elsewhere, it is now looking to longstanding allies in Europe to
take the lead in peacekeeping and reconstructing Afghanistan. That expectation
has led to some grumbling from European members of NATO.

"The Europeans are miffed at the pattern where the United States blows things up
and they're left to clean up," said Nora Bensahel, a specialist in coalition
warfare at the RAND Corporation.

Administration officials express quiet satisfaction that they have avoided some
of the pitfalls of working through formal alliances by limiting military
cooperation in Afghanistan. By way of contrast, they recalled the Clinton
administration's problems in the Balkans, where, because of faulty
communications links, NATO allies were forced to discuss bombing targets over
lines monitored by the Serbs. In Afghanistan, one policy maker boasted, "We were
able to fashion a military coalition that didn't inhibit us."

Such skepticism about traditional alliances stems in part from a conviction
within the administration that the European allies are not properly aboard the
anti-terrorism fight. In addition, Washington is reluctant to include alliance
partners who, as equals, might feel no qualms about questioning its strategy.

In the Middle East, the defiance of another staunch American ally, Israel, may
jeopardize the antiterror coalition, officials say. The continued Israeli raids
of cities, towns and refugee camps in the West Bank, over the appeals of
President Bush, has inflamed Arab coalition partners and, administration
officials acknowledge, diminished the stature of the American president. None of
that helps a president plan a move against Iraq.

But even if firm alliances won't work, there are still significant reasons to
want friends alongside in the fight. And the most significant are political.

The United States has become a global target in part by failing to address
simmering resentments in much of the world, officials concede. Finding common
cause with other nations widens the field of targets and builds political
support abroad. In the end, that may be the secret to preserving American
influence.

Joseph S. Nye Jr., the dean of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, argues
that America faces a "historical test" to develop consensus with other nations
around certain principles. "American power is not eternal," Mr. Nye writes in a
new book, "The Paradox of American Power" (Oxford). "If we squander our soft
power through a combination of arrogance and indifference, we will increase our
vulnerability, sell our values short and hasten the erosion of our preeminence."

THE debate over coalitions is just beginning.

They are nimble. "You don't have to go to Geneva every three months and sign
communiques," said one State Department official.

But they are reactive. Unlike alliances, with their structures for planning and
training, they are less able to deter or prevent crises. "Every time we focus on
a new zone of concern, there will be a new cycle of decision-making," notes
Alton Frye, presidential senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.

Others, including Richard C. Holbrooke, the former ambassador to the United
Nations, warn against spurning alliances like NATO, since the long-term
relationships it has nurtured are important in the current effort.

Mr. Haass, the State Department planner, said the administration is thinking
about formalizing some of the relationships born of necessity. A permanent
institution might address terrorism issues over the long run, as the World Trade
Organization addresses trade issues. The trick would be to avoid killing the
very thing that makes coalitions flexible. "That's something we're beginning to
think about," Mr. Haass said. "What would be terrible would be if all the energy
of the 9-11 endeavor dissipated should the threat seem to go down."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush with Jacques Chirac of France (left) and
Vladimir Putin of Russia, two partners . . . (Reuters); (Associated Press); . .
. in a coalition that also includes the president of Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh.
(Agence France-Presse)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DESERT STORM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(76%); FOREIGN POLICY (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); TALIBAN
(72%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); SADDAM
HUSSEIN (57%); JACQUES CHIRAC (50%) MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); IRAQ
(92%); YEMEN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%); FRANCE (69%); BELGIUM (54%)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             987 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 15, 2002 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Commander in Yugoslavia Will Surrender to U.N. Tribunal

BYLINE:  By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE, April 14


A former commander of the Yugoslav Army says he will surrender to the
international tribunal at The Hague "in a peaceful and dignified way."

Gen. Dragoljub Ojdanic, commander of the army under Slobodan Milosevic during
the 1999 war in Kosovo, told the Serbian daily newspaper Vesti that he would
surrender now that the Yugoslav Parliament had passed a law for closer
cooperation with the tribunal.

"They can arrest me right now, but there is no need for that because I'm not
escaping or hiding," Mr. Ojdanic was quoted as saying in today's issue of Vesti.
"My departure to The Hague is now my legal obligation, just like it was when I
had to defend the country" during the NATO bombing of Serbia in 1999.

His statement came three days after another indicted war crimes suspect, Vlajko
Stojiljkovic, the former Serbian interior minister, shot himself in the head on
the steps of Parliament, to protest the cooperation law, which had passed only
hours earlier.

Mr. Stojiljkovic died on Saturday night after spending two days in a coma and on
life-support systems.

The suicide highlighted the contentious issue of whether Serbs should cooperate
with the tribunal, which is now trying Mr. Milosevic for alleged crimes in
Kosovo, Croatia and Bosnia. The law -- which has divided politicians and the
public alike -- was passed only under heavy pressure from the United States.
Washington had suspended $40 million in American assistance at the start of the
month because of what it deemed to be Serbia's inadequate cooperation with the
tribunal.

The Yugoslav president, Vojislav Kostunica, part of the broad group of reformers
who toppled Mr. Milosevic in 2000, said the suicide was a warning for the West
not to exert too much pressure.

Mr. Ojdanic, Mr. Stojiljkovic and Nikola Sainovic, the former Yugoslav deputy
prime minister, had been considered the most likely suspects to be extradited
after the law was passed.

The three men, along with Mr. Milosevic and Milan Milutinovic, now the president
of Serbia, were indicted in 1999 for crimes against humanity in the Kosovo war.
They were accused of overseeing the uprooting of 800,000 ethnic Albanians and
the slaying of scores of civilians.

Mr. Ojdanic, whose family has also said he will turn himself in, told Vesti that
he was already preparing his defense.

"I expect that I will be summoned either by a domestic or The Hague court at any
moment," he was quoted as saying.

The American assistance -- as well as United States support for other financial
aid from international lending institutions -- can only be restored if Secretary
of State Colin L. Powell certifies that Yugoslav leaders are cooperating
adequately. Although the State Department has granted some leeway, it remains
uncertain exactly what American politicians will consider enough cooperation.

Officials at The Hague say there are roughly 15 suspects in Serbia or
Montenegro, the two remaining Yugoslav republics. State Department officials
said they expected suspects to be extradited, but it was unclear how many or
whom they would insist on.

The army and the police have been reluctant to carry out any arrests, and there
is much fear that it will cost lives to apprehend the most wanted suspect, Ratko
Mladic, the former Bosnian Serb military leader, who has been indicted on a
charge of genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); SUICIDE (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); SHOOTINGS (68%); FOREIGN LENDING (50%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  SUICIDES AND
SUICIDE ATTEMPTS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OJDANIC, DRAGOLJUB (GEN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; STOJILJKOVIC, VLAJKO;
FISHER, IAN

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); KOSOVO
(94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA
& HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             990 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1131 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

Powell Foresees No Truce; Israeli Sweep Continues
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, preparing to end his Mideast peace mission,
emphasized that the outcome would fall short of a formal cease-fire. He is to
meet again today with Yasir Arafat. Israeli forces pressed their West Bank
operation, and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon made clear it would not end soon.
A1

Some 250 Palestinians maintained their two-week occupation of the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem despite harsh conditions.   A9


U.S. Role in Venezuela
The Bush administration, under criticism for its role in the brief ouster of
President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, acknowledged that a senior administration
official was in contact with the man who succeeded Mr. Chavez on the day he took
over.   A1

Strikes Across Italy
Millions of workers stopped assembly lines and made travel all but impossible to
protest government plans for a more flexible labor market.   A3

Dutch Cabinet Resigns
Prime Minister Wim Kok and his cabinet resigned after an investigation concluded
that politicians shared blame for the massacre of Bosnian Muslims at Srebrenica
in 1995 while they were under the protection of Dutch peacekeepers.   A3

World Briefing   A10

NATION CHALLENGED   A12-13

British Forces Hunt Qaeda and Taliban Fighters
Hundreds of British troops, backed by artillery and American helicopters, have
begun combat operations high in the mountains of eastern Afghanistan, British
officials said.   A12

Algerians on Trial in Germany
Five Algerian men went on trial in Frankfurt, accused of plotting to blow up a
Christmas market in France and of being part of an Islamic terrorist group
trained in Afghanistan.   A12

Putting States' Assets at Risk
Five senators proposed legislation to allow an American victim of
state-sponsored terrorism who wins a civil judgment against a country to collect
money from assets of that country frozen in the United States.   A13

Disclosures About Lindh
Lawyers prosecuting John Walker Lindh, the Californian accused of fighting with
the Taliban, suggested that prisoners held in Cuba had supplied information
about him. They said they wanted the material kept secret from the public
because it related to continuing investigations.   A12

Rights Group Fights Detentions
The Center for Constitutional Rights said it would ask a federal court to
declare the government's treatment of hundreds of Muslims held since Sept. 11
biased and unconstitutional.   A13

NATIONAL   A14-20

Vatican Discloses Agenda For Meeting of Cardinals
American cardinals have been summoned to the Vatican next week not only to talk
about sex abuse involving priests but also to agree on guidelines "aimed at
restoring a sense of safety and tranquillity to families and trust to clergy and
the faithful," according to a statement.   A1

Cardinal Bernard F. Law of Boston has spent the last few days in Rome, talking
with the pope and other Vatican officials about his role in the sexual abuse
scandal and discussing whether he should resign.   A19

'Virtual' Pornography Allowed
The Supreme Court struck down parts of a federal law that made it a crime to
create, distribute or possess "virtual" child pornography, which uses computer
images or young adults rather than actual children.   A1

Vote Near on Alaska Drilling
Senators moved toward a showdown, probably tomorrow, on oil and gas exploration
in Alaska's wilderness.   A17

Reshaping Military Command
The Pentagon is expected to announce today a revamping of its worldwide command
structure, underscoring the new priorities of defending against terror attacks
and injecting more innovation into how the military trains, equips and fights.
A20

Amtrak Management Faulted
Amtrak, trying to reduce its deficit, set out to make major changes in its
trains without knowing the cost or how much business would result, the General
Accounting Office said.   A17

Split Decision on Watercraft
The National Park Service permanently barred motorized water scooters from five
national parks but told eight parks to review their bans.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Cuomo Assails Pataki In Opening His Campaign
Andrew M. Cuomo formally opened his campaign for the Democratic gubernatorial
nomination with a stinging attack on the record of Governor Pataki, a
Republican. With his father, former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo in the audience, Andrew
Cuomo denounced Mr. Pataki's handling of the economy, the condition of public
schools and efforts to rebuild Lower Manhattan.   B1

Mayoral Budget Plan
Mayor Bloomberg unveils his executive budget plan today, and the mayor and the
Council have already staked out areas of disagreement.   B1

Strip Club and Mayoral Race
Five current and former employees of a Newark strip club whose owner was charged
last month with running a brothel said Mayor Sharpe James had patronized the
club before a March 24 raid that also resulted in the detention outside the club
of an aide to a political rival of the mayor's. Mr. James had assailed his rival
for not firing the aide.   B1

SPORTS   D1-8

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Heart Attack Recommendation
Researchers said the system for emergency care of heart attacks should be
changed to favor artery-opening angioplasty procedures over clot-busting drugs,
even if that meant taking a stricken patient to a facility farther away.   A1

EDUCATION   B9

DINING   F1-10

OBITUARIES   A21

F. Kenneth Iverson
The former steel executive who revolutionized his industry with mini-mills was
76.   A21

Robert Urich
The Emmy Award-winning actor was 55. The cause was cancer.   A21

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Intel on the Upswing
The world's largest chip maker reported first-quarter earnings of $936 million,
or 14 cents a share, matching Wall Street's expectations and reflecting slightly
better-than-anticipated strength in its crucial microprocessor business.   C1

No Rate Changes Expected
Economists said the Federal Reserve was unlikely to change the interest rates it
controls for the next several months, citing new data that offer further
evidence that the economy is on the mend and that inflation remains under
control.   C1

Overhaul at FleetBoston
New England's largest bank announced a reorganization strategy intended to
refocus the company's business on its core commercial and retail banking
operations.   C1

Online Music Still Thriving
The record industry's legal victory over Napster last year has neither stopped
the trading of free music online nor halted a slide in music sales as a new
generation of free music exchanges has blossomed in place of Napster.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

ARTS   E1-12

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Free speech in cyberspace; Pakistan's perpetual president; last
chance for Roosevelt, L.I.; bound to Botox.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E9
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   B10

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PEACE
PROCESS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (89%); RELIGION
(89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); TALIBAN (87%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); LEGISLATION (73%); MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (71%); POLITICAL PROTESTS
(71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); CHRISTMAS (70%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(68%); RESIGNATIONS (67%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(62%); ARMED FORCES (51%); HELICOPTERS (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (69%)

CITY: ROME, ITALY (79%)

STATE: FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); HOLY SEE (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (92%); GERMANY (91%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ITALY
(79%); CUBA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             991 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DETAINEES;
Civil Rights Group to Sue Over U.S. Handling of Muslim Men

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 892 words


In a new challenge to the Bush administration's prolonged detention of hundreds
of Muslim men after Sept. 11, a civil rights group says it will ask a federal
court to declare the government's treatment of the men biased and
unconstitutional.

A class-action lawsuit prepared by the group, the Center for Constitutional
Rights, accused the government of arbitrarily holding Muslim detainees in prison
for months on minor immigration violations, with no hearings to determine
whether the government had probable cause to hold them.

They have also been subjected to excessively harsh treatment in jails in New
Jersey and Brooklyn, the complaint said, and in some cases could not practice
their religion, contact their families or seek the help of their consular
officials.

The lawsuit will be filed today in United States District Court in Brooklyn,
said Barbara J. Olshansky, a lawyer for the center.

"We want the world to know that we are treating students, tourists, people here
for short period of time, as criminals," Ms. Olshansky said. "We're putting them
into arbitrary detention, just like the worst totalitarian regimes we cry out
all the time about in this country."

About 1,200 Muslim men were arrested in the first weeks after the terror
attacks, most eventually charged with minor immigration violations such as
overstaying a visa.

As of mid-February, according to the only information provided by the Justice
Department, 327 of the original detainees were still in custody on immigration
charges.

Government officials have declined to identify the detainees or the reasons so
many remain in prison, other than to say that all law enforcement agencies must
first clear them of links to terrorism.

The suit names as defendants Attorney General John Ashcroft; Robert S. Mueller
III, the director of the F.B.I.; James W. Ziglar, the commissioner of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service; Dennis Hasty, the warden of the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn; and unnamed corrections officers at
the detention center who are accused of beating and abusing some detainees.

A Justice Department spokesman said the agency would not comment on the
complaint.

Efforts by civil rights groups and immigration lawyers to find out more about
the detainees have been blocked by Mr. Ashcroft's decision to hold hearings on
the detainees behind closed doors.

In the first months after Sept. 11, immigrant advocates and civil rights groups
were largely hesitant about criticizing the government's sweeping arrests and
detention of Muslim men. But as time has passed with dozens of men still
believed to be in prison, charged only with immigration violations, such groups
have begun to challenge Mr. Ashcroft's treatment of noncitizens.

Lawsuits have been filed seeking to open the immigration hearings of the Sept.
11 detainees and force the government to release the names of the detainees. In
several District Court decisions, the civil rights groups have won favorable
decisions, and the government has appealed.

The complaint by the Center for Constitutional Rights, a 36-year-old civil
rights group, was made on behalf of Muslim men who were kept in two prisons in
the New York City area long after immigration judges ordered them to leave the
country.

Those men, according to the lawsuit, had violated immigration laws and had
either agreed to leave voluntarily or had received a deportation order. Normally
in such cases, the immigration courts order the foreigners to leave within a few
weeks of their hearings.

The lawsuit focuses on conditions at the Metropolitan Detention Center in
Brooklyn, a federal jail where the Muslim detainees were kept in a
maximum-security area, and the Passaic County Jail in Paterson, N.J., where the
I.N.S. rents detention space.

One detainee named in the lawsuit said that guards at the Metropolitan Detention
Center bent his thumbs back, pushed him and kicked him in the face when he first
arrived there. For the first week, he said, he did not have a bar of soap or a
towel and he did not get his eyeglasses back from the guards for three months.

The detainee, Asif-ur-Rehman Saffi, said in the lawsuit that guards constantly
called him a terrorist and insulted his religion. Mr. Saffi, who was born in
Pakistan, is a French citizen and last month was released from prison and
deported to France. The only charge against him was working while in the United
States on a tourist visa.

Another detainee named as a plaintiff, Syed Amjad Ali Jaffri, was held in the
Metropolitan Detention Center for nearly seven months, four months after an
immigration judge ordered him deported. He said a guard at the federal prison
slammed his head against a wall, loosening some of his teeth.

Ibrahim Turkmen, another detainee cited in the lawsuit, was arrested by F.B.I.
agents on Oct. 13 at his apartment in West Babylon, N.Y. According to the
lawsuit, Mr. Turkmen spoke very little English and did not understand everything
the agents asked him, but did vehemently deny any links to terrorists.

He was eventually taken to the Passaic County Jail and charged with overstaying
his tourist visa. An immigration judge offered him a standard option in such
cases of minor immigration violations, that is, to leave voluntarily within 30
days.

Mr. Turkmen agreed but was nevertheless detained for four more months, until
Feb. 25.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (92%); CIVIL RIGHTS (91%); IMMIGRATION
(91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); PROBABLE CAUSE (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS
(78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); CLASS ACTIONS (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(76%); RELIGION (73%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (72%); HIJACKING (72%); REFUGEES (71%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (65%) TERRORISM;  SUITS AND
LITIGATION;  MUSLIM-AMERICANS;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(54%) CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (68%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             996 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: IMMIGRATION HEARINGS;
States Are Told to Keep Detainee Information Secret

BYLINE:  By DANNY HAKIM

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, April 18


The Bush administration ordered state and local officials today not to release
information about immigration detainees even as the government lost a crucial
related battle in federal appeals court.

The new directive was issued by James W. Ziglar, the commissioner of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, in consultation with the Justice
Department. The rule prohibits state and local employees from disclosing the
names of immigration detainees in their custody. The regulation follows a ruling
last month by a New Jersey judge that ordered two county jails to release the
names of immigrants detained after Sept. 11.

The order is part of the government effort to keep secret the names of people
taken into custody after Sept. 11 and bar access to their immigration hearings.

That effort was dealt a legal setback today when a federal appeals court in
Cincinnati said the government must release transcripts of past immigration
court hearings in the case of Rabih Haddad, a detainee and a co-founder of a
Muslim charity whose assets the government has frozen.

The court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, said there
was just a "slim likelihood" that it would reverse a lower court decision that
compelled the government to open Mr. Haddad's future immigration hearings.

Michigan newspapers, including The Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News, have
sued to open the hearing of Mr. Haddad, a native of Lebanon who lived with his
family in Ann Arbor. The newspapers were joined in the suit by the American
Civil Liberties Union and Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan.

The A.C.L.U. has filed similar suits to gain information about detainees in
federal and state court in New Jersey. The suits pit First Amendment rights
against a law approved after the Sept. 11 attacks that permits the secret
detention of immigrants.

The decisions in Mr. Haddad's case are the only ones that the federal courts
have made on the detentions after Sept. 11.

"This opinion leaves no doubt about what this panel believes," said Lee Gelernt,
senior staff lawyer for the Immigrants' Rights Project of the civil liberties
union.

Mr. Gelernt said the decisions of the appeals and district courts were critical
early barometers of the federal courts' views.

Todd Gaziano, director of the center for legal and judicial studies at the
Heritage Foundation, which has supported the administration's policy, said the
government could press other cases in other circuits.

"It's a skirmish," Mr. Gaziano said of the newspapers' suit. "It's not likely,
in and of itself, to be that determinative of the larger legal issue."

The civil liberties union criticized the new directive, saying the order was an
effort to circumvent the authority of state legislatures that adopt public
information laws and state courts that enforce them.

Bush administration officials acknowledged that the rule, issued under the
Immigration Nationality Act, had at least in part been prompted by the suit in
New Jersey that sought to release detainees' names.

"Disclosure of that information could provide terrorist organizations with
information that threatens the lives of American citizens and the national
security of the United States," said Mark Corallo, a spokesman for the Justice
Department.

In Mr. Haddad's case, the government will now have to appeal to the Supreme
Court to withhold transcripts of past hearings. Mr. Haddad, a co-founder of the
Global Relief Foundation, was taken into custody in December because his visa
had expired.

Two weeks ago, a judge in Federal District Court here sided with the newspapers
and rejected government arguments that opening the hearings would pose a
security risk. Last week, the Justice Department asked the appeals court for a
stay while it considered the case. It received a temporary stay. Today, the
appeals court rejected a longer stay. That would have let the government
withhold Mr. Haddad's immigration file while the appeals court considers the
case.

The decision today will require the government to allow the press access to an
immigration hearing scheduled for Mr. Haddad on Tuesday, unless it can get a
postponement or the stay from the Supreme Court.

The government continues to argue that open hearings would compromise
investigations of terrorist threats. The appeals court said First Amendment
rights took precedence.

"We recognize that the government alleges substantial injuries to the integrity
of its terrorism-related investigation," the decision said, "but the likelihood
of such harms occurring in this particular case is remote, given the fact that
information about Haddad's detention has already been disseminated."

The decision was reached by a panel of Judges R. Guy Cole Jr., Martha Craig
Daughtrey and Karen Nelson Moore.

The immigration court has refused to give reporters access to records of Mr.
Haddad's previous hearings. A lawyer for The Free Press, Herschel Fink, said he
would ask a federal district judge here to hold Elizabeth Hacker, an immigration
court judge, in contempt on Friday if reporters were denied access again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); APPEALS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS
(78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LITIGATION (77%); TERRORISM (75%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
REFUGEES (73%); CORRECTIONS (72%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); HIJACKING (67%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA;
MUSLIM-AMERICANS

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (58%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(54%)

PERSON: JOHN CONYERS (58%) HAKIM, DANNY; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); HADDAD, RABIH

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (79%); DETROIT, MI, USA (79%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MICHIGAN;  ANN ARBOR (MICH)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1007 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Al Qaeda's Leaders And U.S. Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 177 words


To the Editor:

"Winging It at Guantanamo" (editorial, April 23) illustrates the potential for
prosecutorial misconduct by the Bush administration in the adjudication of
alleged Al Qaeda or Taliban acts of terror. I would argue that there must also
be a recognition of, and investigation into, past and present atrocities
committed by the Northern Alliance, America's proxy warriors in the war on
terrorism.

In the Muslim world, there is a profound perception that United States justice
is rooted not in law but in political expediency. An investigation into war
crimes and crimes against humanity by the Northern Alliance against the Pashtun
majority in Afghanistan -- as well as American recognition and criticism of
Russian bloodletting in Chechnya and Israeli atrocities in the occupied
territories -- could be instrumental in restoring credibility to the American
system of justice, which is viewed with skepticism if not suspicion around the
world.

BRUCE G. RICHARDSON
Topsfield, Mass., April 23, 2002

The writer is the author of a book about Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (88%); MISCONDUCT (88%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HIJACKING (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(70%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); LEGAL ETHICS (58%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

COMPANY: ALLIANCE AMERICA (57%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP); TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP);
NORTHERN ALLIANCE (ANTI-TALIBAN FORCE)

INDUSTRY: SIC3479 COATING, ENGRAVING, & ALLIED SERVICES, NEC (57%); SIC3469
METAL STAMPINGS, NEC (57%)

PERSON: RICHARDSON, BRUCE G; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1009 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2002 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: MUSLIMS;
How in a Little English Town Jihad Found Young Converts

BYLINE:   By AMY WALDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2863 words

DATELINE: TIPTON, England


The young men lived within a few blocks of one another in a Muslim pocket in
this small town near Birmingham. They were out of school and often on the
streets, in the occasional fight, sometime smokers of marijuana. They were, in
the slang of the British Midlands, "dossers" -- slackers, layabouts.

So when they renounced the street for Islam, gave up their bad habits for
prayer, their parents -- immigrants from Pakistan and Bangladesh -- were
pleased. Neighbors were bemused: the drifters had found faith.

Last fall, four young men announced that they were leaving for Pakistan -- for a
computer course, a holiday, an arranged marriage -- then disappeared. Their
families had no word until January, when the Foreign Office called. Three of
them -- Shafiq Rasul, Asif Iqbal and Ruhal Ahmed -- had been captured with the
Taliban in Afghanistan and taken to Camp X-Ray in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The fourth, Munir Ali, believed to have accompanied them into Afghanistan, is
missing.

No one knows precisely what drove them to Afghanistan -- whether they went to
take up arms or offer aid. What is clear is that in Tipton, as across Britain,
the seeds were there: a Muslim generation uncertain of its identity and
prospects, angry at the treatment of Muslims the world over, and prey to
recruitment, by individual journeymen and potent imagery, to militant Islam.

The "Tipton Taliban" were just four young men in a corner of one small town in
England. But their story is a window into the psychic journey being taken in
immigrant communities across Western Europe as young Muslims are swept up by an
orthodox, and often politicized, form of Islam far removed from the "Friday
Prayers" version of their elders.

Some of the youths are stagnant or unemployed, others breezily successful.
Either way, in a poignant kink in the immigrant arc, they have often deemed
immaterial all the material comforts their parents emigrated for.

Today, the Taliban are fallen and Al Qaeda is, at least temporarily, in some
disarray. The world's attention has shifted to another group of angry young
Muslims -- the Palestinians battling Israel. Still, here in Britain, what one
jihad champion calls the "nexus of politics and religion and frustration"
remains unbroken. If anything, it has been fortified by events in the Middle
East.

These young men were ripe for being swept up. They lived a small-town ennui that
could make trouble attractive because at least it made them feel alive. Asif
Iqbal, 20, was hyper and excitable. He liked to test the limits. He had left
school at 16, run with a wild crowd for a while, and blown a chance at college.

He lived with both his Pakistani-born parents but often seemed on his own. His
father, 68 and retired, was busy with leisure pursuits. His mother was
uneducated and mentally a bit unwell. "He had no one to give him advice," a
friend said.

He worked the night shift at an office postal service and spent most of his free
time in the street, other than a Sunday afternoon soccer game. In 1999, he and a
friend, also now in Camp X-Ray, had fought with other Asian youths in a nearby
town, hurting one so badly he was left scarred.

A Refuge for Muslim Activists

When he turned toward Islam, then, Asif Iqbal did not do so in half-measures.
What began as a mild curiosity soon became aggressive, even confrontational.

His path was already a well-trodden one. Britain has during the last two decades
become a refuge unmatched in Europe for Muslim activists, scholars and clerics
fleeing repressive governments in the Arab world or North Africa, and thus a
center of Islamist influence.

Richard Reid, who tried to detonate a shoe-bomb on a trans-Atlantic flight, came
to radical Islam at London's mosques; so did Zacharias Moussaoui, the only
person charged in the Sept. 11 terror attacks. Djamel Beghal, accused of
plotting an attack on the American Embassy in Paris, sought spiritual tutelage
there. Ahmed Omar Sheikh, who is on trial in Pakistan accused of the kidnapping
and murder of Daniel Pearl, grew up in Britain, the child of prosperous
Pakistani parents.

In all, no one knows how many of the newly radicalized have actually taken the
journey from Britain to jihad. But over the last decade, members of the jihad
movement say, hundreds have gone for training or fighting in Bosnia, Chechnya
and Afghanistan. A document found by New York Times reporters at a Kabul house
used by the Islamic militant group Harkat ul-Mujahedeen lists nine trainees,
identified by code name, from Britain.

Since Sept. 11, the presence of so many radicals, and a number of tantalizing,
if ambiguous, terrorist links, have prompted other European nations to accuse
Britain of being soft on terrorism.

Stung by the criticism and fearful that Britain will become a target for
supporting America's war on terror, the government is using tough, even
draconian, new laws to crack down on extremism. It is also trying to better
understand why young men like Mr. Iqbal turn to militancy.

The young men of Tipton are out of British hands, for now. Whether they will be
tried here or in America, or simply go free, is unclear. For now, they pass
their days in sunbaked cages in Camp X-Ray, far from the Midlands drizzle.

At Ease in Neither Land

Their families and friends have mostly put forward the same defense: the boys
were too Westernized for fundamentalism to creep in. They were irreligious; they
had to be prodded to mosque. They drank. They smoked. They went clubbing and
chased girls.

Asif Iqbal preferred snooker and soccer to politics, his father told one
newspaper. Shafiq Rasul's brothers said he wore Armani, as if that alone was
impregnable armor against extremism.

It is a disorienting image: Muslim immigrant parents defending their children on
grounds of decadence.

But it hints at the forces pulling at this immigrant second generation, the
first to be British raised. Their parents had brought their home country to
their host country and so lived comfortably in both. Their sons seemed at ease
in neither.

Aziz ul-Hak, 22, was Asif Iqbal's best friend, and if, like most people here, he
isn't terribly forthcoming about what happened, he is willing to talk a bit
about his own "stressful" in-between life.

He speaks Bengali with his father and Birmingham English with his mates. His
uniform is Nikes and a baseball cap, his wife a Bangladeshi his father picked.
He does not feel particularly British, but in Bangladesh that's all he feels --
a rich Briton ripe for ripping off.

His father came from Bangladesh in 1963, part of a great migration of former
imperial subjects from the Indian subcontinent invited to toil in Britain's
factories. Many came here to the West Midlands, creating in Victoria Park Estate
in Tipton a community that feels like a sari beneath a drab, gray English coat.

In Truth, a Place Apart

It is just six or so streets of linked plain prewar houses in neat uninterrupted
rows. But behind the doors, the South Asian village culture survives, in the
handmade chapatis, the parentally arranged marriages and the mildly intoxicating
Bangladeshi leaf stored in a basket by the register at the Pakeeza grocery
store.

All this has made for the appearance of quirky cultural fusion. Pep's Park Lane
Chippy serves curry sauce as well as fish and chips. Bollywood and Hollywood
share space at the video store. Young Muslims study at the Roman Catholic
school.

But, in truth, the Park Estate is a place apart, a lace-curtained ghetto
surrounded by the whites who make up 86 percent of Tipton's 50,000 residents.
Around Tipton, young Asian men who wear Moschino jeans and gold earrings in one
ear also hear themselves referred to as "Pakis."

It cannot help that the entire economic basis of this world has fallen away. The
factories are mostly closed now. Aziz ul-Hak thinks himself lucky to work at a
food shop, since in Tipton many young Muslims do not work at all. More graduate
to prison than university.

"The main thing with our teenagers is a drug problem, not a religious problem,"
says Bashrhan Khan, 34.

Similar social strains among young South Asians prompted riots in some British
towns last summer. Tipton's afflictions have been milder, but jarring
nonetheless. A few years ago, gangs of young whites came through the Park Estate
yanking off Muslim women's head scarfs.

The Pull Between Cultures

The Asians settled the score, sometimes violently, but felt personally betrayed
by onetime schoolmates. Two years ago, the right-wing British National Party,
whose Web site now features a "Campaign Against Islam," won 24 percent of the
vote in a local election.

This was the circumscribed stage on which the young men who disappeared were
playing out their lives. They had left school at 16 and were living at home, two
on the same street.

Ruhal Ahmed, 20, was a takeaway worker and skilled kickboxer who felt the pull
between cultures more acutely than most. A Bengali, he had fallen in love with a
local Pakistani girl. In Tipton, this was not done. Parents picked partners back
home. The Park Estate was too small to be disrupted by love.

Shafiq Rasul, 24, was 6 foot 2 and model-handsome, by his brothers' reckoning.
His father had come from India 35 years ago to work in a factory, and died four
years ago. The son's purpose seemed less clear: shy Shafiq had dropped out of
college or "taken some time off," and was working part time at an electronics
store.

Munir Ali, 21, now missing, was also Bengali. Sweet and simple, he had struggled
to find work, relying, as many young people here do, on temporary jobs. Before
he left, he wasn't working at all.

As he searched for his place, his older sister had found hers -- unusual in a
culture where women rarely work outside the home. She had won election to the
local council, the first Asian woman to do so.

After the news broke about her missing brother, she issued a statement: "We have
grown up in Britain in a Western society. All members of our family share and
respect British values."

Those values, like freedom of speech and human rights, have drawn Islamic
dissidents seeking haven from repression at home. Some have used Britain as a
base for influencing their home countries' politics, through writing, lobbying
or fund-raising.

But others are steadily kneading the identity crises of Britain's young South
Asians, as well as converts like Richard Reid. These purveyors of radicalism
single out moderate mosques, prisons and universities. Their foil is the West --
its actions, its policies, even the very freedoms they use to malign it.

On a Wednesday night in Luton, just north of London, 20 or so brown young men
crowd into the Islamic Educational Center to hear the Syrian-born Sheik Omar
Bakri Muhammad. Sons of Pakistani or Bangladeshi immigrants, most wear Western
dress.

"They want to keep calling us Pakis, bloody Arabs, brown Kaffirs," Mr. Bakri
says.

He caresses a bushy beard and conjures an imaginary character to dramatize a
favorite theme: the futility of assimilation. "Abu Jabar changes his name to
Bobby. He changes all his clothes. He dances. He raves with them. They still
call him Paki."

Bobby asks, "For God's sake who do I belong to?"

Mr. Bakri answers: "You belong to the Muslim umma, brothers. Come on in."

Mr. Bakri heads Al Muhajiroun, or The Emigrants, which he calls an Islamic
ideological party. Some say he is all bombast and bluff, others that he
manipulates young men into jihad. Whatever the truth, he indisputably transforms
anomic young Muslims into Islamists.

Conjuring Up the Caliphate

His followers see recreating the caliphate -- the era of Islam's ascendancy
after the death of Muhammad in the eighth century -- as the answer to Muslims',
and the world's, problems. They often sound like nothing so much as young
Marxists of another era.

Islam "will guarantee every single individual the bare necessities of food,
clothing, shelter," says Muhammed Ali, a 21-year-old information technology
specialist of slight build and febrile mien.

In Britain, as everywhere, Islam has ribboned into countless sects and schools
that often spend as much time attacking one another as attracting fresh
recruits.

The Birmingham Central Mosque is crowded with young people raised as indifferent
Muslims who have now turned to a Taliban-style Islam that provides a way of life
as much as a religion. The women cover not just their heads, but their faces;
the long-bearded men no longer allow their children to be photographed.

At the same time, many well-educated young Muslims have joined Hizb ut-Tahrir, a
movement brought to England in the 1980's by Middle Eastern students. Its
followers, who wear Western dress and often work in high-tech jobs, use
anti-American propaganda to rally support for a pan-Islamic state.

"Your Muslim brothers are suffering," they whisper to potential recruits.

The goal of the radicals, of whatever stripe, is to make Islam a political
force. To do this, they employ a potent mix of vivid imagery, Koranic
scholarship, hard facts and soft-boiled conspiracy theories -- the Jews attacked
the World Trade Center to discredit Osama bin Laden; the C.I.A. did it to give
America a way into Central Asia; Mr. bin Laden is an American agent meant to
discredit Islam.

All of this is passed along a Muslim information loop, a daisy chain of Web
sites and word of mouth. Azzam.com, for example, features pictures of Iraqi
babies malnourished because of American sanctions or videos of graphic slaughter
by and of Muslims in Chechnya.

Imran Khan, 32, who publishes and sells pro-jihad literature, says that jihad
recruitment is "more promising in smaller towns than larger towns."

"In smaller towns," he said, "there's nothing happening."

The Tales They Told

In the small town of Tipton, Shafiq Rasul told his family he was going to take a
computer course in Pakistan. Asif Iqbal was going to carry out an arranged
marriage, and Ruhal Ahmed was going to watch, or going on holiday, or making a
religious pilgrimage -- no one, anymore, seems sure.

As these stories have fallen away, parents and friends say the young men must
have been brainwashed. They describe jihad recruiters and fiery visiting sheiks;
Muslim door-to-door preachers and extremist mosques that influenced the young
men. None of their theories are provable, but all are plausible.

With three mosques in four square blocks, the Park Estate was ripe for revival.
Islam here has been parsed by denomination, language and culture -- all the
divisions of the subcontinent. That variety well suited the Tipton youths'
meanderings through faith.

When they first turned to Islam, over idle talk at a local pool hall, their
guides were moderates with mystical leanings. They borrowed tapes of Hamza
Yusuf, a moderate American convert who has achieved a mass following in Britain
and the United States. Their families immediately noticed a change. Asif's
father was happy, he told friends -- his son had become a good religious boy.

But, friends say, the boys soon migrated to an Islam of a more puritanical bent.
They became judgmental, telling friends that they would see after they died how
bad their clubbing and pubbing was.

They became convinced of their rightness. Asif once threw a punch because he
could not win a theological argument in front of a group of friends. They argued
against citations from classical scholars by saying they could interpret the
Koran themselves -- they didn't need scholars.

They challenged moderates in town to debate visitors like Sheik Abdullah
el-Faisal, a Jamaican-born, Saudi-educated preacher who came to Tipton for two
visits. He talked of the obligation to jihad, of Muslims killed in Bosnia.

A World of Conspiracies

Mr. Faisal sketched a world of conspiracies, of cabals of Jews and Freemasons
plotting to take over the world. It was more exciting than Bollywood and
Hollywood combined. It was real.

On some of his tapes, he speaks of why Muslims can never have peace with the
"filthy Jews," and of Muslims' right to kill a Hindu if they encounter one in
the road. In February, those tapes got him arrested and charged with
"solicitation to murder," a charge he has said he will answer by showing that
everything he said exists in the Koran.

Asif and his friends were briefly taken with Mr. Faisal, but then moved on. They
learned about Hizb ut-Tahrir, and attended lectures given by a recruiter for Al
Muhajiroun. They argued that the Palestinians' conflict with Israel justified
jihad.

Then came Sept. 11. Muslims in Tipton, like those across Britain, were outraged
by America's bombing of Afghanistan. Still, that the young men undertook their
pilgrimage without parental permission shocked this tradition-bound community
almost as much as their going at all.

"They were supposed to ask their mother three times and their father once," one
young woman said.

But the literature of jihad has an answer to that. "Join the Caravan,"
considered a "classic" treatise of the Afghan jihad movement, states, "When
Jihad becomes Fard Ain" -- an individual obligation -- "no permission of parents
is required."

All the young men needed was someone to make the argument that jihad had become
Fard Ain. In Tipton and beyond, there was no shortage of people to make it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 25, 2002



CORRECTION: A picture caption yesterday about four young Muslims who converted
to militant Islam in a small British town reversed two of their identities.
Shafiq Rasul was at the left and Ruhal Ahmed at the right.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ruhal Ahmed, left, and Shafiq Rasul were among those arrested
with the Taliban. (News Team International); (Associated Press); The one-room
mosque, on the corner at right, is one of three within a few blocks. (Jon Super
for The New York Times); A small mosque in Tipton, England, was attended by some
of the youths now held at Guantanamo, Cuba. The mosque was established in 1979
by immigrants from Bangledesh. (Heidi Bradner for The New York Times)(pg. A14)
Map of England highlighting Tipton: Tipton, in the West Midlands, has a
population of roughly 50,000. (pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TALIBAN (90%); IMMIGRATION
(89%); TERRORISM (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); REFUGEES
(76%); FAMILY (76%); TRENDS (71%); MARRIAGE (69%); POLITICS (63%) TERRORISM;
ISLAM;  GEOGRAPHIC PROFILES;  SOCIAL CONDITIONS AND TRENDS;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

PERSON: WALDMAN, AMY; RASUL, SHAFIQ; IQBAL, ASIF; AHMED, RUHAL; ALI, MUNIR

CITY: BIRMINGHAM, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); ENGLAND (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%);
CUBA (87%); EUROPE (86%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); WESTERN EUROPE
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); MIDDLE EAST (78%)

REGION: GREAT BRITAIN;  TIPTON (ENG);  AFGHANISTAN;  EUROPE

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1010 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing New York: Manhattan: Transgender Bill Passes

BYLINE:  By Diane Cardwell (NYT) (Compiled by Anthony Ramirez)

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 110 words


The City Council approved a bill yesterday that extends protection from
discrimination to transgendered people, transsexuals and others whose gender
identity the bill's backers say does not fit societal norms.

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that he planned to sign the bill,
which was approved by a vote of 45 to 5, with one abstention. Previously, Mr.
Bloomberg and others had argued that the law was unnecessary because
transsexuals are already protected under the city's human rights law. But
proponents of the legislation have long argued that those covered by the bill
face discrimination and need explicit protection.   Diane Cardwell (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (95%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (92%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); MAYORS (90%); CITIES (90%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); APPROVALS (88%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (87%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1011 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senate Panel Moves to Block Bias Against Gays at Work

BYLINE:  By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


A Senate committee approved legislation today to prohibit job discrimination
based on sexual orientation, advancing a bill the Senate could pass this year
but the House is unlikely to take up.

Another measure to protect gays, which would make hate crimes a federal offense
punishable by life in prison, will be brought sometime in the next three weeks,
said Ranit Schmelzer, a spokeswoman for Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the
majority leader. That bill, which the Senate passed in 2000 only to see House
leaders bury it, would also provide money to help local law enforcement agencies
prosecute hate crimes.

The job discrimination bill, which Ms. Schmelzer said would come up later this
year, came within one vote of passage in 1996, going down to a 50-to-49 defeat
when the Senate was in Republican hands.

It prohibits discrimination in hiring, firing, wages and other conditions of
employment, and union membership, based on sexual orientation. It would apply to
employers, including government but not the armed services, and to employment
agencies and unions. It does not cover employers of 14 or fewer workers or
religious organizations.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, the bill's chief sponsor
and chairman of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, called
the bill "a giant step forward" that would curb discrimination that was an
"insidious aspect of American life."

Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, the committee's senior Republican,
disagreed, arguing that the issue was best left to the states. Twelve states and
the District of Columbia have barred job discrimination based on sexual
orientation. He said the bill would create "a lawsuit heaven."

The committee adopted the bill by voice vote and discussion was brief. One
Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, supported it, dismissing the
argument of conservative groups that the bill created special privileges for
gays.

"To do this is not to create a special right for gay men and lesbians, but to
end discrimination against them, as we have done for others," Ms. Collins said.
"To do less is to close our eyes to this inequity in our laws, and to give a
quiet nod to discrimination in the workplace in a country that prides itself on
rewarding merit and hard work."

No one suggested the prospects in the House were anything other than very
difficult this year. Representative Mark Foley, a Florida Republican and a chief
sponsor, said he was hopeful but had no indication the leaders would let it come
to a vote. Representative Chris Shays, a Connecticut Republican and another
chief sponsor, said: "This is kind of a long struggle. This is not something I
see happening this year." Terry Holt, spokesman for Representative Dick Armey of
Texas, the House majority leader, said neither the jobs bill nor the hate crimes
bill was a priority for House action this year.

In the House, the employment bill has 190 co-sponsors, including 21 Republicans,
and Mr. Foley said, "If it gets to a vote, we will pass it."

Supporters such as Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights
Campaign, said she thought it would be necessary to "attach it to something
else" and fight in a House-Senate conference. That was the tactic used in 2000
on the hate crimes bill. Despite a 232-to-191 vote telling House conferees to
accept the measure, it was killed in conference on a Pentagon authorization
bill.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (91%); DISCRIMINATION
(91%); EMPLOYMENT (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); APPROVALS
(90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (88%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); WAGE
DISCRIMINATION (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); LABOR
UNIONS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); LITIGATION (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); RELIGION
(52%) LABOR;  DISCRIMINATION;  HOMOSEXUALITY;  LAW AND LEGISLATION

PERSON: TED KENNEDY (73%); CHRISTOPHER SHAYS (58%); SUSAN COLLINS (58%); JUDD
GREGG (58%); TOM DASCHLE (58%) GREGG, JUDD (SEN); KENNEDY, EDWARD M (SEN);
CLYMER, ADAM

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: UNITED STATES

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1012 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 25, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: RELATIONS;
For Many American Muslims, Complaints of Quiet but Persistent Bias

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1221 words


In ways large and small, from perceived prejudice in the workplace to a
heightened sense of anxiety at home, the events of Sept. 11 continue to
reverberate in the lives of American Muslims.

State and federal civil rights agencies have been flooded with complaints from
Muslims who contend that their employers and co-workers openly denigrated Islam
after the terror attacks, sneeringly labeled them terrorist and, in some cases,
fired them solely because of religion or national origin.

Many other Muslims say they see evidence of a quiet but persistent
discrimination against them in their everyday social transactions. It is not
necessarily tangible. A once-friendly acquaintance no longer says hello. A child
is repeatedly teased over his Arabic name. A customer calls the police to
suggest that a foreign-looking merchant might be a terrorist.

"Being Muslims, will we always be suspected?" said Mansoor Khan, a Pakistan-born
doctor who runs Help & Hope, a volunteer aid group for Muslim immigrants in
Queens. "Will we always have to worry about someone coming to knock on our door?
As American citizens, will our identities be shaky just because we are Muslim?"

It is difficult to say for certain whether the shock of Sept. 11, followed by
the war in Afghanistan, has set off a widespread public reaction against people
who are Muslim or are presumed to be Muslim. What is clear is that many Muslims
firmly believe that American attitudes toward them have become more negative and
mistrustful.

In a national survey by the Zogby International polling company in March 2000,
35 percent of the American Muslims polled reported having experienced
discrimination because of their religion. Thirty-nine of Arab-Americans polled
said they had experienced prejudice based on their ethnic heritage. But feelings
appeared to have shifted significantly after Sept. 11. In November 2001, another
Zogby poll found that 57 percent of American Muslims believed Americans held
unfavorable opinions of Muslims and Arabs.

The unease that many people now feel is not necessarily linked to a concrete
event or overt behavior.

"What we have now is a feeling of insecurity, a feeling that I can't really
describe in words," said Zaheer Sharaf, a grocer and service station owner who
immigrated from Pakistan six years ago.

His own sense of anxiety deepened four months ago, when some family friends
visited from Pakistan. They stepped outside Mr. Sharaf's grocery store, on Main
Street in Broad Brook, Conn., to snap a few photographs. Someone who saw them
called the police to report suspicious foreigners with cameras. "The police came
to the store, and I explained the situation," Mr. Sharaf said. "They were very
nice, but I felt so embarrassed. I'd like to be part of society here, but minor
things like these make me feel excluded."

From the moment American officials identified the people who planned and
executed the terror attacks as Muslims, a backlash against Muslims was feared.
But there were also strong efforts to promote tolerance. Not long after the
attacks, a host of celebrities publicly urged Americans not to blame all Muslims
for the deadly acts of a few.

Despite a scattering of attacks on Muslims and Islamic sites across the country,
there was no widespread eruption of hatred or vengeance. Volunteers offered to
protect mosques and accompany Muslim women who were frightened to leave their
homes. Synagogues and churches invited Islamic scholars to speak at interfaith
seminars.

But at the same time, under the broad umbrella of fighting terrorism, the
government directed a spotlight on Muslims, singling them out for investigation
and interrogation.

In addition to the 1,000 men arrested in an early law enforcement sweep, 5,000
young Muslim men who are in the country on tourist or student visas have been
summoned by the F.B.I. for interviews. Attorney General John Ashcroft has said
these men, because of their Muslim contacts, might have useful information about
terrorism.

The Justice Department has also singled out for arrest another 5,000 Muslims
immigrants who did not leave the country after being ordered deported, although
they represent just a fraction of the 320,000 people of all backgrounds who
violated deportation orders.

"I really believe that employers may be saying to themselves that if Ashcroft
can do this to Muslims, then so can we," said Omar T. Mohammedi, a New York
lawyer who is representing groups of Muslims who have filed discrimination
complaints against their employers.

Indeed, the clearest sign of stress among Muslims has been the dramatic rise in
civil rights complaints.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission reported that in the seven months
since the terrorist attacks, it had received 427 complaints from Muslims
alleging religious discrimination in the workplace, up from 171 in the same
period the year before. It also got nine complaints from Sikhs who said that
they had experienced discrimination after Sept. 11 because they were mistaken
for Arabs or Muslims. In the same period a year earlier, the commission had no
complaints from Sikhs.

"We've never had anything like it since the creation of the commission," said
Cari M. Dominguez, the chairwoman of the 37-year-old agency. "Charges by Muslims
nearly tripled, and while the rate is slowing, we're still getting new
complaints. "

The biggest number of complaints have come from California, Texas, Illinois and
Florida, accounting for 150 of the post-Sept. 11 cases among them. Fourteen
complaints were lodged by people in New York State from Sept. 11, 2001, to April
11.

Ms. Dominguez said that some of the increase possibly resulted from efforts to
encourage Muslims to exercise their right to file grievances. "But as long as we
are internationally still on alert, I suspect we'll continue to see this trend,"
she added.

The New York State Division of Human Rights has also seen an increase in bias
complaints from Muslims and Arabs. It got 38 such complaints dealing with
workplace and housing discrimination after Sept. 11 and through the end of
March, a 37 percent increase over the same period the year before.

The New York City Police Department got 117 reports of hate crimes against Arabs
and Muslims -- covering everything from vandalism to verbal abuse to assaults --
between the terror attacks and the end of March. Most of those incidents
occurred in the first charged months after the terror attacks.

In the first three months of this year, the department got only 14 complaints.
Nevertheless, police officials said, the situation is far from being back to
normal: on average, the department used to deal with just seven complaints of
bias attacks against Arabs and Muslims a year.

The wounds to the community may be deeper than any statistics might indicate.
"We're a community that doesn't report, that doesn't come out and speak," said
Dahlia Eissa, a lawyer who worked for the Arab-American Family Support Center in
Brooklyn until this month. "We even attempted to talk about the issues in group
meetings, but people were too afraid to come.

"We've heard that families have packed up and left, that people are thinking of
changing their names. A lot of people now think that if their name is Omar or
Mohammed or Osama -- something clearly Muslim -- they'll never get anywhere in
this country anymore."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Zaheer Sharaf, a grocer and service station owner in Connecticut
who immigrated from Pakistan six years ago, says that Muslims in the United
States have a feeling of insecurity since the Sept. 11 terror attacks. (Joyce
Dopkeen/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); IMMIGRATION (88%); ARAB AMERICANS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (76%); HIJACKING (76%); ETHNICITY (70%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS
(69%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
MUSLIM-AMERICANS;  DISCRIMINATION

COMPANY: ZOGBY INTERNATIONAL INC (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541910 MARKETING RESEARCH & PUBLIC OPINION POLLING (54%);
NAICS541613 MARKETING CONSULTING SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA
(71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1014 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: Yugoslavia: Ex-Army Chief Surrenders

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 93 words


The former army commander, Gen. Dragoljub Ojdanic, 60, turned himself in to the
war crimes tribunal at The Hague, the first of six suspects to make good on a
pledge to surrender. Mr.

Ojdanic was indicted with the former president, Slobodan Milosevic, already on
trial, in May 1999 for crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or
customs of war, punishable by life imprisonment. He is accused of ordering
attacks on Kosovo Albanian villages in 1999. The United States State Department
spokesman, Richard Boucher, called his surrender "courageous."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (90%); LAW OF WAR (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (51%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; OJDANIC, DRAGOLJUB (GEN)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); KOSOVO (93%); ALBANIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (88%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Ex-Army Chief Denies War Crimes

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 81 words


The general who commanded the Yugoslav Army for the government of Slobodan
Milosevic pleaded not guilty to charges of crimes against humanity and war
crimes.

Dragoljub Ojdanic, who surrendered voluntarily to the United Nations war crimes
tribunal, sat in the same seat Mr. Milosevic uses during his own trial. His
indictment says he took part in "a joint criminal enterprise" that included a
campaign to force some 800,000 ethnic Albanians out of Kosovo in 1999.   Marlise
Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS
(90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1017 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A NATION CHALLENGED: DETAINEES;
Dispute That Prevented New Jersey Deportations Is Resolved

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 641 words


Civil rights lawyers and the Justice Department yesterday settled a dispute over
the deportation of foreign prisoners in New Jersey that had disrupted
immigration proceedings at two county jails for nearly a week.

The agreement re-establishes the routine for immigrant detainees at the Passaic
County and Hudson County Jails, permitting them to attend hearings, post bond
and leave the country either voluntarily or in accordance with deportation
orders.

Last week, the Immigration and Naturalization Service abruptly canceled hearings
and deportation proceedings for prisoners in the two jails, including those for
a number of people who were arrested after Sept. 11 and were desperate to leave
the United States after spending up to six months in detention.

Immigration officials said they had been acting in accordance with a state
appeals court ruling on April 19 that said detainees should not be moved out of
the jails without first giving their consent. Lawyers for many of the detainees
said that the immigration service had grossly misinterpreted the court's order
by blocking the departure of even those who volunteered to leave for their home
countries.

The court order stemmed from a lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Jersey that seeks to force the government to release the names of
Islamic men arrested in the law enforcement sweep after Sept. 11 and detained
for months, most on minor immigration charges.

Hundreds of the 1,200 men arrested ended up in the two New Jersey jails, which
rent space to the I.N.S., although agency officials refused to say how many were
still there.

A New Jersey Superior Court judge ordered the government to release information
about the detainees, but the Justice Department appealed the decision and
received a stay. The disruption in the norm at the two jails resulted from a
dispute over the meaning of the stay.

The joint statement by lawyers for the American Civil Liberties Union of New
Jersey and the Justice Department, representing the immigration service, said
the two sides were able to resolve most of their differences over the court
order's meaning.

The dispute had thrown many immigration proceedings in New Jersey into chaos.
Detainees were prevented from attending their hearings, lawyers said. A group of
illegal immigrants from Egypt who were at Kennedy International Airport waiting
for their flight home were returned to jail when the immigration service
canceled their deportation.

Some of the people in the jails have been in federal custody since last fall,
waiting for the Justice Department to clear them of any connection to terrorism
and then waiting for the I.N.S. to allow them to leave. Generally, the only
charge ever brought was for overstaying their tourist visas, an immigration
violation that previously rarely had resulted in detention.

One of those was Anser Mahmood, a Pakistani truck driver who was living with his
family in Bayonne, N.J., when he was arrested on Oct. 3 and charged with
overstaying his tourist visa. He said he spent four months in isolation in the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn.

In February, Mr. Mahmood joined the general prisoner population in the prison,
he said, and spent another two months there before being sent to the Passaic
County Jail, where he was told he would be deported.

During his detention, Mr. Mahmood said, he was never interviewed by the F.B.I.
or questioned by any other agency about terrorism.

"This thing that happened on Sept. 11 made me angry," said Mr. Mahmood, who said
he was anxious to leave the United States but harbored no ill will toward
Americans. "And this thing that happened to me, I was very relaxed the first few
days, because I knew they were searching for the people responsible. I thought
it would all be over in a few days and they were going to release me."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); DEPORTATION (94%); CORRECTIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); PRISONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); TERRORISM (75%); APPEALS COURTS (74%); BAIL (73%); JUDGES (73%); AIRPORTS
(72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (65%); HIJACKING (64%); AIRLINES (60%); RELIGION (51%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(82%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (99%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1029 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Leader of Islamic Charity Is Accused of Lying to Court

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


The Justice Department arrested the head of an Islamic charity in Illinois today
and said there was extensive evidence that he and his organization had close
ties to Osama bin Laden and had secretly funneled money to his terrorist
network, Al Qaeda.

The man, Enaam M. Arnaout, 39, the Syrian-born director of the Benevolence
International Foundation, was arrested at his home in the Chicago suburb of
Justice and charged with lying under oath in documents his group had filed in
federal court. The documents were part of a suit the group filed in January
against the United States government after officials seized the foundation's
assets as part of the investigations into the Sept. 11 attacks on the United
States.

In seeking to have a court unfreeze the assets, Mr. Arnaout testified that the
foundation was a "faith-based humanitarian organization that engages in
charitable work around the world" and "does not engage in or fund terrorist
activity."

But in an affidavit given today by an F.B.I. agent to support its arrest warrant
for Mr. Arnaout, the government provided an extraordinary amount of information
it had collected, some of it dating back years before the Sept. 11 attacks, to
support the accusation that the foundation was a front to finance terrorism
around the world. The affidavit of Agent Robert Walker was rich in detail about
the movement of money from the Islamic charities into what it said were the
pockets of Al Qaeda operatives to pay for weapons and military training of
terrorists in Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Philippines, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Georgia and Chechnya.

Matthew J. Piers, a lawyer for the foundation, said the government was trying to
suggest Mr. Arnaout and the foundation were guilty "by tangential association."

"I have found no reason to believe that they have engaged in any illegal
activities," Mr. Piers said, "and I am not persuaded by the government's
findings. I think this is consistent with the government's distressing conduct
on the war on terrorism. The government is substituting a lot of people in jail
for concrete success."

Mr. Walker said that despite Mr. Arnaout's public assertions to have never met
Mr. bin Laden, the two were close. The affidavit also asserted that an unnamed
witness had told the authorities that Mr. Arnaout picked up one of Mr. bin
Laden's wives at the Islamabad airport in 1989, and sheltered her at his house
until her husband came to collect her. It also said that people affiliated with
the foundation were Islamic extremists who were exploring ways to obtain
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.

"The Benevolence International Foundation was supporting violence secretly,"
Patrick J. Fitzgerald, the United States attorney in Chicago, told reporters
there. He said that it was important to note that "persons who gave money to the
B.I.F. were victims, not criminals. Today's charges seek to vindicate, not
frustrate, the noble intentions of the vast majority of donors, mostly Muslim
Americans, who thought they were giving help to needy causes."

Mr. Arnaout appeared in court briefly. A United States magistrate, Ian Levin,
ordered him held pending a hearing next week. If convicted on the two perjury
counts, he could be sentenced to jail for 10 years and fined $500,000. The
foundation, also named in two counts of perjury, could be fined $1 million.

The affidavit used by the government to arrest Mr. Arnaout, who also goes by the
names Abdel Samia and Abu Mahmoud, disclosed that officials have gleaned
information from at least five unnamed confidential informers. Some of the
informers are described as having pleaded guilty to terrorism charges and are
now cooperating with the government.

Mr. Walker said that one of the informers told the authorities that money from
the foundation was withdrawn in cash and "its use by Al Qaeda would be virtually
untraceable."

The informer said the relief organizations including the foundation would
"generate paperwork which indicated that all the money was being used for
charitable purposes such as building mosques or schools, or providing food and
clothing for the poor."

Some of the information about the charity and Mr. Arnaout, according to the
papers filed today, was also obtained in a March 19 raid of the foundation's
offices in Bosnia. Investigators found guns and military manuals as well as
photographs of Mr. bin Laden and of Mr. Arnaout "handling rifles, a
shoulder-fired rocket and an antiaircraft gun."

Investigators also regularly retrieved and examined trash at the foundation's
offices in Palos Hills, a Chicago suburb. One folder, the affidavit said, was a
fund-raising appeal in Arabic asking Muslims to "contribute with your mujahedeen
brothers to repel the Crusader-Zionist attack on Muslim lands."

One confidential source, the affidavit recounts, said Mr. Arnaout had discussed
fleeing to Saudi Arabia as recently as last month. But the documents said he was
placed under constant surveillance shortly after that. Mr. Piers, the defense
lawyer, said Mr. Arnaout had wanted to visit his parents and his in-laws, who
live in Saudi Arabia.

He said that his client had also proved he was unlikely to run away because he
was in Europe when the government froze the foundation's assets and he returned
to the United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%); RELIGION (92%);
AL-QAEDA (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CHARITIES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WITNESSES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); FOUNDATIONS (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); PHILANTHROPY (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); AIRLINES (60%) TERRORISM;
PHILANTHROPY;  LYING;  ASSETS, FROZEN;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (92%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (55%) JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; BENEVOLENCE INTERNATIONAL FOUNDATION; AL
QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%) LEWIS, NEIL A; ARNAOUT, ENAAM M; BIN LADEN, OSAMA

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (88%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: ; NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1031 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: STALEMATE;
U.N. May Drop Inquiry at Jenin As Israel Resists

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, April 30


Israel challenged the United Nations today by once again blocking a proposed
fact-finding mission to examine fighting earlier this month in the Jenin refugee
camp, prompting Secretary General Kofi Annan to consider disbanding the
investigative team.

Israeli officials said they preferred the short-term cost in world opinion of
resisting the United Nations to the long-term risk of possibly exposing the army
to war-crimes trials in what they feared would be a biased investigation.

As Palestinian officials charged a cover-up, Israel's prime minister, Ariel
Sharon, a former general who has fought in all of Israel's wars, invoked his own
service as a soldier in declaring that he would protect Israel's troops now.

"No effort to doubt us or put us on an international trial will prevail," Mr.
Sharon declared.

He rejected Palestinian accusations that war crimes were committed in Jenin,
saying, "We made extraordinary efforts not to harm innocent people."

To Mr. Sharon and other senior Israeli officials, the United Nations inquiry is
a case of selective investigation, to be followed, they fear, by spurious
prosecution. Why, they ask, does the United Nations show no interest in
investigating suicide bombings that have killed Israelis? Why does it show no
interest in investigating Israel's charges of ties between Yasir Arafat and
terrorism?

Supporters of the inquiry, on the other hand, marveled that the United Nations
had so far been stymied in its attempt to work inside a refugee camp that is
overseen by one of its own agencies, within occupied West Bank territory that by
treaty is controlled by the governing Palestinian Authority.

Mr. Sharon has believed since the United Nations created Israel 54 years ago
that the Jewish state would sometimes have to stand alone in a world biased
against it, his close associates say. His conviction that the Jenin operation
has been unfairly attacked abroad is widely shared by Israelis, and his
popularity has rebounded since he ordered Israeli forces into the West Bank a
month ago.

Today he was also banking on support from an ally he has carefully cultivated,
President Bush.

Israel agreed on Sunday to a compromise proposed by President Bush to end the
armed siege of Mr. Arafat in Ramallah partly in the hope that the United States
would muffle any United Nations criticism, senior Israeli officials said. But
they said Mr. Sharon struck no explicit bargain for American support.

The United States originated the United Nations resolution that set up the
fact-finding mission in mid-April, and gave the inquiry aggressive backing last
week. But today, in yet another shift by Washington, the Bush administration
offered little more than the wan observation that it could do nothing if Mr.
Annan dropped the inquiry.

"We continue to be quite supportive of the idea," said a senior Bush
administration official. "But if he decides it isn't worth the trouble, we're
not going to be able to push it on our own."

American and British officials met in Ramallah tonight to work out details for
moving six wanted men from Mr. Arafat's besieged compound into a Palestinian
prison under international guardianship. The transfer could take place as soon
as Wednesday, possibly distracting attention from the fight at the United
Nations, officials said.

Israel also withdrew its ground forces from Hebron, a West Bank city south of
here that they occupied on Monday after Palestinian gunmen killed four Israelis,
including a 5-year-old girl, in a nearby settlement.

Mr. Annan, faced with the latest Israeli rejection, was inclined to disband the
inquiry team, according to Kieran Prendergast, undersecretary general for
political affairs.

Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, appealed to Mr. Annan to stand
firm. "I think this is equivalent to giving Sharon the license to do it again,
to kill again and to commit slaughter again," he said.

He said he was consulting with lawyers to see if he could prepare a war-crimes
case against Israel. Charges that there was a massacre in the Jenin camp have
taken on a life of their own, particularly in the Arab world.

"We will never forget, and we will never forgive," Mr. Erekat said.

Israel says 23 suicide bombers came from the congested Jenin camp. It sent
troops inside on April 3 in what it called a hunt for the terrorists
responsible. Over the next eight days, Israel lost 23 soldiers in house-to-house
fighting. At least 45 bodies of Palestinians have been found so far, most of
them apparently men of fighting age.

Palestinian officials have said hundreds of bodies could be buried in rubble
left by Israeli bulldozers, but excavation so far has not supported those
claims.

Today, the group Physicians for Human Rights issued a preliminary forensic
assessment of the camp's dead and wounded, raising concerns about the shooting
of civilians and blocked access to medical care and calling for an international
investigation.

Mr. Prendergast, the United Nations official, said that "with every passing day
it becomes more difficult to determine what took place on the ground in Jenin."

After meeting today, Israel's security cabinet, led by Mr. Sharon, issued a
statement saying the United Nations had failed to adjust the mission to
accommodate Israel's concerns. "As long as these terms have not been met, it
will not be possible for the clarification process to begin," the statement
read.

Mr. Annan said he had met Israel's concerns.

Israel originally resisted the idea of a fact-finding mission but reluctantly
agreed to a compromise on April 19, during a United States maneuver to block a
strongly worded Arab resolution at the United Nations supporting a mission.

Israel's foreign minister, Shimon Peres, asked Mr. Annan to appoint a mission
personally, saying Israel had "nothing to hide." A milder United States
resolution was unanimously approved. But Israeli officials immediately raised
objections, saying the people chosen for the mission team lacked military
experience and would be inclined to ignore the threat Israel felt it faced from
Jenin.

On April 24, Israel first announced that it would delay the arrival of the team,
which has been waiting in Geneva. Mr. Peres, who was still seeking a compromise,
told Israel radio today that he was concerned that the United Nations Security
Council might now impose the inquiry on Israel. "We must take into consideration
the possibility we will be left entirely on our own," he warned.

Tonight, a caucus of Arab nations was drafting a Security Council resolution
demanding that Israel immediately cooperate with the fact-finding team.

In Bethlehem, 26 Palestinian men voluntarily left the Church of the Nativity
today, the largest departure of Palestinians from the compound thus far in a
siege that is nearly month old.

The men, looking weary but healthy, emerged at midafternoon and were quickly
taken to a nearby Israeli military base for identification and questioning. None
were believed to be militants, and they were all expected to be released soon.

In the Gaza Strip, three Palestinians, including a 2-year-old girl, were killed
early Wednesday within a span of four hours when Israeli troops opened fire on
residential areas in the southern town of Rafah, Palestinian hospital sources
told Agence France-Presse. Israel said militants had tried to detonate
explosives in one incident, forcing them to open fire.

In Hebron, the Israeli Army said it had arrested 150 Palestinians it described
as terrorists, including 47 who were on its list of wanted men.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Palestinian children watched from behind a wrecked car as an
Israeli tank pulled out of Hebron yesterday. (Rina Castelnuovo for The New York
Times); Two Palestinians, on an Israeli bus, who left the Church of the Nativity
in Bethlehem yesterday with 24 others. (Tyler Hicks/The New York Times)(pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
ARMIES (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (76%); BANKING & FINANCE (74%); JEWS & JUDAISM (74%); TERRORISM
(71%); BOMBINGS (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (66%); PRIME
MINISTERS (55%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS;  ISRAEL-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  GREAT
BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-ISRAEL;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: BENNET, JAMES; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); SHARON, ARIEL (PRIME MIN); ARAFAT,
YASIR

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JENIN (WEST BANK);  RAMALLAH (WEST BANK);  GREAT BRITAIN;
HEBRON (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1036 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Era in War Crimes Justice

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 468 words


In the aftermath of World War II and the Nuremberg tribunal, the idea arose of
creating a permanent international criminal court that could try the most
heinous international criminals. The plan foundered during 50 years of
superpower rivalry. The end of the cold war and an explosion of ethnic brutality
led to ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia. But there was no mechanism
for trying Idi Amin or Saddam Hussein or others who evade their nations'
justice.

The world's helplessness in the face of such crimes against humanity changed
last month after more than 60 countries ratified a treaty creating a permanent
international criminal court. The court's jurisdiction begins on July 1. Any
individual who commits genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity from that
day on should fear prosecution.

President Clinton signed the treaty, but the Senate has never ratified it. The
court has provoked powerful opposition in the Pentagon, Congress and now the
Bush administration. There are unreasonable fears that Americans could be taken
before the tribunal on politically motivated charges. Washington applied
unseemly pressure to even close allies in an attempt to stop the court. Now that
those efforts have failed, the Bush administration should recognize that to help
make the court as fair and effective as possible is in American interest.

Unfortunately, the administration is seriously considering reversing President
Clinton's signature. No country has ever unsigned a treaty -- it is not clear if
such a thing exists. If Washington does withdraw its signature, that will not
annul the court, but it could encourage other nations to remove their signatures
from treaties that America supports.

The fear in Washington is that American soldiers abroad could be charged
unjustly with war crimes. Such a possibility is remote. The court already
contains strong safeguards that ensure that it will deal only with the most
serious of international crimes and can take a case only if a nation's own
judicial system has declined to carry out a conscientious investigation of the
charges. The Rwanda and former Yugoslavia tribunals, which have rendered fair
and responsible judgments, show that America has little to fear from such a
court.

During the Clinton administration, Washington's proposals greatly improved the
court's rules. The Bush administration ought not to miss the chance to affect
the selection of judges and definition of new crimes -- issues that matter to
America.

By depriving tyrants of a safe haven from prosecution, the court might deter
some of the atrocities that end up demanding Washington's involvement. America
has much to gain from the establishment of the international court, and it will
be best positioned to benefit if Washington drops its unwarranted opposition.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WORLD WAR II
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); COLD WAR (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%);
JURISDICTION (73%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  EDITORIALS;  UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%) INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); CLINTON,
BILL

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (93%); SERBIA (79%); GERMANY (73%)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1037 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Has Nothing to Hide

BYLINE:  By Yuval Steinitz;  Yuval Steinitz is chairman of the subcommittee for
defense planning and policy of the Israeli Knesset.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: HAIFA, Israel


What changed Israel's initial decision to accept a United Nations "fact-finding
committee" on the Jenin refugee camp into a furious rejection?

From the beginning, Israel's acceptance of the committee was tinged with grave
misgivings. The United Nations has long since lost any claim to impartiality
with respect to Israel. The anti-Semitic conference on racism it sponsored in
Durban last summer is but one example of ingrained bias against Israel.
Nevertheless, Israelis were so confident that an honest fact finding would
exonerate Israel of the wild charges being made by Palestinians and humanitarian
organizations that they initially acquiesced to the proposal.

However, when the committee mandate and composition were finally revealed, they
convinced Israelis across the political spectrum that Secretary General Kofi
Annan had set a trap for Israel.

In order to render a fair and unbiased judgment on the conduct of any military
operation, two basic conditions must be met. First, the operation must be placed
in the context of the causes that gave rise to it. Without that context, no
judgment on the proportionality of the response is possible. Second, the
operation must be assessed in comparison to other such military actions.

Yet the United Nations committee was asked to examine the Israeli Defense
Force's actions in Jenin and the suffering of Jenin's inhabitants without
reference to the earlier terrorism coming out of the Jenin camp that had
triggered the Israeli action. In short, the committee would evaluate Israel's
war on terrorism without any reference to terrorism.

Imagine a team sent to investigate American military action in Afghanistan
without reference to the attacks of Sept. 11 or Osama bin Laden's boasts that he
would destroy America. And imagine asking that investigation to ignore the
sanctuary the Taliban gave Mr. bin Laden and his Qaeda operatives despite
previous American warnings.

Stripped of that context, the United States would inevitably be found guilty of
having assaulted one of the poorest and most backward countries on the face of
the earth and of inflicting unnecessary harm on the civilian population. A
similar inquiry into the massive allied bombing of Germany in World War II would
have resulted in charges of war crimes against Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston
Churchill.

But this kind of distorted result is exactly what the United Nations'
noncontextual fact-hiding strategy would have arrived at. To examine the Israeli
operations in Jenin and at similar sites with no reference to the nonstop
Palestinian suicide bombings and other terrorist attacks dispatched from those
sites -- these attacks killed more than 100 Israeli civilians in March alone, a
number that translates for tiny Israel to the equivalent of twice the number of
Americans killed on Sept. 11 -- suggests an intent to find Israel guilty in
advance.

The second major flaw was hidden in the committee composition: most of its
members possessed no military background. Moreover, there was no indication that
the military operation would be assessed in comparison to other military
operations with similar missions; for example, by comparing civilian casualties
in Jenin to civilian casualties inflicted by the Russian ground forces in
Chechnya or by the American air forces in Afghanistan.

Israelis are confident that any fair comparative examination of the Israeli
Defense Force actions in Jenin would show that the soldiers made extraordinary
efforts to minimize civilian casualties in the nine-day battle there.
Twenty-three Israeli infantrymen would be alive today had the army made a
decision to use its airplanes and artillery to wipe out the armed opposition
more quickly.

Israel has nothing to hide. Israel rejected the United Nations fact-finding
committee not because of what the committee sought to explore, but because of
what it was determined to ignore.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%); WORLD WAR II (73%); BOMBINGS
(73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TALIBAN
(73%); RACE & RACISM (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(70%); WAR ON TERROR (70%); AL-QAEDA (70%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (70%); WAR CRIMES
(70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (65%) PALESTINIANS;  TERRORISM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (68%) STEINITZ, YUVAL

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); GERMANY (68%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JENIN (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1038 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

60 in Colombia Reportedly Killed During Battles

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 311 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 3


Clashes between rebels and right-wing paramilitaries in an isolated corner of
northwest Colombia have killed as many as 60 people, many of them civilians
caught in the cross-fire, local authorities said today.

The acting governor of Choco State, David Mosquera, said the casualties occurred
in recent days as the two sides battled for control of the region around Bojaya,
a village in the northwest region. He said some civilians were killed when the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, fired homemade mortars into a
church on Thursday.

He said it was not immediately clear if the FARC guerrillas were aiming at the
church. The rebels had been firing at paramilitary positions in the area. As
mortar rounds, the rebels use cooking gas canisters packed with explosives.

Mr. Mosquera said local hospital officials reported 60 dead and 90 wounded.
Colombia's national human rights ombudsman, Eduardo Cifuentes, said a colleague
in the region had reported the same figures.

Bojaya's mayor, Ariel Palacios, who was visiting Medellin today to organize a
rescue effort, said he had spoken by radio with church officials in the town who
also told him approximately 60 people had been killed.

The figures could not be confirmed. There are no phones and few roads in the
region, and radio communications were lost late today.

Colombia's civil war pits the FARC and a smaller rebel group against right-wing
paramilitaries, as well as government forces.

The jungle-covered area around Bojaya can be reached only via the Atrato River,
and the rebels and paramilitaries were reportedly fighting for control of the
waterway. Rescue services hoped to fly to the region's airstrip, but fighting
blocked them.

Neither the army nor the national police maintain a presence in the jungle
region. Mr. Cifuentes blamed the killings on the lack of government forces in
the region.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); ARMIES (76%); CITY GOVERNMENT (73%); GOVERNORS (72%); POLICE FORCES
(72%); RELIGION (70%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (69%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (68%);
HOSPITALS (54%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY
FORCES

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (91%)

CITY: MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%)

REGION: COLOMBIA;  BOJAYA (COLOMBIA);  ATRATO RIVER (COLOMBIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1039 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Will Spurn Role In a World Tribunal

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 163 words


The Bush administration has decided to renounce any involvement in a treaty
creating an international criminal court to prosecute individuals for genocide,
crimes against humanity and other war crimes, government officials said.

The treaty was signed by President Clinton, but the Bush administration had
already decided not to send it to the Senate for ratification.

Now the government plans to announce what is in effect the "unsigning" of the
treaty.

The administration argued that the court has the potential to create havoc for
the United States, exposing American soldiers and officials overseas to
capricious and mischievous prosecutions.

In addition, officials said, the United States will assert that it will not be
bound by the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, a 1969 accord that
outlines the obligations of nations to obey other treaties they sign, even if
they do not ratify them. Washington has never ratified the Vienna Convention.

Article, Page 18.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); GENOCIDE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%) NO INDEX TERMS
FROM NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1041 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bannu Journal;
Where Al Qaeda's the Quarry, G.I.'s Are Elusive

BYLINE:  By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: BANNU, Pakistan, May 6


This region is full of invisible Americans.

United States soldiers are everywhere, according to the small talk among
residents in this dusty, chaotic outpost in a remote region where Al Qaeda
forces are assumed to be hiding.

Maqbool Khan, a clean-cut man of 20, said the American troops arrived in
helicopters several days ago. A computer science student, he took a keen
interest in their presence because he is desperate to continue his studies in
the United States. But he did not see the Americans, Mr. Khan swiftly added,
because they were quickly hustled out of town in military vehicles.

Indeed, finding someone here who has actually seen an American soldier is almost
as hard as finding Osama bin Laden himself.

American soldiers are definitely in this region, though how many and what they
are doing is unclear -- which is exactly as American and Pakistani officials
want it, for reasons both military and political.

The troops are operating in the so-called tribal areas of Pakistan, a region of
Pashtun Muslims who do not take kindly to outside military forces, not even
Pakistani.

To keep the secrets, Pakistani authorities are simply not allowing journalists
into the tribal areas. This sweltering town, with its three-digit temperatures
and streets choked with three-wheel motorized cabs or horse-drawn carriages
carrying women in black burkas, is as close as one can get.

For a week, a dozen or so American soldiers had a base of operations some 25
miles west of here, at a vocational school in Miram Shah, according to
government officals and tribal leaders there. The small village is not far from
the Afghan town of Khost, a base for American military operations.

Combined American and Pakistani forces raided several madrassas, or religious
schools, in the last week, including one that was run by a former Taliban
official, authorities in Miram Shah have said.

"It is very tense," Adil Khan, a van driver from the village, said of the
situation. Shops close early, he reported, and the certainty about unseen
Americans is accompanied by fear that the Americans may bomb villages in
Pakistan as they did in Afghanistan.

There were as many as 15 American soldiers in his village, he said.

"I haven't seen them," he admitted. "But many other people have."

On Friday, the Americans pulled out of Miram Shah, moving down the road to
Rezmak, officials said. Their target now, apparently, is Khaisor, a mountainous
village reachable only by a two-hour trek on foot.

"Every Muslim in Pakistan is angry that the American soldiers are here," said
Muhammad Nawaz, 53, the president of the transport union in Bannu. He was
sitting on a rope bed, drinking tea, at the Marhaba Call Center, an open-air
shop for people who do not have their own telephones.

Mr. Nawaz and several friends displayed no animosity toward an American visitor.
But they had a litany of complaints about the United States and its policy
toward Muslims.

"America is always talking about human rights," said Mr. Nawaz, who had a long
black beard and a white cap. "But what is happening in Cuba, what is happening
in Chechnya, what is happening in Palestine?"

How could they say America was against the Muslims when it had fought to protect
Muslims in Bosnia? they were asked.

The answer was surprisingly swift: "If they are supporting Muslims in Bosnia,
why not in Palestine?"

The unseen troops are not the only Americans who have passed through Bannu of
late. Another American, with very different views of Muslim life, was here, and
although now long gone his presence is still felt. This was where John Walker
Lindh, the American captured with the Taliban, studied the Koran at a madrassa
for six months before leaving last May. He is now in jail in the United States
awaiting trial on charges of aiding Al Qaeda.

Two American investigators for Mr. Lindh's defense team were here on Friday, the
head of the religious school said today.

The madrassa is just outside of town, down a few narrow roads with mud and adobe
buildings tight against them. The director, Mufti Muhammad Iltimas, seemed to
welcome a foreign journalist, offering lunch and tea. He was joined by two men
with mustaches but no beards, making them look strangely out of place among the
other men at the school, who wore long, unkempt beards.

While jovial, Mufti Iltimas was enigmatic, and parried most questions with
questions of his own.

Asked whether he thought Mr. Lindh would get a fair trial in the United States,
for example, he replied: "I have not read your Constitution. I do not know your
legal system."

Mr. Lindh, at 20, was the oldest of the school's 40 students, whose ages range
from 7 to 15, Mufti Iltimas said. He had come here after studying 17 months in
Yemen, along with hundreds of radical young Islamic men from around the world.

Mufti Iltimas proudly showed the books that Mr. Lindh had brought with him.
There were several Korans, plus works about Islam in Arabic and English,
including "Alms Tax and Fasting" and "Purification and Prayer." His black
suitcase is also still at the school, left behind when he headed across the
border to Afghanistan.

After leaving, a reporter learned why Mufti Iltimas had been so evasive: a
Pakistani in the town recognized his two other visitors as members of Pakistani
intelligence.

Mufti Iltimas said he did not know if anyone from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation had come to ask about Mr. Lindh. But he noted with a smile that
there had been scores of foreigners asking questions. They claimed to be
journalists, he said, but "How do I know?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Bannu, Pakistan, Muhammad Nawaz, foreground, said he knew
American troops were in the area, even if he had not seen them. Behind him to
the right was Maqbool Khan, who is eager to go to the United States. (Raymond
Bonner/The New York Times) Map of Pakistan highlights Bannu: Bannu is as close
as journalists are allowed to Pakistan's tribal areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (91%); TERRORISM (91%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(88%); TALIBAN (78%); HIJACKING (77%); HELICOPTERS (72%); RELIGION (72%);
VOCATIONAL & TECHNICAL TRAINING (71%); JOURNALISM (71%); CALL CENTERS (60%);
COMPUTER SCIENCE (56%); BUSINESS TELEPHONE SERVICE (50%) TERRORISM;  UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  NEWS
AND NEWS MEDIA;  PAKISTAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) AL QAEDA (TERRORIST GROUP)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%) ;BONNER, RAYMOND

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); KHOST, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: PAKISTAN;  BANNU (PAKISTAN);  NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);
AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1042 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Asia: Cambodia: Khmer Rouge Leader Charged

BYLINE:  By Seth Mydans (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 64 words


In a legal move to extend his imprisonment pending trial, the government charged
the former chief torturer of the Khmer Rouge with crimes against humanity.

Kang Kek Ieu, who was known as Duch, administered Tuol Sleng prison where at
least 14,000 people were tortured and sent to their deaths. He was arrested in
May 1999 and was previously charged with genocide.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARRESTS (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(82%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; KANG KEK IEU

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (93%); ASIA (90%)

REGION: CAMBODIA

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1043 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL: DIPLOMACY;
SHARON PROPOSES BYPASSING ARAFAT IN FUTURE TALKS

BYLINE:  By TODD S. PURDUM with STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 6


Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel began talks with top Bush administration
officials here today, outlining his vision of the next phase in Middle East
peacemaking, which he says should bypass Yasir Arafat and offer only interim
steps toward a Palestinian state, Israeli and American officials said.

"Everyone knows we're not going to start drawing lines on a border for permanent
status and dividing Jerusalem," an Israeli official said today. "That's just a
nonstarter today."

Israeli officials pressed their case against Mr. Arafat and continued to
circulate documents that they say show payments by Saudi Arabia to the families
of suicide bombers.

At the same time, King Abdullah II of Jordan and the Saudi foreign minister,
also in Washington, pursued their own cause, including seeking backing for Mr.
Arafat, in a day of closed-door diplomacy with Secretary of State Colin L.
Powell.

In a speech here tonight to the Anti-Defamation League, Mr. Sharon expressed
relief that the United Nations had been forced to abandon a proposed
fact-finding mission into Israel's actions in the Jenin refugee camp, calling
Palestinian accusations of a massacre there "a Palestinian blood libel." He
thanked President Bush and Secretary Powell for helping avoid the inquiry,
saying, "They stood firm in order not to allow that Israeli soldiers will be
interrogated."

Mr. Bush, who is to meet Mr. Sharon on Tuesday, repeated his sharp criticism of
Mr. Arafat but did not echo Mr. Sharon's demands that the Palestinian leader be
replaced, instead calling on him and other Middle East leaders "assume their
responsibilities and lead."

"He has disappointed me," Mr. Bush told reporters during a visit to an
elementary school in Southfield, Mich., speaking of Mr. Arafat. "He must lead.
He must show the world that he believes in peace."

But he added, "In order to achieve peace, all parties -- the Arab nations,
Israel, Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian Authority -- must assume their
responsibilities and lead."

In his speech tonight, Mr. Sharon offered no details of his ideas, but said
Israel had faced "a brutal campaign of terror instigated and encouraged by the
Palestinian Authority and its leader."

While not mentioning Mr. Arafat by name, he said, "A responsible Palestinian
Authority that can advance the cause of peace should not be dependent on the
will of one man."

The "blood libel" mentioned in his speech was a term Mr. Sharon often uses.
Before he began applying it to the accusations about Jenin, he accused Time
magazine of blood libel in his libel suit against the magazine two decades ago.

In Israel, talks continued on how to settle the armed siege at the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, where more than 120 people have been holed up while
Israel demands the handover of Palestinian militants on its most-wanted list. In
return, Israel says it will withdraw from Bethlehem, the last major
Palestinian-controlled area it still occupies in force.

The outlines of a deal were sketched late Sunday, but officials said Mr. Arafat
had objected to Israel's demand that up to 13 men be exiled from the region,
probably to Italy, holding out for deporting only four to six men. Israeli
officials said they believed that Mr. Arafat was reluctant to give Mr. Sharon
any kind of victory before his meeting with Mr. Bush, who has pressed hard for
an end to the standoff.

In the meantime, Arab diplomats said they expected that Presidents Hosni Mubarak
of Egypt and Bashar al-Assad of Syria and Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia
would meet with Mr. Arafat in the Egyptian resort of Sharm el Sheik this weekend
to press him to rein in violence and pave the way for resumption of serious
peace efforts.

But the unusually hectic round of meetings here served to emphasize the gaps
separating Arab, Israeli and American positions. Israeli officials with Mr.
Sharon's party issued an 85-page document they say offers proof of Saudi
payments to the families of suicide bombers and to the Hamas terrorist group.
The Saudi ambassador to Washington, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, issued a statement
condemning the allegations as "totally baseless and false."

For days, Israeli officials have circulated such material and similar captured
documents alleging Mr. Arafat's complicity in terrorist acts.

But Saudi officials took particular umbrage today. Prince Bandar expressed
frustration that Mr. Sharon had not been more supportive of his kingdom's recent
peace initiative calling for broad Arab recognition of Israel in exchange for
its withdrawal from occupied territories.

"The question is, when will Prime Minister Ariel Sharon take 'yes' for an
answer?" the prince said.

Neither the Israelis nor Bush administration officials would offer much detail
about Mr. Sharon's expected discussions with the president, but they said enough
to suggest there would be some disagreements.

Senior European and Arab officials have repeatedly said that any new peace
effort will require a specific, phased timetable toward guaranteed creation of a
Palestinian state. Israeli officials made it plain that Mr. Sharon was prepared
at the moment to discuss only interim measures toward that goal, while Israel
builds up security defenses and reserves the right to make strategic raids in
Palestinian areas in the short term if violence continues.

"I think we're looking today to see what steps can be taken that we can agree
on, that we can move forward on, steps that are toward the final solution but
not the big deal," an Israeli official said. "In the framework of that, I think
Sharon is willing to show flexibility. No one wants to close off talking about
the final settlement." But, he added, Israel is not ready for those talks now.

"The flexibility that Sharon is going to offer is not going to come in a
vacuum," the official said. "It's presupposed on cooperation on the security
side. If the bombings begin again, we'll go right back in."

Secretary Powell met with Mr. Sharon in the prime minister's hotel suite for
about 45 minutes, but the two men did not meet with reporters. Afterward, Mr.
Powell said only, "We had a very good meeting."

American and Israeli officials said that Mr. Sharon had not brought up his
dossier on Mr. Arafat in the meeting with Secretary Powell, and that it had come
up only in passing in a later meeting with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

Secretary Powell, after meeting with King Abdullah of Jordan at the State
Department, said he and Mr. Sharon had talked about how to improve security,
rebuild Palestinian institutions and pave the way for a political solution to
the conflict, but that the administration itself had not made final judgments
about how to proceed.

"There were different points of view on that political dimension," Secretary
Powell said. "And what we'll be discussing with our friends in the weeks ahead
is the nature of a comprehensive settlement or settlement that would involve way
stations on the way to a comprehensive settlement. We have not made a judgment
on this, and that's why we're consulting with our friends."

After his own meeting with Secretary Powell at the State Department, the Saudi
foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, said he could not yet offer an opinion
on a foreign ministers' peace conference on the Middle East proposed by the
United States because too many details remained unknown.

Asked in Arabic if he intended to meet with anyone in Mr. Sharon's delegation
while they are both here, Prince Saud replied first in Arabic and then in other
languages: "That's no, nyet and nein."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel is visiting Washington.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); LIBEL
& SLANDER (89%); IMMIGRATION (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); WAR CRIMES
(71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (69%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (67%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS
(50%); ARMED FORCES (50%) UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;  PALESTINIANS;
TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (83%); UNITED NATIONS (82%) UNITED NATIONS;
ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE; PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY; STATE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: FAISAL, SAUD AL- (MIN); ABDULLAH II (KING OF JORDAN); SHARON, ARIEL
(PRIME MIN); ARAFAT, YASIR; BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES); POWELL, COLIN L (SEC)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(96%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); JORDAN (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  JORDAN;  SAUDI ARABIA;  JENIN (WEST BANK)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1044 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic, at U.N. Court, Trades Atrocity Charges With Kosovar

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 442 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, May 6


Slobodan Milosevic finished an aggressive cross-examination of Kosovo's leader,
Ibrahim Rugova, today at the United Nations war crimes tribunal here, accusing
Kosovo Albanians of committing genocide against Serbs.

On his second day questioning the Mr. Rugova, Mr. Milosevic, the former Yugoslav
president, said the reason he had sent troops into the province was to deal with
acts of genocide by ethnic Albanians.

"Please don't mix things up," Mr. Rugova replied during the tense exchange.
"There wasn't any genocide committed against the Serbs."

Mr. Rugova countered that "over 10 years, there was repression and daily
violence" against the province's ethnic Albanians. He parried most of Mr.
Milosevic's questions, saying simply, "This is not true."

Mr. Milosevic, undeterred, tried to pose lengthy argumentative questions to
prove that there had been a wave of violence against Serbs in Kosovo, but Judge
Richard May intervened. "You cannot keep asking the same question when you don't
get an answer you want," he told Mr. Milosevic, adding, "This is why this case
is not going forward."

The former Yugoslav leader, who is facing more than 60 counts of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity for the Balkan wars in the 1990's, said at
one point that he had actually saved Mr. Rugova from an assassination attempt by
the now-disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army in 1999. Mr. Milosevic said Mr. Rugova
had come to him and begged to leave Kosovo because he feared that he would be
killed by the Kosovar forces.

"Look me in the eyes and tell me if it's true," Mr. Milosevic insisted.

"That is not true," Mr. Rugova countered as he briefly glanced in his
adversary's direction. "I don't want to state insults here. This is only a lie."

"Please, I didn't beg you," he said, and then, alluding to his people's mass
flight from the advancing Yugoslav Army, he added, "I asked to leave Kosovo
because Kosovo was empty."

During the war, an estimated 800,000 ethnic Albanians fled the province or were
expelled, mainly to neighboring Macedonia and Albania.

Mr. Rugova added that he had not asked to meet Mr. Milosevic but had been forced
to, so took the opportunity to ask to leave Kosovo.

The ethnic Albanian leader said he was afraid of being killed by Yugoslav
troops, never by Albanians.

Mr. Milosevic then produced a leaflet handed out in Kosovo after the NATO
bombing started in March 1999 supposedly signed by Mr. Rugova and endorsed by
the Kosovar army, in which Kosovo Albanians were called to leave for Macedonia
and Albania. Mr. Rugova dismissed the document as a forgery and pointed out a
number of linguistic mistakes "we don't make in Albanian."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (90%); ARMIES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMED FORCES (77%);
BOMBINGS (73%); ASSASSINATION (72%); COUNTERFEITING (50%) CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (54%)

PERSON: RUGOVA, IBRAHIM; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (96%); SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

REGION: SERBIA;  KOSOVO (SERBIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1046 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1060 words


INTERNATIONAL   A3-18

Blast Kills 15 in Israel; Sharon Cuts Short U.S. Trip
A suicide bomber blew up a gambling and billiards club filled with elderly women
near Tel Aviv, killing at least 15 people and wounding 58, the police said. The
extremist group Hamas took responsibility. The Palestinian Authority of Yasir
Arafat condemned the attack, which came as Prime Minister Ariel Sharon was
meeting with President Bush in Washington. Mr. Sharon decided to curtail his
visit and return home.   A1

In their talks, Mr. Bush and Mr. Sharon remained divided over how quickly to
move toward the creation of a Palestinian state and whether to deal with Mr.
Arafat. Mr. Bush said he was sending C.I.A. Director George Tenet to the Middle
East to work on building a new Palestinian security force.   A1


Israeli and Palestinian negotiators reached an agreement to end the five-week
siege at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem, but the deal stalled after
Italy said no one had asked its consent to send a group of Palestinian militants
into exile there.   A15

Exhumation in Afghanistan
Canadian troops and American criminal investigators have exhumed 23 bodies from
a grave site in the Tora Bora mountains that they suspect are remains of Al
Qaeda fighters, perhaps a security contingent for Osama bin Laden.   A12

Dutch Election Will Go On
Political leaders decided to proceed with general elections next week, despite
the killing of Pim Fortuyn, a right-wing politician who had aspired to becoming
prime minister. A 32-year-old Dutch environmental activist was being held in his
killing.   A6

Sanction Approval Expected
The Bush administration said it expected the United Nations Security Council to
give quick approval to revised sanctions against Iraq aimed at keeping Saddam
Hussein from developing weapons of mass destruction while allowing for the freer
flow of civilian goods.   A8

World Briefing   A18

NATIONAL   A20-29

U.S. Tells Court Individuals Have a Right to Own Guns
The Justice Department told the Supreme Court for the first time that the
Constitution "broadly protects the rights of individuals" to own firearms. The
statement departs from decades of government policy on the meaning of the Second
Amendment and the view that it protects only a collective right of the states to
organize and maintain militias.   A1

Student Held in Bombings
A 21-year-old Minnesota student, Luke John Helder, was arrested in Nevada in
connection with 18 pipe bombs placed in rural mailboxes in five states. Six
people have been hurt.   A1

Backing for Army Secretary
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and White House officials expressed strong
support for Thomas E. White, saying he was not to blame for a lobbying campaign
to protect an $11 billion artillery system that Mr. Rumsfeld wanted to cancel.
A27

Workers Underpaid in Benefits
The Labor Department's inspector general said more than 20 percent of cash
balance pension plans violated the law by not providing workers with all the
benefits due them.   A24

Priest Denies Rape Charges
Paul R. Shanley, 71, one of the priests at the center of the clergy sexual abuse
scandal in Boston, pleaded not guilty to charges of child rape and was ordered
held on $750,000 bail.   A28

Size-Bias Case Resolved
A 240-pound, 5-foot-8 aerobics teacher reached an agreement with Jazzercise
resolving her complaint with the San Francisco Human Rights Commission over the
company's refusal to grant her a franchise.   A20

EDUCATION   B8

AIDS's Toll on Africa Teachers
The virus that causes AIDS is spreading so rapidly in parts of Africa that it is
killing teachers faster than nations can train them, the World Bank reported.
A12

NEW YORK/REGION   A28-29

Government to Clean Up Residences Fouled on 9/11
The E.P.A. is said to be set to lead a federal effort to clean up and test
apartments south of Canal Street in Lower Manhattan that were fouled by dust and
ash from the destruction of the World Trade Center. The move would reverse a
position that indoor spaces were the province of their owners, not the
government.   A1

Workers took the first step in erecting a new skyscraper on the site where 7
World Trade Center stood.   B1

Skakel Murder Trial Under Way
A prosecutor told jurors in opening arguments that Michael C. Skakel had
repeatedly confessed to killing Martha Moxley in 1975. Mr. Skakel's lawyer said
the state would not be able to prove even a circumstantial case against his
client.   B1

Action on Adult Homes
The Pataki administration issued an array of initiatives to begin reshaping the
system of care and oversight for thousands of mentally ill people living in
adult homes, where lax regulation has led to abuse of residents.   B1

DINING   F1-12

SPORTS   D1-8

Fabled Racehorse Dies
Seattle Slew, the last living Triple Crown champion, died in his sleep at the
age of 28 -- exactly 25 years after his Kentucky Derby victory.   D1

OBITUARIES   C16

ARTS   E1-12

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Pesticides and Organic Produce
The first detailed scientific analysis of organic fruits and vegetables shows
that they contain a third as much pesticide residue as conventionally grown
foods.   A29

BUSINESS DAY   C1-15

Enron Files Called Smoking Gun
Politicians, lawyers and consumer groups said documents showing that Enron had
manipulated California's electric-power market were invaluable to their quest to
recover billions of dollars that the state was overcharged in 2000 and 2001.
A1

The Fed Stands Pat on Rates
The Fed voted unanimously to hold its benchmark interest rate unchanged, saying
the durability of the economic recovery remained uncertain despite a sharp
upturn in first-quarter growth and a surge in productivity.   C1

The S.& P. 500 slid 3.18 points, to 1,049.49, its lowest level since Oct. 1. The
Dow advanced 28.51 points, to 9,836.55, while the Nasdaq, already down 19
percent this year, fell 4.66 points, to 1,573.82.   C10

Good Quarter for Cisco
The leading maker of Internet networking equipment reported profits for its
fiscal third quarter that were better than expected, as belt-tightening, lower
costs for parts and a slight rise in sales helped reverse a steep loss a year
before.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: Hijacking Mideast peace; more Enron mischief; tear down the wall;
young women at risk.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS
(89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS (85%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); HAMAS (78%); LOBBYING
(78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); APPROVALS (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); ELECTIONS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS
(76%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); ARMIES (74%); SENIOR
CITIZENS (72%); ARRESTS (72%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (71%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (70%); FIREARMS (67%); SUPREME COURTS (66%); ARMED FORCES (66%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (63%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (61%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (50%) NO INDEX TERMS FROM
NYTIMES

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); HAMAS (58%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (75%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%); JOHN A LUKE JR (56%); OSAMA
BIN LADEN (50%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (92%)

STATE: NEVADA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); ISRAEL
(93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); CANADA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1047 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 8, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TURMOIL;
Statement by Palestinian Authority

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 323 words


Following is the statement by the Palestinian Authority on the bombing yesterday
in Israel, as transcribed by The New York Times:

The Palestinian leadership strongly condemns the violent attack against Israeli
civilians in a public hall in Rishon le Zion.

The timing of this dangerous attack against Israeli civilians at a time when
Sharon meets with the American president is aimed at supporting Sharon's claims
it is impossible to make peace with the Palestinian people. And to stamp our
people with terrorism and to excuse Sharon and his government from spilling
Palestinian blood in the Jenin refugee camp and all of the areas, cities, camps
and villages that did not stop until this hour.

The Palestinian leadership in front of this danger facing our people, our rights
and the status of our just cause on the international level, because of these
terrorist acts against Israeli civilians, decided to take effective measures
against those involved in this dangerous operation and those who are standing
behind it. And we will not go easy with these groups that commit these
operations that harm our people and our cause severely, especially after the
repeated declarations by the Palestinian leadership of its rejection and
condemnation of these terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians. These attacks
will allow Sharon to be armed with all the excuses to launch this bloody
destructive war against our masses and to commit the massacres in the Jenin camp
and other places and to continue to put into effect military escalations in the
Palestinian territories.

The leadership declares clearly its rejection and condemnation of these attacks
and considers the groups that are launching them to be working against the
interest of the Palestinian people, that it needs to rapidly limit it from
harming the Palestinian cause and the national destiny, and to block the path of
these terrorist crimes that our people pay the price for.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); REFUGEES (70%) TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  PALESTINIANS

ORGANIZATION: PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  RISHON LE ZION (ISRAEL)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1048 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bill on Border Security and Immigration Passes in House

BYLINE:  By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


The House overwhelmingly approved a bill today to increase the security of the
nation's borders and to toughen enforcement of immigration laws, clearing the
measure for President Bush, who has said he will sign it.

The vote was 411 to 0, with 2 House members voting present. The Senate passed
the bill 97 to 0 on April 18.

House members said the bill would close gaps in security revealed by last year's
terrorist attacks.

"Since Sept. 11, we have learned how deeply vulnerable our immigration system is
to exploitation by aliens who wish to harm Americans," said Representative F.
James Sensenbrenner Jr., the Wisconsin Republican who is chairman of the
Judiciary Committee and chief sponsor of the bill.

The legislation would increase the number of immigration inspectors and
investigators, require universities to keep better track of foreign students and
heighten scrutiny of visa applications from countries listed as sponsors of
terrorism.

Under the bill, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence
Agency would have to share more information with the State Department, which
issues visas. The government will meld certain databases of federal law
enforcement and intelligence agencies, to help in screening visa applicants and
foreigners entering the United States.

The American Civil Liberties Union said the new storehouse of information must
not be used as the basis for a national identification system. In monitoring
foreign visitors, it said, the government must not compromise the privacy rights
of Americans or harass people who "look foreign" or are members of racial
minorities.

Civil liberties advocates were alarmed at some early proposals, including one
that might have required noncitizens to carry identification documents, but
these ideas were dropped after bipartisan negotiations.

Under the bill, a presidential commission will examine use of the electronic
data system to see if it infringes on privacy rights.

Angela M. Kelley, deputy director of the National Immigration Forum, an advocacy
group for immigrants, and Cecilia Munoz, vice president of the National Council
of La Raza, a Latino civil rights group, said their organizations supported the
bill in its final form.

The federal government would have to issue machine-readable, tamper-resistant
visas and travel documents imprinted with identifiers like fingerprints or
retina scans.

The hijackers responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks entered the United States on
tourist, student and business visas. Hani Hanjour, identified as the pilot who
flew a jet into the Pentagon, came here to study English in California but never
showed up for classes. Two men who crashed jetliners into the World Trade
Center, Mohamed Atta and Marwan al-Shehhi, entered the United States on tourist
visas, then studied at a Florida flight school while they waited for student
visas.

Under the bill, the Justice Department must establish an electronic system to
track the acceptance of foreign students by American schools, the issuance of
visas to them, their admission to this country and their enrollment in schools
here. Schools must notify the government if foreign students drop out or do not
enroll.

Representative George W. Gekas, Republican of Pennsylvania and chairman of the
Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, said: "No longer shall criminals come to
our colleges and thwart our immigration laws by hiding in the halls of learning.
We will know what college they attend. We will know when they leave. Terrorists
like Mohamed Atta will be caught when they try to convert our education system
into a terrorist hideout."

Victor C. Johnson, a lobbyist at the Association of International Educators,
which represents foreign student advisers, said his group supported the bill.

"It strikes an appropriate balance, tightening visa controls and student
monitoring while maintaining our openness to foreign students and scholars," Mr.
Johnson said.

The border security bill is the latest legislative response to the events of
Sept. 11. Congress has provided billions of dollars of emergency aid to New
York. In October, President Bush signed an antiterrorism bill that gave law
enforcement agencies vast new powers to conduct surveillance, detain suspects
and attack money laundering. In November, he signed a major aviation security
bill. House and Senate negotiators are working on a bioterrorism bill, passed in
different forms by the two chambers.

Despite the lopsided votes on the border security bill, Congress had difficulty
deciding how much to tighten immigration policy.

In March, just before Mr. Bush visited Mexico, the House approved a proposal
that would have made it easier for thousands of Mexicans and other illegal
immigrants to obtain permanent resident visas, or green cards. This provision
was not in the bill passed today. But lawmakers, eager to court Hispanic voters,
said it was likely to be approved as a separate measure later in this election
year.

A similar provision, enacted in 2000, expired in April 2001. On Thursday, the
Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, plans to
introduce a bill to reauthorize the program, widely known by its legal citation,
Section 245(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.

Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, introduced a similar bill last
year. The 30 co-sponsors span the political spectrum from Senator Jesse Helms,
Republican of North Carolina, to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); LEGISLATION (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY (91%); BORDER
CONTROL (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); APPROVALS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); STUDENT DEMOGRAPHICS
(88%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); BIOMETRICS (78%); NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS
(78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); HIJACKING (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%);
FINGERPRINTING (73%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (73%); FLIGHT SCHOOLS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); RACE & RACISM (64%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (64%);
COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (54%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(55%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%)

PERSON: F JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR (57%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1051 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 11, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paper Fights Subpoena Of Journalist By U.N. Court

BYLINE:  By MARLISE SIMONS with FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, May 10


Lawyers for The Washington Post today challenged a subpoena served by the United
Nations war crimes tribunal on a former reporter for the newspaper, arguing that
journalists who work in conflict zones should not be required to give testimony
unless absolutely vital because it could hamper their work and endanger their
lives.

Lawyers at the court say a ruling on this case is expected to set an important
precedent for future war crimes tribunals, above all for the new International
Criminal Court, set to begin work in July.

European reporters and documentary filmmakers have already testified voluntarily
in several cases at the court in The Hague that deals with war crimes in the
former Yugoslavia, but no American has agreed to appear. Until now, however, the
tribunal had never subpoenaed a reluctant reporter.

In this case, the burning issue is not the confidentiality of a reporter's
sources or notes, a subject often fought over in American courts, the lawyers
said, but the principle of when and why a reporter working in a war zone or an
area of conflict can be summoned to appear as a witness.

The lawyers for The Washington Post said they wanted the court to draw up rules
on behalf of journalists everywhere that deal with the circumstances under which
they can testify. These might resemble federal guidelines in the United States.

In earlier cases, lawyers, court employees and Red Cross workers have been
exempted from testifying, according to Geoffrey Robertson, who led The Post's
legal team. "We say there is another category that should be entitled to
exemption from testifying, namely journalists."

Mr. Robertson, a British expert in international law, added: "The watchdog role
of the journalist must be particularly protected. We invite this court to make
the first ruling on freedom of speech."

The Washington Post is seeking to block the appearance of their former
correspondent, Jonathan Randal, in the case of Radoslav Brdjanin, a Bosnian
Serb, who has been charged with genocide, persecution and deportation of
non-Serbs during the Bosnian war. When the trial began early this year,
prosecutors said they wanted to introduce as evidence an article by Mr. Randal
published in 1993 which quoted Mr. Brdjanin.

Lawyers for Mr. Brdjanin said they would accept the article as evidence only if
they had a chance to cross-examine Mr. Randal. Prosecutors agreed and asked the
judges to issue a subpoena. It was served by French bailiffs in Paris, where Mr.
Randal lives. Mr. Randal, 69, an experienced correspondent who also worked for
The New York Times, is now writing books.

According to Mr. Robertson, a tribunal investigator approached Mr. Randal last
year. The journalist told them he was reluctant to testify in court, he said,
but agreed instead to give the investigator a witness statement. "He was unhappy
about giving evidence and he contacted his newspaper," Mr. Robertson said.

But the chief counsel for Mr. Brdjanin, John Ackerman, who is based in Texas,
wanted more. He said that he wanted to question Mr. Randal because he felt his
story was "less than accurate." There were important differences, he said,
between Mr. Randal's article and another written by an American journalist who
was present at the same interview and who translated from Serbo-Croat for Mr.
Randall.

The court has declined to name the other journalist.

Court officials here say that contacts between reporters and tribunal
investigators have been common and that reporters have often provided
off-the-record information that investigators have used as leads.

There have been no consequences for journalists or other witnesses who refused
to testify.

"Our very ability to survive depends on the support of institutions,
governments, individuals," said Graham Blewitt, the tribunal's deputy
prosecutor.

In the United States, Floyd Abrams, a First Amendment lawyer with Cahill Gordon
& Reindel , said compelling Mr. Randal to appear could set a perilous precedent.
"If every Milosevic and every aide to Milosevic comes to understand that every
time a journalist talks to them, they are talking as a potential witness against
them, an awful lot of doors would be closed," he said.

Lawyers said Mr. Randal might not have been served the subpoena in the United
States, where rules for summoning journalists are more stringent. The lawyers
for The Post today argued for similar stringent conditions, saying that while
journalists should be free to testify if they wished to do so, the tribunal
should not compel them to give evidence that could be obtained elsewhere or if
it was not absolutely essential.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUBPOENAS (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(92%); LAWYERS (91%); JOURNALISM (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WRITERS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EVIDENCE (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (79%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); NEWS
REPORTING (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); GENOCIDE (73%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (68%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (55%); VISUAL ARTISTS (55%) WAR CRIMES AND
CRIMINALS;  SUBPOENAS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  DEPORTATION;  NEWS AND
NEWS MEDIA

COMPANY: GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (85%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)
WASHINGTON POST; UNITED NATIONS

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (85%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (85%); NAICS517110 WIRED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (85%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (85%);
NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (85%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; BARRINGER, FELICITY; RANDAL, JONATHAN; BRDJANIN,
RADOSLAV

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); PARIS, FRANCE (51%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SERBIA (79%); FRANCE (51%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1057 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Open Hearings Sought for Terror Detainees

BYLINE:  By The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 245 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, May 13


Even a case-by-case process of determining whether immigration hearings for
post-Sept. 11 detainees should be kept secret could jeopardize the terrorism
investigation, lawyers for the federal government argued today as they battled a
lawsuit over whether to open the hearings to the press.

The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey sued the Immigration and
Naturalization Service in Federal District Court here in March on behalf of
several New Jersey newspapers, seeking to overturn a blanket order that hearings
for all so-called special interest cases be held in secret.

The order was issued Sept. 21 by the nation's top immigration judge, Michael J.
Creppy. It involves an unknown number of mainly Arab immigrants who were
detained -- many of them in New Jersey jails -- after Sept. 11.

The government has invoked national security to close the hearings. Lawyers for
the newspapers concede that some hearings may involve truly sensitive material,
but say the government should have to demonstrate that case by case.

Judge John W. Bissell did not say at the close of today's one-day hearing when
he would rule.

. Michael Lindemann, a deputy attorney general for immigration, said today that
even preliminary arguments on whether to open a hearing would reveal the extent
of investigators' knowledge. But lawyers for the newspapers, including The New
Jersey Law Journal in Newark and The Herald News of West Paterson, said Judge
Creppy's order was too broad.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (93%); LAWYERS (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); REFUGEES (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  FREEDOM OF THE
PRESS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%) AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  NEW JERSEY

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1059 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Africa: Rwanda: Genocide Suspect Arrested

BYLINE:  Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 93 words


A former Rwandan Army colonel accused of overseeing the massacre of 2,000
civilians was arrested in Belgium on charges of genocide and crimes against
humanity. The warrant for Leonidas Rusatira's arrest was issued by the United
Nations tribunal for Rwanda, based in Arusha, Tanzania. According to the
indictment, Colonel Rusatira led an attack on a technical college in Kigali on
April 11, 1994, after promising United Nations peacekeepers there that the lives
of thousands of civilians who had sought refuge would be protected if the
peacekeepers left.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); CIVIL WAR (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); PEACEKEEPING
(87%) CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (58%) UNITED NATIONS WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL

PERSON: RUSATIRA, LEONIDAS

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); BELGIUM
(72%)

REGION: RWANDA

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Williamsburg Journal;
Where the Past Lives, Undisturbed by the Present

BYLINE:  By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: WILLIAMSBURG, Va.


The word came back from the future, as it were, to the African-American
character interpreters who portray slaves anguishing over freedom in the year
1774 here in the busy, history-steeped tourist mecca of modern Colonial
Williamsburg:

Descendants of Thomas Jefferson, meeting in May of the year 2002, have once more
rebuffed any admission of kinship with descendants of Sally Hemings, a slave who
quite likely bore Jefferson at least one child, according to the latest DNA
evidence now accepted by the scholars at his Monticello plantation.

"When the Jefferson fight comes around each year I just get an extra edge," said
Richard Josey, who portrays a gardener enslaved in this picturesque village. He
shook his head in dismay at how some things never seem to change.

In his real life as a modern black professional engrossed by the precise details
of history, Mr. Josey, like the other slave portrayers here, is more inspired
than depressed by the annual rebuff of Hemings kin by white Jefferson
descendants organized as the Monticello Association.

In recent years, the association members have been meeting each spring in
Charlottesville, 120 miles west, and firmly voting down all proposals for
accepting the Hemings descendants, let alone granting them permission to be
buried at Monticello.

"I just hope those folks come down here and see slavery for what it really is,"
said Mr. Josey, brandishing a tone of resistance that is part and parcel of his
character, a country-born but urban-wise slave chafing under the ownership of
his white master, Lord Dunmore.

The slavery aspects of colonial life have been gradually introduced here in
increasing detail across the last 20 years. As options now stand, summer
tourists can visit the idealized world of Jefferson's Monticello with its white
graveyard, or head here for an even more historical inkling of slavery in the
tableaus that dapple the larger world of dominant colonial whites.

Some of the words echoing from the latest standoff at Monticello make
Williamsburg seem more relevant for at least attempting glimpses at the deep
roots of lasting national enmity.

"Our intent was to kill this forever," a member of the Monticello Association
said after the latest vote against the Hemings descendants.

A Hemings family member, requesting acknowledgment of the DNA evidence,
observed, "None of us have any interest in invading your cemetery and making any
of you less white."

In the shifting repertoire of Williamsburg, the dedicated slave portrayers are
now depicting the mundane life of 1774. That was a heady year for whites and a
perplexing one for blacks as the masters' talk was all about freedom and the
right to revolt against English, not American, injustice.

"I hear the words that they're saying, but I do not think that they mean freedom
for us in the same way they mean it for themselves," Moses, a house slave of
Peyton Randolph, the first president of the Continental Congress, confided in
his colleague, Mingo.

The two slaves, charged with stealing a sheep and some corn, were waiting in the
courthouse for the dispensation of colonial justice. Ignoring the tourist
mini-cameras of 2002, the two evinced no great optimism for acquittal or future
freedom from bondage. (Character portrayers are not tied to precise scripts but
ad-lib situations with close attention required to the real events they study.)

"That Mr. Jefferson, he says slavery is an a-BOM-in-ation," said Moses,
delivering the observation with an easy Tidewater drawl.

Mingo, squinting at his friend, shot back: "But Jefferson still got his slaves."

The timeless craving for freedom may be one explanation for the difficulty that
Williamsburg administrators report in finding people interested in careers in
bondage roles that can prove stressful and controversial in the eyes of black
friends and family members.

"I always hear about it," Mr. Josey said. "I ask them: 'Would you really rather
your child heard only about Jefferson and Washington and the great things and
not know anything about where your ancestors came from?' "

Harvey Bakari, the developer of the African-American program, said it is a
challenge recruiting people willing to play slaves.

"It takes a lot of commitment to put on the costume of a slave and have the
strength to wear it as a badge of honor to our ancestors," Mr. Bakari said.

This year Williamsburg is emphasizing the urban aspects of slavery. Highlights
include some charming kitchen gossip by the slaves, some heated debates over
whether they should support the antislavery British if revolution comes, the
poignant dilemma of a woman impregnated by the master, and the most wrenching
issue of how to tell a young slave child about the suffocating world of bondage.

Hope Smith, who plays Rose, a house slave, has portrayed characters here for 18
of her 26 years, even as she studied at Jefferson's alma mater, William and Mary
College.

"My mom thought it was an opportunity for me to get over what was a painful
shyness when I was young," Ms. Smith explained. "I grew to love this history. It
makes you value and treasure the freedoms you do have, and more keen to
injustice."

Slaves represented half of historic Williamsburg, but the 10 slave portrayers
are only about a fifth of the interpreters corps tourists see, Ms. Smith said in
hoping for a truer balance. Even more, the black interpreters yearn for far more
human interaction between master and slave.

"I'd like to see Thomas Jefferson come up in front of the Raleigh Tavern here
with his man Jupiter pulling the horse, because those are the pictures sure to
stick in someone's mind," said Mr. Josey, who has encyclopedic knowledge of
Jefferson the master and Jupiter the slave.

"Did you know Jefferson admitted he owed Jupiter money?" Mr. Josey asked,
grinning at the possibilities of not denying history. "Jefferson wrote that in
his diary."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Colonial Williamsburg, actors have been increasingly
depicting scenes from the lives of slaves. Among those portraying slaves are
Hope Smith, far left above, with Harriott Lomax and Richard Josey, bottom.
(Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SLAVERY (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
DNA (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); EVIDENCE
(76%); FORENSICS (75%); CEMETERIES (62%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING (57%) SLAVERY;
COLONIAL WILLIAMSBURG (VA);  DNA (DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID)

PERSON: CLINES, FRANCIS X; JEFFERSON, THOMAS (1743-1826); HEMINGS, SALLY

CITY: WILLIAMSBURG, VA, USA (98%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (98%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: VIRGINIA

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1064 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru Rebels Were Executed, Report Suggests

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 352 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 17


At least 8 of the 14 leftist rebels who surrendered at the end of a hostage
siege in Lima in early 1997 were first incapacitated and then shot from behind,
according to a forensic report on an incident that prosecutors say could be
crucial to bringing former President Alberto Fujimori to trial.

Prosecutors are investigating the siege of the Japanese ambassador's residence,
during which the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement held 72 people for 126 days,
to establish whether the rebels were executed after surrendering.

Prosecutors say that if they can prove that Mr. Fujimori was responsible for the
rebels' deaths, they will have a strong case to try him for crimes against
humanity.

The forensic report was compiled after the bodies of the 14 rebel hostage-takers
were exhumed last year; it has not yet been officially released.

"The distribution and recurrence of the wounds turns them into a pattern," said
the specialists in the report, which was conducted by the Peruvian Institute of
Forensic Anthropology and submitted to the attorney general's office. A source
familiar with the investigation discussed the report's contents today.

"The fact that these wounds follow the same trajectory, from back to front,
suggests the position of the victim in relation to the person shooting was
always the same and the movement was minimal or nil," the report read.

Mr. Fujimori was forced out of office in November 2000 at the height of a
corruption scandal and has been in self-imposed exile in Japan ever since.

He denies all charges of rights abuse and corruption, refuses to return to Peru
and is protected from extradition by dual citizenship and Peru's lack of an
extradition treaty with Japan.

A judge stirred controversy this week by ordering the arrest of 12 officers who
took part in the daring commando raid to free the hostages. Only one officer has
been detained.

At the crux of the case is whether the rebels died in cross-fire after 140
commandos burst into the residence from secretly drilled underground tunnels, or
whether they were shot after giving themselves up -- and if so, who gave the
order.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FORENSICS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CORRUPTION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); WAR
CRIMES (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (71%); SCANDALS (66%); FIRES (66%); CITIZENSHIP (52%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%)

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); JAPAN (92%)

REGION: PERU;  LIMA (PERU);  JAPAN

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1066 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: DETAINEES;
U.S. Defends the Withholding Of Jailed Immigrants' Names

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: HACKENSACK, N.J., May 20


Justice Department lawyers, defending the federal government's refusal to
identify the 1,200 foreign Muslims arrested after Sept. 11, said today that
public disclosure would undermine counterterrorism efforts and put the detainees
at risk of attack from angry Americans as well as terrorists.

Appearing before the Appellate Division of State Superior Court, the government
lawyers insisted that national security interests outweighed any public right to
know who is being kept in its jails, why and for how long.

"This is not secrecy for secrecy's sake," said Robert D. McCallum Jr., the
assistant attorney general in charge of the department's civil division.

He added that revealing the names of detainees, even those cleared by
investigators of involvement with terrorism, might open them to attack by
American "vigilantes" or allow terrorists to piece together details of the
government's counterterrorism efforts.

The arguments were the latest in a series of attempts by the Bush administration
to justify its assertion of sweeping powers to hold secret immigration hearings,
conceal the identities of foreign detainees and imprison people as material
witnesses, all in the name of fighting terrorism.

In every case heard in the last few months, federal and state district judges in
New York, New Jersey and Michigan have ruled against the government and in favor
of disclosure.

The hearing today stemmed from a lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Jersey. It argued that information about federal detainees held in
two county jails must be provided to the public under the state's freedom of
information laws.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service, an arm of the Justice Department,
rents jail space in New Jersey, as it does in many states. The largest group of
Sept. 11 detainees were housed in jails in Passaic County and Hudson County.

Judge Arthur N. D'Italia of State Superior Court in Hudson County ruled in March
that the two jails must turn over the names of the federal detainees they were
holding. The government appealed, and the order was temporarily stayed.

Last month, reacting to a defeat in a similar federal court case, the Justice
Department sought to block such disclosures by means of an emergency rule that
barred employees of state, county or private jails from identifying their
immigrant inmates.

Despite the government's efforts to conceal the identities and whereabouts of
foreigners it has arrested, the names and stories of a number of Middle Eastern
and Pakistani detainees caught up in the sweep have become public in the last
few months.

Some, like Muhammad Mobine, an illegal Pakistani immigrant held in the Krome
Detention Center outside Miami, have called immigrant advocacy groups for help.
Mr. Mobine, who speaks only broken English, said through a translator that he
was arrested just five days after the terrorist attacks.

He said he had been told by F.B.I. agents that he had come under suspicion
because he had applied for a driver's license at the same office, and on the
same day, where one of the hijackers picked up a license. "I don't know
anything," Mr. Mobine said, in a telephone call from jail last month. "I don't
see a judge. I just want to go home."

In another case, the name of a Turkish immigrant, Mustafa Camci, became public
only this month, seven months after his arrest. The disclosure came when a
federal judge in Wilmington, Del., ruled that law enforcement agents had
conducted an illegal search of Mr. Camci's apartment when they arrested him
Sept. 20 after coming to look for one of his roommates.

Justice Department officials have said that most of the people arrested in the
weeks after the terror attacks have since been cleared of any connection to the
attacks or to terror groups.

Most, if not all, of those people were believed to be Muslim men from the Middle
East, Africa and Southeast Asia, who were then detained on charges of
overstaying their visas. Many detainees are only now being processed for
deportation or voluntary departure from the country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); LAWYERS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%);
IMMIGRATION (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); ARRESTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
PRISONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPEALS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(79%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); COUNTIES (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); JUDGES
(78%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (78%); LITIGATION (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (77%); APPEALS COURTS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(77%); HIJACKING (77%); RELIGION (73%); REFUGEES (68%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION
AND REFUGEES;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  SECURITY AND WARNING SYSTEMS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. to File 5 Suits On Voting Problems in 2000

BYLINE:  By LYNETTE CLEMETSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The Bush administration today announced plans to file five lawsuits saying there
had been voting rights violations in the 2000 presidential elections. Three of
the lawsuits will be filed against counties in Florida, center of the bitter
dispute that ultimately secured the Bush presidency.

Accusations in the cases include discriminatory treatment of minority voters,
purging of voter rolls, failure to provide access to disabled voters and failure
to provide assistance to voters with limited English proficiency, said Ralph
Boyd, assistant attorney general for the Justice Department's civil rights
division.

The two other suits involve cities in Missouri and Tennessee.

The lawsuits will not seek to overturn the results of the 2000 election but are
intended to induce the counties and cities involved to ensure that minority
voters are not disenfranchised in the 2002 elections. Still, the lawsuits would
place the Bush administration in agreement with complaints of civil rights
leaders like the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who contended that minority voters in
Florida were discriminated against in the 2000 presidential balloting.

The cases will be filed "well in advance of the primaries for the 2002
elections," Mr. Boyd testified in a combative hearing before the Senate
Judiciary Committee. Pressed for a more specific timeline, Mr. Boyd said it was
"likely and probable that the cases will be filed in the next 30 to 60 days."

Members of groups who contested the election results said they were eager to
hear specifics.

"We are certainly glad that they are finally engaged, but the devil is in the
details," said Hilary O. Shelton, Washington director of the N.A.A.C.P. "We will
be looking very closely at the specifics in their cases, and what remedies they
are seeking."

Among the details raising concern is why the administration's action is focused
on counties and cities rather than state-level agencies. Some of the accusations
by civil rights groups, for example, erroneous purging of voters, were
violations said to be conducted by state offices, like the secretary of state.
Remedies to those problems, critics charge, can be addressed only at the state
level.

Mr. Boyd refused to identify the counties and cities named in the suits or give
details. But Murray Greenberg, first assistant county attorney for Miami-Dade
County, said he received a call 10 days ago from the Justice Department stating
that the administration intended to file suit against the county for its failure
to provide language assistance to Creole-speaking voters.

"We're not saying anything specific about the jurisdictions at this point and we
have no further guidance on the charges involved until the suits have been
filed," a spokesman for the Justice Department said after the hearings.

One reason the Justice Department has refused to discuss the cases is that it is
discussing settlements with the Florida counties and cities involved. "My hope,
my aspiration and my expectation is that in each of those we'll reach an
enforceable agreement prior to the filing of the lawsuit," Mr. Boyd told
committee members today.

Democratic members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, who spent most of the
hearing confronting Mr. Boyd on what they deemed slow and regressive tactics of
the Bush administration on a number of civil rights issues, were surprised by
the announcement. They were quick to criticize the timeliness of the action.

"I question why these investigations have taken 18 months and why, with the
primary season only a few months away, the Department of Justice has not
mobilized a plan to make sure these voting rights abuses do not occur again,"
said Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, in a statement after
the proceedings.

"There are civil rights organizations that have moved much more quickly than
this with much fewer resources," said Senator John Edwards, Democrat of North
Carolina, who initially raised the question of the status of voting rights
lawsuits to Mr. Boyd during the hearing.

The Justice Department says it was delayed in taking action because of the
volume of complaints it received. By January 2001, the civil rights division had
received 11,000 complaints involving voting rights violations, Mr. Boyd
testified. By Inauguration Day it had narrowed its investigation to 20 cases
nationwide, including 12 in Florida. Two more investigations involving Florida
were soon added. Justice officials refused to specify when and how they revised
their list down to the five cases they announced today.

A coalition of civil rights organizations including the N.A.A.C.P., People for
the American Way Foundation, the Lawyers Committee on Civil Rights and the
A.C.L.U. had filed suit against Florida state and county officials, including
Katherine Harris, Florida's secretary of state, in January 2001.

Settlements have already been reached with two counties: Leon, which includes
the area in and around Tallahassee; and Broward, which includes Ft. Lauderdale.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); ELECTIONS (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (92%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); LITIGATION (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); COUNTIES (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); COUNTY
GOVERNMENT (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); LAWYERS
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%) PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000;
DISCRIMINATION;  BLACKS;  MINORITIES (US);  SUITS AND LITIGATION

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%)

PERSON: JESSE JACKSON (58%); AL GORE (58%) CLEMETSON, LYNETTE; BUSH, GEORGE W
(PRES); GORE, AL

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (73%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (95%); MISSOURI, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: FLORIDA;  FLORIDA;  TENNESSEE;  MISSOURI

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1072 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Panel Led by U.S. Criticizes Sudan's Government Over Slavery

BYLINE:  By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan, May 22


An international commission led by the United States condemned the Sudanese
government today for allowing slavery to flourish in this war-ravaged country.

But the commission said the issue was not as clear-cut as it was often
portrayed. Panel members also questioned whether international Christian
organizations that buy slaves and free them are helping the situation, saying it
would be better if slaves were released with no money changing hands. Critics
say the payments may help create a market for slaves.

Government officials have long denied any role in what they call tribal
abductions. As a show of concern, in 1999 Sudan created the Commission for the
Elimination of Abductions of Women and Children to address the problem. Few
outside experts take the group seriously.

But the panel, which was created this year by the United States and includes
officials from France, Italy, Norway and Britain, said in a report issued today
that Sudan had done too little to control a practice that is largely carried out
by militiamen armed by the government.

"They burn villages, loot cattle, rape and kill civilians and abduct and enslave
men, women and children," the panel said in its report, which includes
interviews with many former slaves.

The findings will come as no surprise to American policy makers, who have long
accused Sudan of tacitly allowing slavery. John C. Danforth, President Bush's
special envoy for the country, who helped to create the panel, said in a report
to Mr. Bush last month, "The record is clear: the government arms and directs
marauding raiders who operate in the south, destroying villages and abducting
women and children to serve as chattel servants, herders and field hands."

The panel found no easy answers. It said the government ought to aggressively
prosecute those who engage in slavery and actively seek the return of captives
to their homes.

Led by Penn Kemble, a former director of the United States Information Agency,
the commission found that a wide variety of economic relationships exist among
the Sudanese. Many of them are exploitative, like bondage to pay off debts, but
fall short of slavery.

It also said slavery is a long-standing practice in Sudan, even though it was
made illegal in 1924.

The modern version of slavery, the commission found, exists without slave
markets or a formal slave trade. Instead, raiders attack villages, most often
those near the north-south divide, to round up forced laborers.

The report said the problem was most troublesome among the government-backed
militias that guard the military supply train that runs from Babanusa through
rebel-held territory in Bahr el Ghazal to Wau in the south. The commission
called for the government to stop running the train until the end of the war.

The commission gave no estimate of the number of slaves in the country. Previous
figures have ranged from 10,000 to more than 10 times that. The commission said
both the government and the southern rebels had obstructed previous efforts at
counting.

The rebels were also said to have abducted villagers, particularly in the
Western Upper Nile area, and to have forced civilians to join them. Both sides,
the commission reported, have engaged in human rights violations from rape and
hostage taking to intentional attacks on civilians.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (88%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%);
FORCED LABOR (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); FARM LABOR (66%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(58%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1079 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mosque and State

BYLINE:  By Robin Wright;  Robin Wright, the author of "Sacred Rage: The Wrath
of Militant Islam," is a diplomatic correspondent for The Los Angeles Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1489 words


JIHAD
The Trail of Political Islam.
By Gilles Kepel.
Translated by Anthony F. Roberts.
454 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The Belknap Press/
Harvard University Press. $29.95.

No political trend has taken the world more by surprise over the past quarter
century than the eruption of militant Islam -- in fomenting revolution in the
1970's, in taking on both superpowers and helping bring one down in the 1980's,
and in building a global terror network in the 1990's. For many in the West, the
exotic and remote "Mohammedanism" of the preoil, preindependence and pre-Israel
days has evolved into the force behind the world's premier security threat.

So "Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam" will be a welcome respite for anyone
who fears the fury associated with militant Islam. Despite the terrorist attacks
of Sept. 11 and the Palestinian suicide bombings in Israel, Gilles Kepel argues
that the trend is, in fact, now on its last legs. The violence is merely a
reflection of the movement's failure, not its success. "The attack on the United
States was a desperate symbol of the isolation, fragmentation and decline of the
Islamist movement, not a sign of its strength and irrepressible might," he
writes. And while he concedes that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict may provoke
further attacks under the mantle of holy war, violence "has proven to be a
deathtrap for Islamists as a whole."

This is, to say the least, a controversial if intriguing theory. Kepel, an
Arabist and a professor at the Institute for Political Studies in Paris, comes
to this conclusion in a thoughtful and expansive chronicle of the contemporary
Islamist movement from Cairo to Kabul, from Kuala Lumpur all the way to
"Londonistan." Divided into two sections, the book covers the rise and predicted
fall of the modern militant jihad.

As Kepel sees it, the onset of the current Islamist movement was symbolized by
Egypt's decision in 1966 to hang Sayyid Qutb, one of the most influential early
Islamist theorists. Qutb rejected nationalism, which filled a void when the
Muslim world was in disarray after colonialism. He believed it weakened the
Islamic world by dividing it into more than 50 nations, and he equated it with
the pagan state of ignorance before the revelation of Islam to the prophet
Muhammad. His best sellers urged the creation of a "new Koranic generation" to
build a sequel to the prophet's first Muslim community. Like his contemporaries,
who included Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and Pakistan's Mawlana Mawdudi, Qutb
redefined the political discourse by offering an alternative vision. His
execution reflected the emerging chasm between the state and the Islamists.

The movement became more visible after the 1973 Arab-Israeli war. The Saudi-led
oil embargo ultimately generated unprecedented wealth that let the kingdom
bankroll Islamist causes worldwide. Three social dynamics -- soaring population,
literacy and the pull of the city -- also spurred the trend. The Islamic world's
population increased by 50 percent between 1955 and 1970. Some 60 percent of the
Muslim world was under 24 years old by 1975. Many were among the first
generation to read -- and to have serious aspirations. Disillusioned by
autocratic and corrupt regimes, the new generation increasingly turned to
various Islamist groups. The decade was capped by Iran's 1979 revolution, which
ended 2,500 years of monarchy and proved that Islam could provide a political
alternative.

Deepening turmoil marked the 1980's as proliferating militants launched a wave
of jihads. The mujahedeen took on Soviet troops in Afghanistan and Hezbollah
emerged in Lebanon to take on Israel and the United States. President Anwar
el-Sadat of Egypt was assassinated. Sudan, Africa's largest country, fell to
Islamist control. The first Palestinian intifada in 1987 fostered the rise of
Hamas and Islamic Jihad.

But the most noteworthy facet of the decade, Kepel argues, was the struggle
between Khomeini's Islamic republic and Saudi Arabia's Islamic monarchy over
which Islamist vision prevailed. Indeed, the best part of this section, which
covers a lot of well-trodden ground, is the struggle within the Islamic world.

The second half of "Jihad" offers the more interesting read, however, because it
defies conventional wisdom in evaluating the 1990's. The triumph in Afghanistan,
when the pro-Communist government collapsed in 1992, dispersed the war-hardened
jihadis back to their homes outside Afghanistan -- and beyond. They radicalized
Egypt's Islamist movement, which turned to killing foreign tourists, Coptic
Christians and others, and they opened a new battlefront in Algeria after a
military coup prevented moderate Islamists from claiming electoral victory. The
jihadis also popped up in Bosnia, where they tried to make the war against
Serbia part of their cause. They even set up shop in New York, where they
carried out the first World Trade Center bombing in 1993.

Yet Bosnia, Algeria and Egypt actually reflect the movement's failure, Kepel
argues, because the Islamists miscalculated. The extremist operations carried
out by networks "cut off from any social movement and manipulated by obscure
forces, had an effect that was the exact reverse of the one their authors
probably hoped for," he writes. A fragile alliance between the young urban poor
and the devout middle classes was also unable to endure or confront the state,
and the movement eventually split.

In Bosnia, the 2,000 foreign jihadis failed to inspire and the holy war ended
with a Pax Americana in 1995. In Algeria, the jihad collapsed into a
"blood-drenched nightmare" that lost popular appeal -- leading one faction to
declare a unilateral truce in 1997. It was a disaster that put the wider
movement on the defensive. In Egypt, the ruthless 1992-97 campaign by a radical
Islamist fringe group killed hundreds but was marginalized through repression
and pre-empted by market economics.

And in Iran, the one place where militant Islam prevailed, the zeal for the
Islamic Revolution has also petered out. In the 1997 presidential election, vast
numbers voted for a reformer who advocated democratizing society and easing
rigid restrictions. So between 1995 and 1997, the author concludes, the "high
season of jihad" began to draw to a close in many countries.

"The failure to transplant jihad was an early indication of two entirely new
phenomena that characterized political Islam in the 1990's," Kepel writes. "The
first was the gradual opening of a gulf between the ideas of Islamist radicals
and the needs of ordinary Muslims, in whose eyes utopian ideals were
progressively losing their attraction. Second, there began to emerge among those
same ordinary Muslims a blueprint for a Muslim democratic society that went
beyond the Islamist model. It was suggested that traditional Islamic culture
could find a way to allow Muslims to embrace the modern world without betraying
themselves."

By 2000, the transition to a post-Islamist period had already begun, Kepel
maintains. It was reflected in elections from Indonesia to Morocco, where
revamped Islamist parties increasingly "set aside the sovereignty of God" and
ran for office -- whenever allowed. "Many Islamist parties and movements were
bent on winning recognition as democrats and on denouncing repression by
reference to the universal Western principles of human rights," he says.

Kepel's theory may have seemed more convincing when "Jihad" was first published
in France in 2000, well before the Sept. 11 attacks. He has updated it for the
English translation and, he contends, the World Trade Center and Pentagon
attacks only reinforce his conclusion. Rejecting compromise, Al Qaeda, the
organization of Osama bin Laden, and other extremist groups turned to "raw
terrorism in its most spectacular and destructive form" to try to revive their
cause in a new millennium. Although the remaining cells are still a deadly
security threat, Kepel contends that they find it increasingly difficult to
inspire or recruit, leaving them farther away from taking power than ever.

"Jihad" -- a word that actually means "effort" or "struggle" and reflects what
all Muslims are supposed to do to observe the faith's values -- is a compelling
read that makes an appealing case. It caters to the specialist in its detail and
scope, however. And it is weakest in explaining the bigger picture. Kepel writes
about Islamist political goals and military tactics, but too little about Islam
itself. In the West, Christianity went through a Reformation that paved the way
for the Age of Enlightenment and the birth of modern democracy -- a 400-year
course that is still not quite complete. Islam is now just beginning to struggle
with its own reformation, a process of reinterpreting the Koran and blending
religious traditions with modern society. The past quarter century of militancy
is a part of this broader process -- a phase of history that is definitely not
over.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: JIHAD: THE TRAIL OF POLITICAL ISLAM (BOOK)

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Christoph Niemann)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TRENDS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (89%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (78%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (73%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); LITERATURE
(69%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (50%) BOOKS AND LITERATURE;  REVIEWS

COMPANY: HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS (58%)

ORGANIZATION: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (84%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

PERSON: WRIGHT, ROBIN; KEPEL, GILLES

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (53%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); EGYPT (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1082 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Vows Its 'Full Might' If a War Comes

BYLINE:  By HOWARD W. FRENCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1088 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, May 27


President Pervez Musharraf said today in an address to his nation that Pakistan
did not want a conflict with India but that if it came to war between the
nuclear-armed rivals, he would "respond with full might."

After months of tensions, General Musharraf urged his neighbor to open a
dialogue and "to move towards normalization of relations, which implies
de-escalation, reduction of tension on the borders," where the two countries
have a total of a million troops dug in for the possibility of war.

Between pledges not to seek war and his urging of steps to reduce tensions,
General Musharraf laid full blame with India for the standoff between the two,
who have fought three past wars, and issued several chilling warnings.

"We do not want war," he said. "But if war is thrust upon us, we would respond
with full might, and give a befitting reply."

Pakistan test-fired a short-range ballistic missile on Tuesday, the Pakistani
Army reported. It was the military's third missile test since Saturday.
General Musharraf repeatedly said that he would not allow Pakistan to be used as
a staging ground for terror attacks -- India's chief complaint against him. But
he denied that Islamic militants were continuing to cross into India's side of
the disputed Kashmir region to carry out attacks, like one nearly two weeks ago
that killed more than 30 people and sent tensions soaring.

He also pledged support for those resisting Indian rule in the mostly Muslim
region. "Pakistan will always remain by your side in your freedom struggle," he
said.

At one point, the general highlighted the religious dimension of the conflict
between the two nations, saying: "A Muslim is not afraid and does not retreat,
but with the cry of 'God is great!' he jumps into the battle to fight."

Indian officials, while withholding official comment today, reacted to the
address with anger and said they found little in the way of conciliation.  Page
A4.

"Even if you looked under a microscope," one Indian official said, "you couldn't
find anything positive in this speech."

American officials declined to comment on the speech. Deputy Secretary of
Defense Richard L. Armitage is scheduled to go to the region next week to try to
help defuse the crisis.

Political commentators here said General Musharraf's speech reflected a delicate
balancing act between the demands on him at home and abroad, as did the testing
of ballistic missiles here in recent days.

An important ally in America's fight against terrorists in the region, the
general has nevertheless been on the diplomatic defensive abroad over the
attacks in Kashmir, and he is vulnerable at home to charges of backing down in
the face of threats from India, his country's traditional rival.

The standing of the Pakistani leader, an army general who seized power in
October 1999, has also been diminished by a recent flawed referendum extending
his rule. Today, he promised to hold national elections in October that he said
would restore "genuine democracy."

"He said, and I counted it four times, that we will not support terror across
the border, and I think he means it because he needs peace to hold elections,"
said Najim Sethi, editor of The Daily Times.

"But overall, this is the kind of rhetoric that you need to make when you are
covering your tracks in retreat," he added. "If he was a moving target for
diehard fundamentalists, now he is a fixed target. "They will not only say he
has sold out, but he has sold out to the Hindus."

Tensions have risen between India and Pakistan since the May 14 attack in
Kashmir that killed 35 people, mostly the wives and children of Indian troops
stationed there.

As the two have engaged in increasingly fierce artillery duels, and appeared
close to war, international pressure has mounted on Pakistan to end its
longstanding support for violent separatist groups that filter into the
Indian-held portion of Kashmir across the so-called Line of Control.

But General Musharraf denied any support for terrorism several times in his
address today. "We assure the world community that Pakistan is doing nothing
across the Line of Control," he said, "and Pakistan will never allow the export
of terrorism anywhere in the world from within Pakistan."

Those denials did not convince Indian leaders, who charge that scores of
infiltrations continue. That skepticism was also echoed by Britain's foreign
secretary, Jack Straw, who arrived in Pakistan today and called for an end to
cross-border terrorism "in all its guises and disguises."

In recent days, General Musharraf has been receiving much the same message from
Washington, London, Moscow and the European Union, as well.

Pakistani political analysts said that even though General Musharraf has worked
closely with Washington against the Taliban regime in Afghanisan, he has been
slow to understand the extent to which international opinion had shifted against
anything remotely associated with terrorism. They say he has been badly
outmaneuvered by India over the Kashmir issue.

While General Musharraf could turn his back on the Taliban, whom Pakistani
governments had supported before Sept. 11, Kashmir is an issue close to the
heart of his nation -- and his military -- and the general is clearly eager to
avoid any impression that he would jettison the cause.

A year ago, a summit meeting in Agra, India, between General Musharraf and the
Indian prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee, ended without a joint statement
because of the Pakistani president's refusal to allow mention of infiltrations
into Indian-controlled Kashmir.

Now, General Musharraf is vulnerable to attack in his own country, even by
people who oppose the insurgency, for having been forced to end all support for
militant separatists without obtaining anything in return from India, which
human rights groups say has committed serious abuses as it has struggled to keep
a hold on the region.

"The Kashmiris have serious, legitimate concerns, which need to be addressed,"
said Rashid Rehman, editor of the Frontier Post. "But in the post-9/11 world,
irregular warfare, terrorism and other desperate measures are just not going to
fly in the world. The government has been too slow in learning this, or they
have simply clung to their illusions."

For all of the world attention to the crisis between India and Pakistan, most of
General Musharraf's speech seemed aimed at his domestic audience, including an
awkward apology for the conduct of an April referendum on a measure that
extended his term of office for five years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a televised speech yesterday, Gen. Pervez Musharraf said
Pakistan would not initiate a war over Kashmir, but it is ready to fight.
(Agence France-Presse)(pg. A4) Map of Pakistan highlighting Islamabad:
Islamabad, Pakistan's capital, is just miles from disputed Kashmir. (pg. A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (89%); RELIGION (89%); MISSILE RESEARCH &
DEVELOPMENT (88%); TERRORISM (87%); ARMIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); ARMED FORCES (70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (67%)
INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US;  TERRORISM;  ISLAM;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (91%) MUSHARRAF, PERVEZ (PRES); FRENCH, HOWARD W

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (93%)

STATE: KASHMIR (94%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (97%); ASIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: INDIA;  PAKISTAN;  KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1085 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: SURVEILLANCE;
Government Will Ease Limits On Domestic Spying by F.B.I.

BYLINE:  By DON VAN NATTA Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


As part of a sweeping effort to transform the F.B.I. into a domestic terrorism
prevention agency, Attorney General John Ashcroft has decided to relax
restrictions on the bureau's ability to conduct domestic spying in
counterterrorism operations, senior government officials said today.

Mr. Ashcroft and Robert S. Mueller III, the director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, plan to announce on Thursday a broad loosening of the guidelines
that restrict the surveillance of religious and political organizations, the
officials said. The guidelines were adopted after disclosures of domestic F.B.I.
spying under the old Cointelpro program, and for 25 years they have been among
the most fundamental limits on the bureau's conduct.

The revision will shift the power to initiate counterterrorism inquiries from
headquarters to the special agents in charge of the 56 field offices, the
officials said.

"We are turning the ship 180 degrees from prosecution of crimes as our main
focus to the prevention of terrorist acts," a senior Justice Department official
said tonight. "We want to make sure that we do everything possible to stop the
terrorists before they can kill innocent Americans, everything within the bounds
of the Constitution and federal law."

Officials at the American Civil Liberties Union criticized the new guidelines,
saying they represent another step by the Bush administration to roll back
civil-liberties protections in the name of improving counterterrorism measures.

"These new guidelines say to the American people that you no longer have to be
doing something wrong in order to get that F.B.I. knock at your door," Laura W.
Murphy, director of the national office of the A.C.L.U., said. "The government
is rewarding failure. It seems when the F.B.I. fails, the response by the Bush
administration is to give the bureau new powers, as opposed to seriously look at
why the intelligence and law enforcement failures occurred."

Under the old guidelines, agents needed to show that they had probable cause or
information from an informer that crimes were being committed to begin
counterterrorism investigations. Under the new guidelines, agents will be free
to search for leads or clues to terrorist activities in public databases or on
the Internet.

Under the old guidelines, surfing the Internet for the sole purpose of
developing leads was prohibited.

Among other changes, the new guidelines let agents search Web sites and online
chat rooms for evidence of terrorists' planning or other criminal activities,
the officials said.

The bureau will also use commercial "data-mining services" from companies that
collect, organize and analyze marketing and demographic information from the
Internet to help develop leads on potential crimes like threats to the security
of computer networks. Businesses routinely use the information, but the bureau
has been constrained from using those services.

The guidelines were imposed in the 1970's after the disclosures about
Cointelpro, a widespread domestic surveillance program that monitored antiwar
militants, the Ku Klux Klan and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., among
others, while J. Edgar Hoover was bureau director.

Beyond the reports of the spying, a political firestorm arose over what many
critics regarded as the abuse of power. The surveillance guidelines have since
then defined the operational conduct of the bureau in inquiries of domestic and
overseas groups that operate in the United States.

Since Sept. 11, the guidelines have been criticized by many law enforcement
officials as an outmoded counterterrorism tool that hampered efforts.

A senior agent in the Minneapolis office, Coleen Rowley, complained on May 21 in
a letter to Mr. Mueller that officials at headquarters had repeatedly held back
agents in the field office who sought to investigate Zacarias Moussaoui
aggressively in the four weeks before Sept. 11.

Senior officials said today that Mr. Ashcroft's new guidelines addressed some of
Ms. Rowley's complaints. Ms. Rowley, general counsel in the Minneapolis office,
also complained that agents there had no idea that an agent in Phoenix wrote in
a memorandum to headquarters in July that Arab men, possibly connected to Osama
bin Laden, had trained at a flight school in Arizona.

Under the new guidelines, field offices will no longer have to await approval
for intelligence investigations from headquarters. Headquarters would often take
weeks or even months before deciding whether an inquiry was warranted.

Instead, the field offices could begin counterterrorism inquiries themselves.
Inquiries can last from 180 days to one year before being reviewed by senior
officials.

"Agent Rowley's concerns are thoroughly addressed in the F.B.I. reorganization
and the attorney general's guidelines," a senior official said tonight. "We are
devolving power to begin and conduct investigations to the field offices and
freeing their hands to do everything possible within the bounds of the
Constitution and federal law to protect us from terrorists."

Under the current guidelines, the bureau cannot send undercover agents to
investigate groups that gather at places like mosques or churches unless
investigators first find probable cause or evidence that leads them to believe
that someone in the group may have broken the law. Such full investigations
cannot proceed without the attorney general's consent.

Many investigators have complained since Sept. 11 that Islamic militants have
sometimes met at mosques, apparently knowing that religious institutions are
usually off limits to F.B.I. surveillance squads.

A lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union, Gregory T. Nojeim, predicted
that the new guidelines would cause a flood of new information that the bureau
will have trouble analyzing.

"The problem with the 9/11 investigation was a failure to analyze and act on
relevant information," Mr. Nojeim said. "And their solution is to gather
exponentially more information that they have no possible way to properly
analyze."

A senior official at the Justice Department dismissed that criticism.

"Under the new rules," the official said, "we allow the field to conduct the
investigations and we will give headquarters the ability to analyze the
information. No longer will there be disparate pieces of information floating
around in isolation in different parts of the country. Now you will have a much
greater ability to connect those dots."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(92%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%);
INTERNET & WWW (84%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
HIJACKING (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS
(71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); PROBABLE CAUSE (66%); DATA MINING
(66%); CHAT ROOMS (60%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (56%); RELIGION (56%)
TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;  CIVIL RIGHTS

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (82%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (91%) VAN NATTA, DON JR; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN);
MUELLER, ROBERT S III (DIR); ROWLEY, COLEEN; MOUSSAOUI, ZACARIAS

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MINNESOTA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  MINNEAPOLIS (MINN)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1086 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2002 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Fund for Tower Victims Will Aid Some Gay Partners

BYLINE:   By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1520 words


Some of the gay men and lesbians who were partners of Sept. 11 victims are
poised to collect substantial awards from the federal fund set up to compensate
bereaved families, according to Kenneth R. Feinberg, special master of the fund,
and lawyers familiar with the process.

Those who present claims to the Sept. 11 Victim Compensation Fund in cooperation
with the next of kin of the deceased are all but assured of awards, Mr. Feinberg
said. But even situations in which the victim's family is not supportive will be
reviewed case by case, Mr. Feinberg said, with state law as the guiding
principle.

New York State does not recognize same-sex unions. But an executive order by
Gov. George E. Pataki in the wake of the terror attacks extending spousal
benefits to gay partners under the State Crime Victims Board was intended to
give Mr. Feinberg room to exercise discretion.

"If the next of kin is supportive and there's no dispute, it's a nonissue," Mr.
Feinberg said in an interview. "If the personal representative, say a parent,
comes to me and says, 'Cut a check for the same-sex partner,' there will be no
problem. Then it's a ministerial function. What do I care?"

In less clear-cut situations, Mr. Feinberg added, he will take into account that
New York's leaders, in a variety of post-9/11 actions, "have tried to improve
the likelihood that I can exercise my discretion and I will do my best." He
added that cases involving heterosexual domestic partners will be reviewed in
the same way.

The federal awards process unfolds in the context of decisions by the state and
city government and by the Red Cross that are supportive of the claims of the 22
known gay surviving partners of the terror attacks. These actions are not meant
to be a wholesale push to expand the rights of same-sex couples. Rather they are
a demonstration, halting and tentative, of how a national tragedy can result in
policy that would not have occurred otherwise. It is too early to say whether
any of the emergency benefits made available to survivors of Sept. 11 will be
extended to others.

"Clearly the momentum is specific to this event and won't necessarily be
replicated," said Lee. M. Miringoff, the director of the Marist College Poll,
commenting on the significance of the poll results. "But it does change the
political climate and it's hard to imagine totally turning back the clock."

The legalizing of gay marriage remains unpopular, opposed by a majority of
Americans. But polls show that most people support individual spousal benefits
for gay partners, whose unions are recognized by law only in Vermont and Hawaii.

Gay rights organizations, like the Empire Gay Pride Agenda and the Lambda Legal
Defense and Education Fund, have made inclusion in Sept. 11 relief efforts, and
especially the federal fund, a major priority, for the sake of the partners and
the political precedent it could set.

Still, recognition of survivors of gays is a polarizing issue for politicians.
Republicans in the House of Representatives shelved a Senate bill, opposed by
the Department of Justice, that would have provided death benefits to the
survivors of the Rev. Mychal Judge, a New York City Fire Department chaplain,
who was gay, and estates of nine other gay public safety officers who died at
the the World Trade Center. Father Judge's survivors were his sisters.

The loudest public outcry against assisting gay partners of Sept. 11 victims has
come from conservative organizations, like the Traditional Values Coalition in
Anaheim, Calif. Its founder, the Rev. Louis P. Sheldon, has said that charitable
organizations "should be giving priority to those widows who were home with
their babies" and that government agencies should not be swayed by advocates
"capitalizing on a national tragedy to promote their homosexual agenda."

But New York's elected leaders have supported the extension of aid. Mr. Pataki's
executive order to the Crime Victims Board entitles domestic partners to awards
up to $600 a week, to a total of $30,000, a benefit otherwise limited to
husbands or wives. The lesbian partner of a civilian Army employee who died at
the Pentagon, by contrast, was denied benefits by the comparable agency in
Virginia.

The governor also opened the state's Sept. 11 charitable fund to gay partners.
Along with other state and city elected leaders, Mr. Pataki petitioned the Bush
administration to define relationships, for the purposes of the federal fund, by
the "totality of circumstance," including "emotional and financial commitment"
and "exclusivity and longevity," not by the existence of marriage licenses. In
addition, in a recent 9/11 relief act passed unanimously by the State
Legislature, the preamble states that it is the lawmakers' intent that domestic
partners be recognized by Mr. Feinberg.

New York City joined the Pataki administration in its appeal to the federal
government and similarly made its Sept. 11 charity available to gay partners.
Yesterday, the City Council held a hearing on the difficulties faced by
surviving domestic partners, both homosexual and heterosexual, who are
ineligible for a safety net of government benefits, including Social Security,
Workers Compensation, military and uniformed service pensions and inheritance
rights in the absence of a will.

In addition, the Red Cross strengthened its policy of defining family in a
"broad and inclusive" way by adding guidelines and oversight. Faced with reports
of gay partners turned away by workers at the Family Assistance Center at Pier
94, the charity issued 16 criteria for determining a "financially
interdependent" couple; trained volunteers to interview same-sex partners; and
appointed an ombudsman to oversee their cases.

The emergency funds made available after Sept. 11 came too late for Mike Lyons
of Jersey City, who saw his partner of 18 years, John Keohane, killed by falling
debris as the two fled the collapsing towers. Mr. Lyons, unemployed and
suffering from multiple sclerosis, was slow to apply for financial assistance,
and was running out of money when he committed suicide on March 1.

Emergency aid kept Margaret Cruz afloat after the loss of her partner of 18
years, Patricia McAneney. Ms. McAneney's brother and sister-in-law filed for
both government and charitable funds. By law, they are entitled $50,000 in
Workers Compensation. But Ms. Cruz documented her financially interdependent
partnership and prevailed with the Crime Victim's Board, the Red Cross and the
New York State charitable fund. A total of $80,000 went to Ms. McAneney.

No decisions will mean more financially than those made by Mr. Feinberg, who
supervises a fund created by Congress, as part of the airline bailout package,
to compensate survivors of the terrorist attacks in return for their promise not
to sue. Awards are expected to average $1.85 million per family; the calculation
depends on the number of people entitled to money, among other criteria, and
could grow if next of kin and a domestic partner jointly apply.

"Some, I can't say most, will get generous awards," said Larry S. Stewart, a
Miami lawyer who is the president of Trial Lawyers Care, a consortium of more
than 1,200 lawyers offering free representation to the more than 3,000 eligible
families, including some of the gay partners. "And that will create positive
pressure for change."

Many of the 22 surviving gay partners have not been accepted by the next of kin,
seriously complicating their cases. William Randolph, for one, a part-time
organist at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine, lived in Harlem for 26
years with his partner, Wesley Mercer, vice president of corporate security at
Morgan Stanley. Mr. Mercer helped save all but 2 of the company's 3,300
employees.

Mr. Mercer never divorced his wife, Mr. Randolph said, so she will receive his
Army pension, Social Security and Workers Compensation. The Mercers had two
children, one deceased and the other grown and financially independent. Mr.
Randolph received a gift of $100,000 from Morgan Stanley, which was aware of the
men's long-term relationship, and he also received help from the Crime Victims
Board and the Red Cross.

Others, like David O'Leary of Yonkers, have the full backing of his partner's
family and thus fit Mr. Feinberg's definition of an easy claim to adjudicate.
Mr. O'Leary has tentatively begun the process by gathering documents as personal
as birthday cards and family photographs and as bureaucratic at joint bank
statements and utility bills.

Mr. O'Leary and Michael Lepore had lived together for 18 years and combined
their assets in every way. Mr. Lepore's mother, Jean Carlucci, has already
signed over her $50,000 lump sum payment from Workers Compensation. The youngest
of Mr. Lepore's three brothers, Anthony, the executor of the estate, has given
Mr. O'Leary momentos the survivors have greatly prized: the commemorative urn
and flag from the city and choice seats at ground zero ceremonies, which he
would otherwise have been denied.

"That's just how they have been," Mr. O'Leary said. "They look at me as
Michael's spouse, and think everything should go to me."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 2002



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about
federal compensation awards to the same-sex partners of Sept. 11 victims
referred imprecisely to legislation shelved by Congress that would have
guaranteed compensation to survivors of the public safety officers who died
without immediate next of kin. The legislation would have provided death
benefits to the estates of 10 officers who died without spouses, children or
living parents; it made no mention of their sexual orientation.

GRAPHIC: Photos: William Randolph, above, lost his partner, Wesley Mercer, and
has not been accepted by Mr. Mercer's next of kin. David O'Leary, seated far
left, has the support of the family of his partner, Michael Lepore, including
Mr. Lepore's brother Anthony, standing. Margaret Cruz, left, lost her partner,
Patricia McAneney. She testified yesterday at a City Council hearing. (Ruby
Washington/The New York Times); (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times); (Nicole
Bengiveno/The New York Times)(pg. B5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (93%); COHABITATION (89%); TERRORISM (89%); DOMESTIC
PARTNERSHIPS (89%); FAMILY (89%); DECRIMINALIZATION (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE &
UNIONS (78%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (78%); MARRIAGE (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(75%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (75%); HIJACKING (74%); VICTIMS RIGHTS
(73%); INTERVIEWS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (69%); POLLS
& SURVEYS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); CITIES (63%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (63%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE
CENTER (NYC);  HOMOSEXUALITY

PERSON: GROSS, JANE; FEINBERG, KENNETH R

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); HAWAII, USA (79%);
VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1087 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: THE TERROR SUSPECT;
Mother Hires Lawyer to Persuade Defendant to End Defense Plan

BYLINE:  AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 294 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, May 29


The mother of Zacarias Moussaoui, the the only person charged in connection with
the Sept. 11 attacks, has hired a civil rights lawyer here to persuade her son
to abandon his plans to represent himself at his trial.

The lawyer, Randall B. Hamud, an Arab-American, said Mr. Moussaoui's mother,
Aicha el-Wafi, of Narbonne, France, retained him last week.

"She wants him not to represent himself," Mr. Hamud said on Tuesday. "It's a
one-way ticket to the death chamber."

At a hearing last month, Mr. Moussaoui expressed a desire to dismiss his
court-appointed lawyers and said he was praying for the destruction of the
United States. He asked for a Muslim lawyer of his choice to advise him. Judge
Leonie M. Brinkema of Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., said she would
not rule on the request until Mr. Moussaoui had a mental examination to
determine whether the request was knowing and voluntarily.

Prosecutors have said they will seek the death penalty for Mr. Moussaoui, 33, a
French citizen of Moroccan descent. His trial is planned for October. He was
arrested on Aug. 16 in Minnesota after the authorities grew suspicious of his
conduct. He was in custody on Sept. 11.

"My goal is to get him represented," Mr. Hamud said. "I think that's an
honorable goal."

Mr. Moussaoui's lawyer, Gerald Zirkin, did not return a call.

Newsweek magazine first reported Mr. Hamud's role on its Web site. Mr. Hamud has
been a vociferous critic of the Justice Department's antiterrorism effort. He
has said Attorney General John Ashcroft is "putting the jackboot of repression
on my people" and called the case against Mr. Moussaoui weak and based on
circumstantial evidence.

Mr. Hamud declined to say whether he had F.B.I. clearance to meet Mr. Moussaoui
in jail in Virginia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aicha el-Wafi at home in Narbonne, France, in December with a
picture of her son Zacarias Moussaoui, who is charged in the Sept. 11 attacks.
(Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%); CAPITAL CRIMES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ARAB AMERICANS (78%); ARRESTS
(78%); HIJACKING (78%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (75%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (64%); WEB
SITES (50%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING

COMPANY: NEWSWEEK INC (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%)

PERSON: MOUSSAOUI, ZACARIAS; EL-WAFI, AICHA; HAMUD, RANDALL B

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); VIRGINIA, USA (91%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); MINNESOTA, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1089 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: IMMIGRATION;
Judge Rejects U.S. Policy of Secret Hearings

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 521 words


A federal judge in New Jersey yesterday rejected the government's policy of
holding only secret hearings for immigrants detained after Sept. 11.

The judge, John W. Bissell of United States District Court in Newark, said
deportation hearings could be closed on a case-by-case basis if the government
thought an open hearing would disclose sensitive information.

The decision was the third time that the Justice Department had failed to
convince a court that national security would be harmed by the disclosure of
information about the 1,200 Muslim immigrants arrested in the weeks after the
terrorist attacks.

The Justice Department was expected to ask for an immediate stayfrom the United
States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia.

The New Jersey lawsuit was filed by the American Civil Liberties Union; The New
Jersey Law Journal; and the North Jersey Media Group, which owns The Herald News
of West Paterson and other papers.

They argued that the government's blanket closing of deportation hearings
amounted to a violation of the detainees' due process rights and the public's
right to monitor the actions of government officials.

Essentially the same arguments have been made by newspapers and the civil rights
union in at least two other cases, one in federal court in Detroit that
challenged the secret hearings and the other in New Jersey state court
challenging the government's refusal to identify the Sept. 11 detainees.

In both cases, judges ruled against the government. The two cases are now before
appeals courts.

"This decision, like the Detroit decision, does not leave the government
powerless to close hearings where they believe there is sensitive information,"
said Lee Gelernt, a senior lawyer for the civil liberties union. "What the
decision does not permit the government to do is categorically close down every
immigration hearing from beginning to end, without specific evidence in an
individual case of why it must be secret."

The rulings may ultimately affect the cases of only a few dozen people still
thought to be in detention. Most of those arrested after the Sept. 11 attacks
have been deported or, in a few cases, have been released.

In nearly all cases, their names and the reasons for their arrests have never
been disclosed by the Justice Department or the Immigration and Naturalization
Service.

Government lawyers have argued that making that information public, as well as
opening their deportation hearings, would put the detainees at risk and
jeopardize terrorism investigations.

Deportation hearings normally are open to the public. But on Sept. 21, Michael
J. Creppy, the nation's chief immigration judge, issued an order barring the
press, the public and family members from attending hearings for those "special
interest" detainees arrested after the terrorist attacks.

Judge Creppy also ordered immigration courts to keep the hearing dates and
docket information secret.

In his ruling yesterday, Judge Bissell said he was not persuaded that closed
deportation hearings amounted to "an acceptable means of avoiding a compromise
of the government's investigation."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); JUDGES (92%); PUBLIC POLICY (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(89%); LAWYERS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (78%); VERDICTS (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (78%); DUE PROCESS (77%);
APPEALS COURTS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); HIJACKING (75%); APPEALS (74%);
REFUGEES (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%) TERRORISM;
DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

COMPANY: NORTH JERSEY MEDIA GROUP INC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%)

PERSON: BISSELL, JOHN W (JUDGE); SACHS, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1090 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: THE INQUIRY;
Ashcroft Permits F.B.I. to Monitor Internet and Public Activities

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


Attorney General John Ashcroft said today that he was stepping up the fight
against terrorism by expanding the F.B.I.'s authority to monitor the World Wide
Web, political groups, libraries and religious organizations, including houses
of worship like mosques.

Mr. Ashcroft said guidelines restricting the bureau, imposed a quarter of a
century ago in response to abuses by federal law enforcement officials, were
outdated and left investigators at a disadvantage in fighting terrorism today.

"Men and women of the F.B.I. in the field are frustrated because many of our own
internal restrictions have hampered our ability to fight terrorism," Mr.
Ashcroft said to reporters.

"In many instances," he added, "the guidelines bar F.B.I. field agents from
taking the initiative to detect and prevent future terrorist attacks, or act
unless the bureau learns of possible criminal activity from external sources."

Mr. Ashcroft said the old guidelines prohibited F.B.I. investigators from
surfing the Web "in the same way that you and I can look for information."
Justice Department officials said that under 1999 guidelines, the Policies for
Online Criminal Investigation, F.B.I. agents could not search for leads on the
Internet but could use it only in cases where a criminal investigation had been
established.

For example, one official said, agents would have been permitted in recent
months to look at Web sites for information about anthrax because of the
agency's broad investigation of anthrax-contaminated letters to officials.

But agents would not have been allowed to search the Internet for information
about smallpox's potential as a biological weapon, he said, because it was not
the subject of a criminal investigation.

Those guidelines are based on principles dating to the days of President Gerald
R. Ford and Attorney General Edward H. Levi that prohibited agents from using
publicly available sources of information like libraries to collect information,
except in a criminal investigation. An investigation requires some complaint of
wrongdoing.

The prohibitions were a reaction to Cointelpro, an F.B.I. domestic spying
operation aimed at disrupting political groups. Its best-known target was the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. The guidelines were based on the principle that
federal agents should not compile dossiers on people and groups without some
reason to be believe a crime had been committed.

The changes announced today by Mr. Ashcroft are certain to produce a new chapter
in the debate over whether the nation's security agencies are updating
antiquated policies to combat terrorism or simply taking advantage of the Sept.
11 attacks and their aftermath to obtain new powers.

Kate Martin, a policy analyst at the Center for National Security Studies, a
civil liberties group in Washington, said Mr. Ashcroft's unilateral announcement
of the changes "shows that the administration continues to be disdainful of any
open policy-making."

Other changes imposed by Mr. Ashcroft will allow supervisors in the bureau's 56
field offices to initiate counterterrorism inquiries without approval from
headquarters in Washington. Agents will also be allowed once again to search
commercial databases without the need to show a crime may have been committed,
as was required before today.

As for attending events at places like mosques, the change reads: "For the
purpose of detecting or preventing terrorist activities, the F.B.I. is
authorized to visit any place and attend any event that is open to the public,
on the same terms and conditions as members of the public generally."

As the bureau dealt in recent weeks with criticism that it mishandled
information that could have uncovered the Sept. 11 plot, senior officials at the
Justice Department and the bureau have adopted a posture of acknowledging that
serious mistakes were made. As part of that approach, Mr. Ashcroft used the
widely praised complaint of Coleen Rowley, a senior agent in Minneapolis, to
help justify his changes.

Ms. Rowley had said officials at F.B.I. headquarters stymied investigations that
might have uncovered the Sept. 11 plot. Mr. Ashcroft said his changes would help
agents in the field, like Ms. Rowley.

At the White House today, President Bush joined in sending the administration's
message that the bureau had serious problems but that recent changes would put
it on the right track.

"The F.B.I. needed to change," Mr. Bush said. "It was an organization full of
fine people who loved America, but the organization didn't meet the times."

A joint investigation of the government's performance before Sept. 11 by the
House and Senate intelligence committees will begin next week.

An aide to Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida and chairman of the Select
Committee on Intelligence, said today that the first closed hearings, on
Tuesday, would be for briefings by the committee's investigative staff.

The aide, Paul Anderson, said staff investigators would brief the members of the
House and Senate panels on their findings from a review of more than 100,000
pages of documents and testimony from 175 witnesses. No witnesses are scheduled
to appear in the first week of hearings, Mr. Anderson said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General John Ashcroft, left, discussed new F.B.I.
guidelines yesterday. His deputy, Larry D. Thompson, and an agent were beside
him. (Carol T. Powers for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (93%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (93%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); RELIGION (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); ANTHRAX (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CHEMICAL &
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (78%); INTERNET CRIME (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); SEARCH ENGINES (67%); SMALLPOX (64%);
ESPIONAGE (61%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%) TERRORISM;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS
BY GOVERNMENT;  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION; JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

PERSON: ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); LEWIS, NEIL A

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1093 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 31, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

String of Diplomats Begin Arriving for New Mideast Effort

BYLINE:  By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, May 30


A covey of diplomats began arriving here today in renewed efforts to find a way
out of the deadly impasse between Israel and the Palestinians, as the Israeli
Army continued what have by now become nearly daily raids into Palestinian
territory.

The first to arrive was William J. Burns, the American assistant secretary of
state for Near Eastern affairs, who flew in today from Cairo and met with the
Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, in Ramallah. On Friday he is to see the
Israeli foreign minister, Shimon Peres, and the prime minister, Ariel Sharon.

Mr. Sharon, riding huge poll numbers, won another victory today when the
scrupulously religious Shas Party said it would rejoin his government and vote
for a belt-tightening economic package. Last week, Mr. Sharon dismissed Shas
ministers when the party opposed the package, though the 17 seats the party
holds in the fragmented Parliament are crucial to holding a majority.

The Palestinian Authority, meanwhile, formally announced today that Yasir Arafat
had finally signed the Basic Law, a kind of constitution, that had been voted by
the Palestinian legislature and had sat, unapproved, on his desk for the last
five years. The step was interpreted as a nod to the pressure for reform.

Even as the Sharon government continued to tighten security measures, the
authorities, in an announcement certain to unsettle Israelis, said tonight that
they had arrested a Palestinian man and his Jewish Israeli wife as prime
suspects in helping organize the May 22 suicide bombing in Rishon le Zion.

They were identified as as Ibrahim Sarahana, 33, from the Bethlehem area, and
Marina Pinski, 26, who immigrated here from Russia 11 years ago. They were said
to have driven the 16-year-old suicide bomber to the mall, which Mr. Sarahana
choose as a target.

"Such complicity on the part of Israeli Jews is almost unheard of," Reuters
quoted the Israeli police spokesman as saying.

Before dawn, Israel sent tanks and dozens of armored personnel carriers and
jeeps into the West Bank city of Hebron, where they arrested four Palestinians.
They included an Islamic Jihad leader, Muhammad Sider, who Palestinian officials
said had been the target of two Israeli assassination attempts.

The army pulled out of Hebron by midday, and it left Bethlehem tonight, after
four days of undertaking house-to-house searches and maintaining sniper
positions around Manger Square.

At the same time, the army said it had detained six Palestinians in a village
near Tulkarm, and had gone back into Jenin and imposed a curfew on the city. At
least one explosion was heard there. There was also skirmishing in Gaza, with 11
Palestinians reported wounded.

Early Friday, dozens of Israeli armored personnel carriers and several tanks
thrust into the Balata refugee camp on the outskirts of Nablus, where they met
heavy Palestinian fire, Reuters reported Palestinian witnesses as saying.

"Humanitarian problems, the daily humiliation that ordinary Palestinians suffer
under occupation are getting worse every day," Mr. Burns told reporters during a
stopover in Cairo, where he met with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt before
arriving in Israel.

One aspect of what Palestinians see as that humiliation -- roadblocks -- has
become increasingly evident. All week there have been long lines at the two
checkpoints leading from Ramallah to Jerusalem, and new roadblocks have been set
up in the northern districts of the city.

Also, An Israeli human rights group charged today that Israeli soldiers had
killed a 17-year-old Palestinian in their custody in Ramallah during the army's
raid earlier this spring, and demanded an official investigation. The right's
group, B'Tselem, said that the Palestinian, Murad Awaisa, was taken away from
other detainees on March 31 and was later found with one bullet near his heart
and another in his knee.

Mr. Burns is to be joined here on Monday by the director of central
intelligence, George J. Tenet, who is tasked with reforming the Palestinian
Authority and its hydra-headed security forces.

Other diplomatic visitors include Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany
and, in the coming days, the European Union's foreign policy chief, Javier
Solana, and Osama al-Baz, the Egyptian presidential adviser, who is to arrive
here ahead of a visit to Washington by Mr. Mubarak.

Mr. Arafat apparently signed the Basic Law Tuesday night, officials said, but it
was not formally announced until today. His spokesman, Nabil Abu Rdeneh, said
the law was part of the reforms that Mr. Arafat had promised in a speech to the
legislative council two weeks ago.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMIES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(89%); TERRORISM (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR (77%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); ASSASSINATION (76%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (76%); RELIGION (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); ARMED FORCES
(72%); IMMIGRATION (70%); REFUGEES (70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (69%); POLICE FORCES
(68%); CURFEW (65%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (60%) Terms not available from
NYTimes.

PERSON: SHIMON PERES (58%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (88%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EGYPT (88%)

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1095 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Official Warns Asians to Guard Against Terror

BYLINE:  By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, May 31


Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz warned America's allies in Asia today
to keep their guard up against terrorist activities within their borders,
cautioning that even nations with large Muslim populations remain targets for
attack by Islamic extremists.

"I still think the terrorism problem is felt as a little bit remote, as a little
bit America's problem," Mr. Wolfowitz told reporters traveling with him to a
three-day regional security conference here that ends on Sunday. "It's not just
America's problem. The targets also very explicitly include the 500 million
Muslims who live in the Pacific Rim."

Mr. Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Indonesia, said he intended to use his
stature as the highest-ranking Pentagon official to visit Southeast Asia since
the Sept. 11 attacks to underscore that the Bush administration's long-term
goals in the capaign against terror extended well beyond Afghanistan.

"Perhaps, they may not realize quite how committed the United States is or quite
how long we expect this to take," Mr. Wolfowitz said, referring to Asian allies,
a few hours before separate meetings with military officials from Indonesia,
Singapore and India.

On Monday, Mr. Wolfowitz is to fly to the southern Philippines to meet with
American troops who are helping Philippine soldiers hunt down a small band of
Muslim extremists, known as Abu Sayyaf, who are holding two American hostages,
Martin and Gracia Burnham.

Bush administration officials have generally praised the help they are receiving
from Singapore, Malaysia and the Philippines in rooting out terrorists and their
training grounds. But Mr. Wolfowitz and other top American officials are gently
prodding Indonesia to step up its efforts.

"Could they do more? Probably," Mr. Wolfowitz said before his meeting with
Matori Abdul Djalil, Indonesia's defense minister.

After the meeting, Mr. Matori said his government was committed to combating
terrorists throughout the archipelago's 13,000 islands, but ruled out sending
American troops to Indonesia to assist, a step that officials in both countries
have concluded would stir anti-American sentiment.

Administration officials have long worried that Al Qaeda could intensify its
focus on Asia.

"The Southeast Asians, in particular, have had the experience of some very
serious bad actors connected to Al Qaeda planning and conducting terrorist
activities in their countries," Mr. Wolfowitz said.

As members of Osama bin Laden's terrorist network have fled Afghanistan, "their
main refuge so far has not been Southeast Asia," Mr. Wolfowitz said. "But every
time you cut them off in one place, they're going to look for other places.
Southeast Asian countries remain vulnerable for that reason."

Earlier this year, the F.B.I. said Malaysia was a staging area for the Sept. 11
attacks and a base for Al Qaeda. Malaysian officials have rejected that
assessment, saying it was unfair to describe Malaysia as anything more than a
"transit point" for Qaeda operatives.

But American investigators say that Muslim extremists in Malaysia appear to have
organized "sleeper cells" of Islamic militants throughout Southeast Asia, and
that they may have given direction to a network based here in neighboring
Singapore, which had planned to blow up the embassies here of the United States,
Israel, Australia and Britain.

The plot was apparently foiled when 13 terror suspects were arrested in
Singapore, a tiny, tightly policed city-state, late last year. During
interrogations, officials here said, the suspects described a well-organized
terror network stretching across several nations in Southeast Asia, including
the Philippines, which has a large Muslim population, and Indonesia, the most
populous Muslim nation.

Indonesia faces increasing breakdowns in law and order, as well as separatist
movements in two major provinces, and Mr. Wolfowitz today reaffirmed the
Pentagon's call to resume relations with the Indonesian military.

The United States severed military ties three years ago in response to
atrocities the Indonesian Army committed in East Timor. Mr. Matori, the defense
minister, told Mr. Wolfowitz and a Congressional delegation attending the
conference here that the Indonesia military had made several important changes,
including putting the armed forces under civilian control and establishing
tribunals for human rights violators.

Critics, including the author of the sanctions, Senator Patrick J. Leahy,
Democrat of Vermont, have expressed skepticism about the changes. But two
senators influential in foreign affairs, Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican, and
Jack Reed, a Rhode Island Democrat, voiced confidence today that Congress would
approve some conditional assistance by this summer.

The Pentagon wants Congress to help finance a plan for training and equipping a
domestic peacekeeping force to help Indonesia quell sectarian violence. It also
wants lawmakers to approve money to assist the Indonesians to establish their
own counterterrorism unit.

"Democracy in Indonesia is not going to survive without an effective and
reformed military," Mr. Wolfowitz said. "There's no question about the need for
reforming the Indonesian military. They've made some steps. They still have more
they need to do. We want to give some carrot as well as some stick. So far, it's
been pretty much all stick."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz talked with George
Fernandes, India's defense minister, yesterday in Singapore during the opening
dinner for a three-day regional security conference. (Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); RELIGION (77%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (74%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%);
ISLANDS & REEFS (62%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

ORGANIZATION: ABU SAYYAF GROUP (54%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ASIA (96%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (94%); MALAYSIA
(94%); INDONESIA (94%); SINGAPORE (94%); PHILIPPINES (93%); INDIA (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1102 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

City Landlords Get a Primer For Spotting Terrorist Tenants

BYLINE:  By JACOB H. FRIES

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 587 words


Landlords should be suspicious of tenants who insist on first-floor apartments,
have little furniture, use cash, prefer pay phones and try to hide their
identities, New York Police Department officials said yesterday at a briefing on
fighting terrorism.

The closed three-hour meeting at 1 Police Plaza drew 250 landlords and real
estate executives, who were given a 38-page handbook that covered topics
including understanding terrorist goals and spotting fake passports and
pipe-bomb ingredients.

"The most counterintuitive thing is to take everything seriously and report it,"
said Dan Margulies, director of the Community Housing Improvement Program, a
trade association, after the briefing by the police counterterrorism division.
"We have to get over this blase mindset that, 'It's New York; why should I
report someone standing on their head?' "

Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the meeting was in response to recent
uncorroborated reports that terrorists might rent apartments and plant
explosives in them, a tactic used by Chechen rebels in Russia in 1999.

The manual, "New York City Board of Realtors Training," devoted seven pages to
identifying suspicious or odd behavior, which real estate professionals said was
generally ignored -- if not embraced outright -- in a city as diverse as New
York.

Citing Qaeda documents, the report said terrorists might insist on living on the
first floor in the middle of a block, because that provides the most escape
options. They prefer transient areas or new buildings, rather than older
neighborhoods where people are familiar with one other, it said.

The report said Qaeda operatives hid their tracks by using cash and changing
their appearance. The report quoted a terrorist manual as saying, "An undercover
member should have a general appearance that does not include Islamic
orientation, such as a beard, toothpick, long shirt or small Koran."

Similar police briefings will be held in the coming weeks for officials in the
financial district and entertainment industry, and for the general public, Mr.
Kelly said yesterday. He also announced a new hot line, 888-NYC-SAFE
(888-692-7233), for reporting suspicious activity.

"The art of the game will be to keep people informed and to develop a confidence
that together we cannot only make improvements, but deal with this terrible
threat," said Frank Libutti, the deputy police commissioner of counterterrorism.

Reaction among landlords and representatives of building owners was varied. Many
said that their buildings were secured, with cameras and doormen in place.

Joseph Strasburg, president of the Rent Stabilization Association, a property
owners group, said that among the useful recommendations to landlords was that
they perform thorough background checks and insist on seeing original documents,
not photocopies, to establish the identities of potential tenants.

"We need to establish a detailed protocol for screening all tenants," he said.

Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said
that she had not read the Police Department's report, but she added that she
worried that landlords might ignore people's rights in the name of security.

"Since Sept. 11, the government has intruded on individual privacy rights in
areas beyond the war on terrorism," she said. "We hate to see the same thing
happen with regard to landlords and tenants, and we hope that this does not turn
into a situation where landlords engage in illegal spying, harassment or
discrimination."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); POLICE
FORCES (90%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RENT CONTROL (79%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (78%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%);
COUNTERFEITING (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (62%); RELIGION (62%); ENTERTAINMENT &
ARTS (61%) Terms not available from NYTimes.

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1104 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Misdirected Snooping Doesn't Stop Terror

BYLINE:  By David Cole;  David Cole is a professor at Georgetown University Law
Center and an attorney with the Center for Constitutional Rights.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Attorney General John Ashcroft announced last week that he has freed F.B.I.
agents from restrictions on counterterrorism investigations, he no doubt hoped
to ease the concerns of Americans alarmed by F.B.I. blunders before Sept. 11.
But the mistakes that kept the F.B.I. from picking up on hints of the violence
to come arose from a failure of vision, not an absence of legal authority. The
agency needs to focus on terrorist crime; it doesn't need to indulge in wasteful
and undemocratic monitoring of legitimate political and religious activity.

The guidelines that Mr. Ashcroft amended had restricted F.B.I. spying absent
some information about a potential federal crime. They were adopted in response
to the F.B.I.'s widespread political spying on antiwar and civil rights groups
and other dissident organizations and movements in the 1960's, 1970's and
1980's. Even under the restrictions, some F.B.I. counterterrorism investigations
have featured blanket monitoring of political groups, rather than a careful
focus on prevention and deterrence where crime is actually likely. The Ashcroft
guidelines will take the F.B.I. even further in that direction.

One example of what can go wrong when the F.B.I. loses its criminal focus goes
back to the 80's, when the F.B.I., concerned about possible terrorism at the Los
Angeles Olympics, began investigating a group of politically active Palestinian
students in Los Angeles. The bureau used electronic wiretapping, videotaping and
round-the-clock surveillance. For three years agents attended public
demonstrations and meetings, seized literature and had it translated, and
reported on the "anti-Reagan" slogans chanted at rallies. Tracking the group's
distribution of a Palestinian magazine as if it were drugs, they intercepted
copies at the Los Angeles airport, weighed the boxes to estimate how many each
contained and then spent countless hours tailing the people who picked them up.
In 1986, agents attended a public community dinner the students held to
celebrate Palestinian culture and politics. Although none of the agents could
speak or understand Arabic, they reported afterward that by observing posters of
people with assault rifles, the "tone" of the speeches, and "the music and
entire mood" of the gathering, they had divined that it was a fund-raising event
for terrorism.

In the end, according to Congressional testimony in 1987 by William Webster, the
former F.B.I. director, the bureau found no evidence that anyone in this group
had engaged in anything criminal, much less terrorist. Yet rather than close the
investigation, the F.B.I. wrote a 1,400-page report in 1986 urging the
Immigration and Naturalization Service to deport these people to hamper their
political activities. The eight were arrested -- because, Mr. Webster testified,
"they are alleged to be members of a worldwide Communist organization which
under the McCarran Act makes them eligible for deportation." Fifteen years
later, while they lead productive lives and raise families, the F.B.I. and the
I.N.S. continue to seek their deportation (and I continue to defend them on a
pro bono basis).

It is legitimate, of course, to investigate individuals or organizations where
there is credible suspicion that they are engaged in or planning criminal
conduct. But when investigations go on for years and focus entirely on lawful
political activity, the F.B.I. is not only wasting its time but violating
constitutional rights.

All of the actions against the students I represent were undertaken under the
guidelines that Mr. Ashcroft found too restrictive. The new guidelines, which
remove even the threshold requirement of information of a potential crime, are
virtually certain to deflect the attention of law enforcement from stopping
terrorist acts toward policing lawful political activities. Rather than inviting
the F.B.I. to indulge in political spying and reach conclusions of guilt by
association, we should demand that the bureau fight crime, not political
dissent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); WIRETAPPING (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (84%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%);
HIJACKING (76%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (75%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ARRESTS (71%); FUNDRAISING (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); TESTIMONY (63%); FIREARMS (63%);
IMMIGRATION (62%); AIRLINES (62%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
PENTAGON BUILDING;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE;  INTELLIGENCE SERVICES;  SURVEILLANCE OF CITIZENS BY GOVERNMENT;
WIRETAPPING AND OTHER EAVESDROPPING DEVICES AND METHODS;  FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND
EXPRESSION

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%) FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION

PERSON: ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); COLE, DAVID (PROF)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1106 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

5 Passengers Say Airlines Discriminated By Looks

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 642 words


In separate civil rights lawsuits filed yesterday, five men said they were
wrongly removed from commercial airline flights after Sept. 11 solely because
other travelers or crew members objected to their Middle Eastern appearance.

The men, four of them American citizens and one a legal permanent resident, said
they had undergone intensive security checks at the airports and boarded their
flights, only to be told that others were uncomfortable with them on board.

In one instance, two men said they and another man were ordered off a
Continental Airlines flight at Newark International Airport after a woman on the
plane pointed them out to the captain as "those brown-skinned men." Moments
later, they said, they were escorted off the plane. The flight left without
them.

Lawyers for the five men said they do not challenge the airlines' right to
conduct security inspections and, in some cases, to remove suspicious passengers
when the pilot deems it necessary for the safety of the flight.

But the sole basis for suspicion, they said, should not be a passenger's skin
color, ethnicity, religion or foreign-sounding name.

"Some of our clients know that because of the way they look, they'll always be
'randomly' selected for security checks," said Reginald T. Shuford, a staff
lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, which is representing the
plaintiffs. "What takes this to a new level is that despite complying with all
that's asked of them, they can get on an airplane and some other passenger can
say he's uncomfortable and the person gets kicked off."

Officials at three of the four airlines accused in the litigation -- American,
United and Continental -- declined to comment on the specific charges but said
their policies strongly prohibit discrimination. Northwest Airlines, the fourth
airline, issued a statement supporting the actions of its employees in removing
the plaintiff in one of the suits.

The incident involving Continental Airlines, which was cited in two of the
lawsuits, occurred on New Year's Eve on a flight that was to leave Newark for
Tampa, Fla., according to the plaintiffs, who filed their suit in Federal
District Court in Newark.

Edgardo Cureg, a mathematics student at the University of South Florida, said he
was sitting in the first-class section of that plane, speaking to a professor
from his university, when both of them were ordered off the aircraft with no
explanation. Mr. Cureg, 34, is from the Philippines and said the professor was
from Sri Lanka.

A third man, Michael Dasrath, a financial analyst born in Guyana who was also
sitting in first class, was also ordered off the plane. As he recounted the
episode at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday, he was doing nothing but
sitting in his seat when he noticed a woman glaring at him.

The woman pointed at him and called the captain over, he said. "These are her
direct words that I heard her say to the captain: 'those brown-skinned men are
behaving suspiciously.' "

Mr. Cureg and Mr. Dasrath said that all three men were later given seats on a
Continental flight to Orlando, Fla., where the airline provided a car to take
them to the Tampa airport.

In the other lawsuits, filed in California and Maryland, passengers of Southeast
Asian and Arab backgrounds said they were ordered off flights with the
explanation that their presence made crew members or other passengers
uncomfortable.

The lawsuits underscore concerns about racial profiling that have been raised
repeatedly by civil rights advocates since the terror attacks and have fueled a
sharp increase in complaints to state and federal agencies.

A spokesman for the federal Department of Transportation, for example, said 195
discrimination complaints were received between Sept. 11 and April 30, 2002,
while only 68 such complaints were filed during the same period the year before.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRLINES (93%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (90%); AIRPORTS (90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (84%); LAWYERS
(78%); AVIATION SECURITY (78%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TERRORISM (73%); INSPECTIONS (72%); ETHNICITY (67%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (62%) AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  DISCRIMINATION;  SECURITY AND
WARNING SYSTEMS;  TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;
HIJACKING;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

COMPANY: UNITED CONTINENTAL HOLDINGS INC (92%); DELTA AIR LINES INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

TICKER: UAL (NYSE) (92%); DAL (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (92%); NAICS481112 SCHEDULED
FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (92%); NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR
TRANSPORTATION (92%)

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (93%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); NEW JERSEY, USA (93%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); GUYANA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1112 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 9, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

COMMUNITIES;
Extra Innings?

BYLINE:  By NANCY HAGGERTY

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: PORT CHESTER


BARBARA MALDONADO and Crystal Rudolph, postal workers in Port Chester, just
wanted to play a little softball this spring, on the post office team. The
village's softball league was traditionally all male, but that didn't seem to be
a problem.

And then it was.

Amid charges of discrimination and with legal action possibly looming, the Port
Chester Recreation Commission is expected to decide Wednesday whether to follow
the advice of the village attorney and recommend that the village's all-male
softball leagues be open to women, or to support the Recreation Department,
which banned the two women last month, citing safety concerns.

The nine-member commission, which includes four women, will send its findings to
the village's Board of Trustees for a ruling. Mayor Gerald L. Logan said a
public hearing might be scheduled before the vote.

Thomas Hroncich, recreation superintendent, said he had invited the two women,
all the male softball players in the league and the league umpires to speak
before the commission.

Calling it a "total error in judgment," Mr. Hroncich said that he had initially
permitted the women to join the team. They played on May 14, and less than a
week later Mr. Hroncich reversed himself. He said while an actual complaint had
not been lodged, their participation had been brought to the attention of his
assistant, Heather Krakowski, the program's director, who raised the safety
question.

"I don't think it's sexist or unfair at all," Mr. Hroncich said, defending his
ultimate decision. "It's a men's league. It just presents a safety condition.
It's not open to women. We have a girls' volleyball program. It's not open to
men. It was just bad judgment on my part to allow something to take place that's
never taken place before."

Others disagree.

Anthony Cerreto, the village attorney, said that he was recommending that the
women be allowed to play.

Linda Berns, executive director of the Westchester Chapter of the New York Civil
Liberties Union, maintained that it was illegal to ban women.

"It's quite clear women are being discriminated against," Ms. Berns said. "This
is 2002. It's certainly a violation based on sex. If this is on village property
and is a village-run league there is no reason it should be segregated.
Segregation went out in the 60's."

Ms. Berns said her group would be "very interested in getting involved and will
watch this very carefully."

Port Chester, which has 18 men's teams divided into two leagues, has neither a
women's nor a coed league. Mr. Hroncich acknowledged that the village did not
ask male softball players for either injury or illness histories before they
played.

Brian Miles, vice president of the Spain Agency in Mahopac, which handles
village insurance, said the program is listed with his company simply as "Adult
Softball." The policy covers up to $2,500 a person toward medical expenses.
Probably 10,000 people a year in Port Chester participating in recreational
activities and special events fall under this coverage, he said.

The village's liability policy also makes no male/female distinction.

"Everybody is covered," he said.

Miss Maldonado, said after being dropped from the team she was told the village
would start a women's league if she could recruit enough players for four teams.
She wasn't interested.

"I want to play now," she said. "This is just for fun. It isn't the World Series
or anything." The league's 14-game season is scheduled to end July 30.

Miss Maldonado, 23, who earned All-City softball honors in high school in the
Bronx, dismissed the village's safety concerns.

She and Miss Rudolph were better players than half the men in the league, she
said, so it wasn't likely they would get hurt.

"The odds of them getting hurt are 100 percent higher," she said.

Tim Maher, the team captain, was glad to have the women on his team. He
attributed the dispute to men fearing "beat-by-a-girl syndrome."

"My speculation is that it's an old boys' network," he said, adding that his
female players were good and "fit right in."

Miss Rudolph, who is in her late 30's, characterized the league's attitude as:
"This is all men and we don't want any sissies around."

"Sports doesn't just have a man's name on it," she argued.

Miss Maldonado added: "It is discrimination. We love the game. All my life I've
had to put up with things like this."

Mr. Hroncich said the question of the women playing should have been posed in
the preseason and said he wondered whether they were better than their teammates
and were added to bolster their team.

"Does this give them some benefit?" he asked. "Is it about winning rather than
playing?"

Miss Maldonado played second and flied out in her only at bat, while Miss
Rudolph played third and scored her team's lone run in a 13-1 loss. Both women
said opposition players praised them during the game.

Mr. Maher said with his team 0-2, he had asked to add the women because 4
players from the original 15-member squad had dropped out.

The mayor said he would wait for the commission's report before deciding how to
vote but added that having mixed teams could be "very healthy" and that he was
not "closed to it."

"Certainly there are some talented players who are being shut out," he said.

Mr. Hroncich, who said he should have contacted the commission for its opinion
before allowing the women to play, noted that his department was currently
surveying other municipalities about their policies and that information would
be available at this week's meeting.

None of nine Westchester communities recently contacted prohibit women from
playing on male softball teams.

"It wouldn't be an issue," said Henry Atterbury, superintendent of recreation
and parks in Ossining.

Arne Abramowitz, commissioner of parks and recreation in White Plains, said
women currently play on men's basketball teams and had been on male softball
teams in the past. Ron Belmont, recreation superintendent in Harrison, said a
woman played eight to 10 years ago there.

And in Yonkers, August Cambria, deputy recreation commissioner, answered,
"Absolutely."

"If a girl wanted to play, we would let them," he said. "They're more than
welcome."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barbara Maldonado, a postal worker in Port Chester, who wants to
play softball on the post office team. But the village's league is traditionally
all male, and Miss Maldonado and a co-worker, Crystal Rudolph, have been banned
by the village recreation department. (Suzy Allman for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SOFTBALL (93%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); MAYORS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%);
LITIGATION (77%); LAWYERS (76%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (76%); SPORTS INJURIES (73%);
REFEREES & UMPIRES (72%); CULTURE DEPARTMENTS (71%); EXECUTIVES (64%) SOFTBALL;
WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION

PERSON: MALDONADO, BARBARA; RUDOLPH, CRYSTAL; HAGGERTY, NANCY

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (73%)

REGION: PORT CHESTER (NY)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1117 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 12, 2002 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: THE DISCLOSURES;
Questions of Timing Arise With New Information

BYLINE:  By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


The announcement by Attorney General John Ashcroft of the arrest of a man
accused of planning to explode a radioactive device was a notable change from
the administration's position that it would not disclose information about the
plots it disrupted.

Some Democrats and civil liberties advocates have questioned whether the
disclosure was timed to help counter criticism that the authorities, especially
those at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had mishandled signals that might
have uncovered the Sept. 11 plot. They questioned whether the disclosure about
the case of Jose Padilla, also known as Abdullah al-Muhajir, was part of a
pattern in which the administration orchestrated its announcements to help it
politically.

"Every time it looks as though the administration is going to face criticism,
they emerge with a request for expanded powers or a new announcement," said
Laura W. Murphy, the director of the Washington office of the American Civil
Liberties Union. " What they seem to be doing is timing things so they drown out
really aggressive inquiry into their performance."

Representative Henry Waxman, Democrat of California, said it was not possible to
know whether the announcement's timing was being manipulated. "But," Mr. Waxman
said, "it's hard to ignore that there seems to be a pattern that makes it appear
they are being quite political in their calculations of the timing of these
announcements."

Mr. Waxman also cited President Bush's announcement of a new Department of
Homeland Security on the same day the Senate Judiciary Committee was hearing
testimony from Coleen Rowley, the F.B.I. agent who accused the bureau of
bungling warnings before Sept. 11.

One administration official said the timing of the Monday announcement was
forced by circumstances beyond their control. The official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity, said the arrest of Mr. Padilla was announced when he was
transferred to military authorities from civilian custody.

"If the information were to get out and not be in the full context," the
official said, "it would be confusing and a lot more alarming to the public."

The official said that when the military took custody of Mr. Padilla, Defense
Department officials felt obliged to tell members of Congress on the Armed
Forces committees, and that meant that the information might soon become public
knowledge.

Other law enforcement officials said the timing of the announcement of the
Padilla arrest was driven by prosecutors' having to appear at a hearing in a New
York federal court to show that Mr. Padilla was indicted in order to keep him in
custody. The officials said they did not have enough evidence to indict him.
Other officials assert they chose not to indict Mr. Padilla because they would
have had to disclose investigative details they wanted to keep secret.

The officials acknowledged, however, that once they decided to disclose the
arrest and the accusation that Mr. Padilla was seeking to manufacture a
radioactive, or dirty, bomb, they rushed to ensure that the first announcement
could be made by Mr. Ashcroft, even though he was in Moscow on a previously
scheduled trip.

Officials worked quickly to arrange a video hookup for Mr. Ashcroft, who laced
his announcement with praise for the F.B.I. and its ability to deter terrorist
attacks.

Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the majority leader, told reporters today
that he had questions about the timing of the Padilla announcement, but said he
was "confident that the administration would not politicize this issue."

Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center, said that although he had no
knowledge of whether the administration orchestrated the timing of the Padilla
announcement, "it's certainly easy to be cynical about it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); AL-QAEDA (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (64%); NATIONAL SECURITY (64%); HIJACKING (64%)
TERRORISM;  BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES;  RADIATION;  ATOMIC WEAPONS;  AIRLINES AND
AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (54%) FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; AL QAEDA

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%); HENRY WAXMAN (70%) LEWIS, NEIL A; PADILLA, JOSE
(ABDULLAH AL-MUHAJIR); ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (PRES)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 14, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bill Would Broaden Powers Of Police to Fight Terrorism

BYLINE:  By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 13


Gov. George E. Pataki and his Republican colleagues in the State Senate today
unveiled a bill that is meant to give state and local police some of the same
powers in fighting terrorists that federal authorities have.

The governor said the Republican-led Senate had agreed to pass the 37-page bill
on Monday and urged the Democratic majority in the Assembly to approve it as
well. "We are a target," Mr. Pataki said. "America and New York are both
targets, and we have to give law enforcement every tool we can, consistent with
our freedoms."

The bill immediately raised concerns from some liberal Democrats in the
Assembly, as well as the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties
Union.

The legislation would make possessing or using chemical or biological weapons an
offense punishable by life in prison. It would also establish new felony charges
for laundering money for a terrorist organization, conspiring to commit an act
of terrorism or aiding terrorists.

The bill would permit, in terrorism investigations, roving wiretaps, which let
the police listen in on any phone line a person uses, and would no longer
require that the authorities corroborate the testimony of an accomplice. It
would also allow prosecutors to use evidence obtained through an illegal search
if the police officer "acted in good faith."

In addition, the bill would let state prosecutors charge terrorism suspects even
if they faced federal charges and would remove the statute of limitations on
terrorist acts. The authorities would also be able to look at tax returns in
terrorism investigations. Finally, the state could seize a convicted terrorist's
property outside the state.

Dan Weiler, a spokesman for Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, said that the
Democrats were also interested in protecting residents and would carefully
consider the bill.

Some liberal Democrats, however, said that the parts of the bill dealing with
the rights of defendants might face tough going in the Assembly. "There are some
things in the bill we should probably do and some things we probably shouldn't,"
said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat.

Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union,
said several of the governor's proposals were deeply troubling. Allowing state
prosecutions of people charged in federal court, she said, would probably run
afoul of the prohibition against double jeopardy in the United States
Constitution. Allowing evidence obtained illegally but in "good faith" by a
police officer erodes the Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable
searches, she said.

Mr. Pataki, however, said the bill did not erode civil liberties but gave local
police the tools that federal agents have. He said the state and local police
could not afford to leave the business of tracking down terrorists to federal
agencies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); POLICE
FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); SEARCH
& SEIZURE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); LIBERALISM
(89%); GOVERNORS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); TESTIMONY (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); MONEY LAUNDERING (77%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM (77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); EXECUTIVES (74%);
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (74%); LITIGATION (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (73%); FELONIES (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(72%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (72%); APPROVALS (72%); TAXES & TAXATION
(70%); JAIL SENTENCING (68%); DOUBLE JEOPARDY (68%); WIRETAPPING (67%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%) TERRORISM;  LAW AND LEGISLATION;  MONEY LAUNDERING;
SENTENCES (CRIMINAL);  POLICE

PERSON: MCKINLEY, JAMES C JR; PATAKI, GEORGE E (GOV)

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK STATE;  NEW YORK STATE

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1125 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pledge of Afghan Leader: No 'Banana Republic' Here

BYLINE:  By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1030 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 14


A triumphant Hamid Karzai proclaimed today that he had won a mandate from the
Afghan people to clean up government corruption and to wage war against
terrorists and he vowed to press foreign allies to finance a sweeping
reconstruction of the nation's devastated road system.

On the day after he was overwhelmingly elected to serve as interim president of
Afghanistan by delegates to a loya jirga, or grand council, Mr. Karzai outlined
an ambitious but very pragmatic list of national priorities. It includes
building a national army and police force, improving schools and health care and
creating jobs.

"The objective is to take Afghanistan out of this quagmire," Mr. Karzai said,
speaking in English to scores of local and foreign reporters who had packed an
ornate meeting room inside the presidential palace for his first news conference
after the vote.

"Warlordism, terrorism, hunger, oppression," he said, listing the national
plagues he intends to lift. "Our objective is to bring the Afghan people dignity
and the good life that they so very much deserve."

Mr. Karzai spent much of his day in meetings piecing together his cabinet, an
enormously sensitive process that is being closely watched by the many ethnic,
religious and political factions gathered in this capital city for the first
loya jirga in a generation.

Many delegates have said that Mr. Karzai must find an acceptable ethnic balance
of Pashtun, Tajik, Hazara and Uzbek appointees to his cabinet in order to build
national legitimacy for the fragile central government.

To weaken the grip of military commanders over their regions, advisers to Mr.
Karzai said, he is also expected to offer several senior government positions,
including possibly one or more vice presidency posts, to warlords. Those offered
the jobs could include Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum of Mazar-i-Sharif and Ismail
Khan of Herat.

"One of the tests he faces is whether he can attract regional leaders to the
capital, away from the power bases," said a Western diplomat.

The delegates are expected to begin on Saturday to select some of the 111
members for the national Parliament. It is not clear, however, whether Mr.
Karzai will be able to compile his cabinet selections before the delegates
adjourn on Sunday. The new government is scheduled to take power on June 22.

Mr. Karzai, wearing a green turban and a traditional Afghan shirt under a dark
jacket, repeatedly said during his news conference that eliminating all traces
of Al Qaeda and their Taliban sympathizers from Afghanistan would remain one of
his highest priorities, a message that seemed directed in large part at
Washington.

"This fight will go on, in the same strong manner as in the past six months," he
said, suggesting that he has no intention of asking the United States to begin
drawing down its more than 7,000 troops in Afghanistan, as some local Afghan
leaders have demanded.

"I will continue to have this fight go on until we are completely sure that
there is no danger to civilians anywhere, in any part of society, in any part of
the world, from terrorism," he said.

On the fourth day of the loya jirga, the more than 1,600 delegates spent much of
their time listening to dozens of speakers catalog the nation's problems.
Virtually all the speakers flouted the five-minute time limit, prompting worried
comments from organizers that the gathering would have to be extended an extra
day.

"We have no schools, no hospitals, no electricity and no water system," said
Omar Qul, who spoke for a Turkmen community near Mazar-i-Sharif.

In one particularly fiery speech, Abdul Rab Rassoul Sayyaf, an Islamic cleric
and military commander from Kabul, urged Mr. Karzai to obey Islamic law
carefully, lest he lose support of the people. He called for renaming the
government, which will serve until national elections are held in 18 months, the
Islamic Transitional Government of Afghanistan.

The proposal drew loud calls of "God is great" from the crowd. But several
advisers to Mr. Karzai said later that they believed that under the Bonn
agreement, which established the rules for the loya jirga, the transitional
government could not be renamed.

Mr. Karzai, at his news conference, chided other countries for failing to
deliver promised aid. He called on those delinquent nations to earmark millions
of dollars to a repaving program for Afghanistan's asphalt-starved roads.

"I will not accept any excuses in that," he said. "I want the world community to
help Afghanistan to rebuild its highways."

Afghanistan has only a skeletal highway system, and those few roads have been
shattered during the last two decades by bombs, mines, tank treads and simple
neglect. Driving 30 miles on the country's main highways can take four hours
because the roads are so deeply rutted. Pulling onto the shoulder can be a
life-threatening experience because of land mines.

As a result, commerce between regions is constricted, and transporting medicine,
clothing and other supplies to remote regions has often been impossible.

Numerous speakers at the loya jirga today called for swift punishment for
government officials who demand bribes. At his news conference, Mr. Karzai said
he had been struck by the many expressions of anger about corruption during the
day.

"This is an area in which I am determined to fight as we fight against
terrorism," he said. "This menace must go away."

Over the coming months, another council will be created to write a new
Constitution for Afghanistan. Mr. Karzai said he would support the creation of a
legislative branch that has lawmaking powers and an independent judiciary
capable of imposing criminal sanctions and resolving civil disputes.

"I don't want a banana republic," he said. "I want a real country."

Mr. Karzai also said that as the national army grew stronger, he expected the
power of the regional commanders to diminish. But he also suggested that he did
not consider it a high priority to seek justice against warlords accused of
human rights abuses.

"First, have peace and stability," he said. "Then give the people of Afghanistan
the justice they want. If we can do both at the same time, it would be great. Do
we have that luxury? We will see."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Delegates to Afghanistan's grand council, which is meeting this
week in Kabul to shape the new government, debated policy yesterday. (Pool photo
by Behrouz Mehri); The grand council, or loya jirga, meeting in Kabul this week
selected Hamid Karzai to be Afghanistan's interim president. (Reuters) Map of
Afghanistan highlighting Kabul

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%); ARMIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (77%); POLITICS (76%); JOB CREATION (75%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (75%);
ARMED FORCES (75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); POLICE FORCES (70%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS
(57%) POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (92%) DAO, JAMES; KARZAI, HAMID

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%); MAZAR-E SHARIF,
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); TAJIKISTAN (79%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistani Acquittal

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 122 words


To the Editor:

Re "Sentenced to Death, Rape Victim Is Freed by Pakistani Court" (news article,
June 8):

The government of Pakistan is committed to upholding the rights of women.

Pakistan is bound by the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women.

The ordinance in question has a basis in Islamic principle. Therefore, the
federal Shariat court acquitted Zafran Bibi of the adultery charge.

Sentence to stoning by death has no origin in the Koran, as enunciated by
several scholars. No woman in Pakistan has been punished by stoning to death
under this law. The Pakistani Constitution gives equal rights to women and men
in Pakistan.

RIZWAN KHAN
Counselor (Press)
Mission of Pakistan to the U.N.
New York, June 14, 2002

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); ACQUITTAL (90%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); RELIGION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (88%); SENTENCING (88%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); CIVIL RIGHTS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(56%) SEX CRIMES;  WOMEN;  ADULTERY;  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;  ISLAM

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: KHAN, RIZWAN; BIBI, ZAFRAN

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%)

REGION: PAKISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1127 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BRIEFING: A NATION CHALLENGED;
WITHHOLDING DETAINEES' NAMES

BYLINE:  By John Holl

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 119 words


A state appellate court ruled last week that the federal government can keep the
names of detainees being held in custody a secret.

Since Sept. 11 more than 1,100 detainees have been held nationally, many of them
in Hudson and Passaic County jails, according to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. The ruling said that the release of detainees' names
could compromise investigations and public safety. Civil liberties advocates
wanted the names released to monitor detainees' treatment in custody and to
ensure adequate legal representation. A representative of the New Jersey chapter
of the American Civil Liberties Union said the group planned to appeal the
ruling to the State Supreme Court.   John Holl

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
APPEALS (90%); HIJACKING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (88%); VERDICTS (88%); SUPREME COURTS
(86%); CORRECTIONS (86%); TERRORISM (85%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (84%); REFUGEES
(84%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  ILLEGAL ALIENS;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%) IMMIGRATION AND
NATURALIZATION SERVICE (US)

PERSON: HOLL, JOHN

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1133 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suicide Bomber Hits Jerusalem; At Least 14 Die

BYLINE:  By JAMES BENNET and JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1412 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Tuesday, June 18


A suicide bomber detonated a powerful explosion on a bus during rush hour here
this morning, killing at least 14 people, the police said.

The explosion, which blew out the sides of the bus and peeled off its top from
front to back, took place on the south side of the city, at the Patt Junction,
near a mall. The bus was carrying commuters and possibly school children from
the city's outskirts to its center.

Initial reports were of at least 29 people injured, five of them seriously. Two
black body bags lay beside the wrecked bus, surrounded by broken glass and other
debris. Another body, covered by a bag, lay on the front steps of the bus,
spilling onto the road. The bumper of the bus lay in the street, spattered with
blood.

Kfir Ben-David, 26, was driving by at the time of the blast. "I made a left turn
and behind me I heard a tremendous explosion," he said. "I saw the bus was full
of smoke. There was a moment of silence until people absorbed what happened,
then I heard screams."

Jerusalem had been on high alert for the last 24 hours, with helicopters
overhead, snap checkpoints jamming traffic on some streets and large numbers of
armed soldiers on patrol.

On Monday, Israeli forces killed a Palestinian militant in the West Bank village
of Al Khader, Walid Sbeich, 30, just south of the scene of the attack this
morning. Israel radio linked that killing to this attack, saying that Mr. Sbeich
may have dispatched the bomber before he was killed.

The bus, a red and white number 32A, was making its way from the Jerusalem
neighborhood of Gilo, which was built on land seized by Israel during the 1967
war and has been a flashpoint in the conflict.

On Monday, another Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself up on the Israeli
side of the border with the West Bank, near where Israel is building its new
security fence, and two other Palestinian fighters were killed.

Both Jewish settlers and Palestinians object to the plan to build the elaborate
225-mile barrier -- of ditches, barricades, walls, sensors, patrol roads and
other obstacles. It is to run roughly along the old Green Line marking Israel's
border before the 1967 war. Each group, of course, opposes building the fence
for different reasons.

Even as the Israeli right began protests against the fence outside the prime
minister's office on Monday, Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, was
denouncing it as "a sinful assault on our land."

"An act of racism," Mr. Arafat said. "A fascist apartheid measure being done,
and we do not accept it. We will continue rejecting it by all means."

Mr. Arafat faced new pressure of his own on Monday as a group announced the
formation of a new party to oppose him.

On Monday night Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel, under pressure from his
base on the right, scheduled a debate about the fence for the full cabinet
meeting on Sunday. He had said it would be discussed at an inner cabinet meeting
on Wednesday, but several factional parties, representing settlers and Russian
immigrants among others, are threatening to leave his coalition over the issue.

One cabinet member, Effi Eitam, chairman of the National Religious Party and a
former general who advocates "transfer" -- expulsion -- of Palestinians from the
West Bank, called the fence a "victory for terrorism."

Speaking of the settlers who would remain on the outside of the fence and of the
lands that some Jews believe were given to the Jewish people by God, he said,
"They are basically planning the great escape, the abandonment of 200,000 Judea
and Samaria residents, and perhaps the worst thing is that the terror achieved
the cantonization of the land of Israel."

The settlers oppose creating a fence because they fear that it could become a de
facto border along the pre-1967 line in a settlement with the Palestinians and
that they could be left isolated or forced to leave.

The Palestinians object, among other reasons, because the path of construction
veers east of the line in places, to protect settlements or to avoid unfavorable
topography, taking land they consider theirs. It would also block the estimated
25,000 Palestinians who, Israeli security officials say, manage to cross into
Israel to find work each day, further crippling the Palestinian economy.

The suicide bomber who blew himself up on Monday detonated the charge near the
Israeli Arab village of Marja, the Border Police said. The site is just across
the line from the part of the northern West Bank near Tulkarm where construction
work has begun on the fence.

"A border patrol unit saw a suspicious person and they called to him to stop," a
spokeswoman for the paramilitary police said. "There was an explosion -- he was
apparently a suicide bomber."

No one else was injured. There are no fences or barriers in the immediate area,
but the police patrol only in armored vehicles because in the last two years two
border policemen, an army officer and a civilian have been killed in attacks
there.

A second Palestinian was killed overnight on Monday during an attempt to ambush
an Israeli armored patrol that had entered the West Bank city of Jenin, the
Israeli Army said. In the village of El Khader, near Bethlehem, Palestinian
witnesses said, Israeli snipers shot Mr. Sbeich, a leader of Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades, as he drove down a main street on Monday.

The European Union added the group to its terrorist blacklist on Monday, along
with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Both groups are accused
of carrying out numerous attacks.

An Israeli military court, acting on Monday, extended for 22 more days the
detention of Marwan Barghouti, the West Bank leader of Mr. Arafat's Fatah
faction. Mr. Barghouti was arrested in mid-April, and Israeli officials have
suggested that he is involved with the brigades.

Defense Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer said on Monday that Israel knew of five
suicide bombers actively preparing for attacks and was trying to hunt them down.
The city of Haifa was put on a special alert after what the regional police
chief, Lt. Cmdr. Moshe Waldman, described as "very hot warnings" of a possible
attack on restaurants or other crowded places.

Mr. Ben-Eliezer told Israeli radio on Monday that the military campaign against
Palestinian militias -- which has included daily raids into Palestinian cities
and towns -- had damaged their ability but not their motivation to mount fatal
attacks. "Today, it is easier to find a suicide bomber than explosives," he
said.

Mr. Ben-Eliezer, who is also chairman of the Labor Party and a contender for
prime minister, is regarded as the prime champion of the fence and, potentially
at least, the prime political beneficiary. Mr. Sharon and others had resisted
the concept until polls recently indicated that building such a barrier was
overwhelmingly popular among Israelis across a large political spectrum.

Mr. Ben-Eliezer referred to this mood in a ceremony on Sunday to observe the
formal beginning of construction, saying that, "an entire people is expecting to
be given answers," in what was seen as an appeal to centrist swing voters.

On the Palestinian side, there were signs of a nascent political movement
critical of Mr. Arafat and his widely disliked Palestinian Authority. A group of
Palestinian intellectuals and social activists, most of them local residents who
were active in the first intifada, announced the formation of an independent
reform movement called the Palestinian National Initiative.

"We don't want to be left between the authority and fundamentalism," said
Mustapha Barghouti, one of the founders and the leader of the Medical Relief
Committees which, among other things, smuggled medical supplies into besieged
villages and refugee camps during the first intifada.

He dismissed Mr. Arafat's recent cabinet reshuffle, billed as an effort to
improve operations, saying at a news conference in Ramallah: "It's only a small
change. We want to provide them with grass-roots pressure to go in the right
direction, to be the voice of the people."

Mr. Arafat dispatched his new interior minister, Abdel-Razzaq al-Yahya, to
Egypt, along with the West Bank security chief, Jibril Rajoub, for discussions
with, among others, the Egyptian intelligence chief, Omar Suleiman.

Cooperation with, and possibly supervision by, Egyptian security officials,
appears to be a main thrust of the American pressure for reforms by the
Palestinian Authority, despite widespread criticism of Egypt by human rights
groups for suppressing dissent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marwan Barghouti, whose detention was extended yesterday.; A
line of razor wire at the checkpoint of Kalandia is part of the 225-mile barrier
being constructed by Israel to run along the West Bank. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (90%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); RACE & RACISM (75%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (66%); PRIME MINISTERS (63%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (63%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (62%); HELICOPTERS (51%) BOMBS AND
EXPLOSIVES;  TERRORISM;  FENCES;  PALESTINIANS

PERSON: SBEICH, WALID; BENNET, JAMES; KIFNER, JOHN; ARAFAT, YASIR

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%)

REGION: ISRAEL;  WEST BANK;  JERUSALEM

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1134 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing Europe: The Hague: Bosnian Serb Pleads Not Guilty

BYLINE:  By Marlise Simons (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 90 words


A former Bosnian Serb police commander arrested by NATO forces in Bosnia last
Thursday on charges of crimes against humanity pleaded not guilty at the United
Nations war crimes tribunal.

Drako Mrdja, 34, is accused of taking part in the so-called Vlasic Mountain
massacre of Aug. 21, 1992, when Bosnian Muslim prisoners were said to have been
lined up on the edge of a cliff and shot or pushed to their deaths by Bosnian
Serb police officers. The indictment says 228 people were reported missing after
the incident.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ARMED
FORCES (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); INDICTMENTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%) WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS;  CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%)
UNITED NATIONS

PERSON: MRDJA, DRAKO; SIMONS, MARLISE

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

REGION: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1136 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 19, 2002 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

TRACES OF TERROR: DETAINEES;
Appeals Panel Upholds Ruling For Open Court

BYLINE:   By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, June 18


A federal appeals panel refused today to block a judge's order that the
Immigration and Naturalization Service hold open deportation hearings for
so-called special-interest cases involving detainees held after Sept. 11.

The Justice Department had asked the United States Court of Appeals for the
Third Circuit to issue a stay on a May 29 order by Judge John W. Bissell of
United States District Court in Newark while the department filed an appeal to
overturn the order itself and keep the hearings secret. But a three-judge panel
from the third circuit upheld last month's order and refused to grant the stay.
Judge Bissell later clarified the order, applying it to special-interest cases
nationwide, not merely in New Jersey.

Charles Miller, a Justice Department spokesman, said the department had not
decided whether to appeal the panel's denial of the stay to the United States
Supreme Court, which would be that court's first opportunity to address the
government's post-Sept. 11 secrecy policy.

"We're still reviewing our options," Mr. Miller said.

Judge Bissell's order to open the hearings was in response to a lawsuit filed by
the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of two news organizations -- The
New Jersey Law Journal and the North Jersey Media Group, a newspaper publisher
-- seeking access to the hearings. The suit followed a Sept. 21 memo by the
country's chief immigration judge, Michael J. Creppy, at the direction of
Attorney General John Ashcroft, ordering immigration judges to close all
special-interest hearings and withhold related information.

The government has argued that open hearings would jeopardize an investigation
into the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks and other terrorist activity,
and would threaten the detainees' safety. But civil rights advocates say a
blanket secrecy order violates the public's constitutionally guaranteed access
to government proceedings. Judge Bissell noted that the government might still
seek to close individual hearings on a case-by-case basis by demonstrating a
need for secrecy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 20, 2002



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a federal
appeals panel's refusal to delay the opening of deportation hearings for
immigrants detained after Sept. 11 misstated the day of the decision. It was
Monday, not Tuesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); JUDGES (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); APPEALS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); DEPORTATION (90%); TERRORISM (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); APPEALS COURTS
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (65%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (50%) TERRORISM;  IMMIGRATION AND
REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION;  DECISIONS AND VERDICTS;  ILLEGAL ALIENS

COMPANY: NORTH JERSEY MEDIA GROUP INC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
(56%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%) IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION
SERVICE

INDUSTRY: SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%)

CITY: NEWARK, NJ, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1142 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ashcroft Petitions Justices For Secrecy in Deportations

BYLINE:  By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 693 words


Attorney General John Ashcroft asked the Supreme Court yesterday to permit
secret deportation hearings for people arrested after Sept. 11, arguing that
national security would be compromised by disclosure of any information about
the detainees.

The request presented the court with its first opportunity to review some of the
Justice Department's antiterrorism policies, which have drawn criticism from
civil rights groups.

In the petition, Mr. Ashcroft and the department's chief immigration judge,
Michael Creppy, asked the court to issue a stay of a lower court's ruling in New
Jersey, which rejected Judge Creppy's blanket closing of deportation hearings.

A stay, pending the government's appeal of the New Jersey ruling, would keep
Judge Creppy's November directive to immigration judges in effect. That order
excluded the public, the press and family members from attending hearings for
"special interest" detainees who are being deported by the government.

The government's petition yesterday cast the issue in stark terms.

"This is an extraordinary case, touching on the nation's very ability to defend
itself against the continuing threat of hostile attack from myriad and unknown
sources," the Justice Department said in its request.

The American Civil Liberties Union and several newspapers have challenged the
Creppy directive in two federal lawsuits, calling it a violation of the First
Amendment and of the detainees' rights to due process.

"Notwithstanding the sweeping rhetoric in the government petition, the actual
legal issue before the courts is much narrower," said Lee Gelernt, a lawyer with
the civil liberties union.

"The First Amendment requires that secret proceedings occur only where there has
been a specific individualized showing that closure is necessary in a particular
case," he added. "We do not believe the government has demonstrated that
traditional First Amendment rules should not apply."

The lawsuit that prompted the petition to the Supreme Court was brought before
the United States District Court in Newark by the civil liberties union, The New
Jersey Law Journal and the North Jersey Media Group, which owns The Herald News
of West Paterson and other papers.

Last month, Judge John W. Bissell of United States District Court in Newark
ruled against the Justice Department and Mr. Ashcroft. The government has
appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit, in Philadelphia, which denied the request for a stay this week.

A federal district judge in Detroit, in a similar case filed by the civil
liberties union and Detroit newspapers, ruled against the government. That case
has been appealed.

Federal investigators arrested about 1,200 people in the weeks after the terror
attacks. As far as is known, nearly all of them were immigrants from Arab and
Muslim countries. Most were charged only with immigration violations and most
have been deported.

Only 74 of the original Sept. 11 detainees remain in federal custody, according
to the latest Justice Department statement, but it is not clear how many of
those people are in deportation proceedings.

The information that is known about their cases has come from the detainees
themselves, who have generally been free to call relatives and reporters from
the immigration detention centers and jails where they have been held for more
than nine months. Many of them said they were interviewed by federal agents soon
after their arrests but were never charged with any crime other than overstaying
their visas.

The government, in accordance with the Creppy directive, has not released the
names of those detainees and has not listed their deportation hearings on
immigration court docket sheets.

The reason for such secrecy, Mr. Ashcroft argued in the Supreme Court petition,
is to prevent terrorist organizations from picking up clues about continuing
investigations and to protect the detainees from harassment. District courts in
Michigan and New Jersey, in ruling against the government, said it already has
discretion under existing regulations to exclude the public in order to protect
witnesses, the detainee or the public interest.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (94%); IMMIGRATION (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); PETITIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
APPEALS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (79%); JUDGES (79%); TERRORISM (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); DUE PROCESS
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); APPEALS COURTS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(77%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); HIJACKING (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%) TERRORISM;  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING;  WORLD
TRADE CENTER (NYC);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  DEPORTATION

COMPANY: NORTH JERSEY MEDIA GROUP INC (52%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(55%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (52%)

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN; ASHCROFT, JOHN (ATTY GEN)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1144 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

War on Terror Makes for Odd Twists in Justice System

BYLINE:  By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


In one of the strange turns in the war on terrorism, two Americans are being
held in military brigs without access to lawyers, while two foreigners accused
of terrorist activities are being tried in federal court with the full range of
protections usually accorded to Americans.

This patchwork approach has revealed a flexibility in the justice system but
also what critics call an overly broad assertion of presidential authority.

The government contends it can detain people until the hostilities are over --
whenever that is -- without charging them or giving them access to lawyers. The
dispute is likely to end up before the Supreme Court.

The Americans in prison are Yasser Esam Hamdi, born in Louisiana and raised in
Saudi Arabia, and Jose Padilla, born in Brooklyn and raised in Chicago. A third
American, John Walker Lindh, born in the District of Columbia and raised in
California, is facing a trial.

Mr. Lindh has a high-powered legal team defending him in federal court in
Alexandria, Va., against 10 counts, including conspiring to kill Americans and
supporting terrorist organizations.

Mr. Hamdi, picked up on the battlefield in Afghanistan in November, was sent to
Guantanamo Bay in Cuba then moved to a brig in Norfolk, Va., on April 22 when
the authorities confirmed he had been born in America. He has not been charged.

The government moved Mr. Hamdi from Cuba to the mainland because he was
American, meaning that he had more rights than other Guantanamo detainees. But
now it argues that his citizenship is irrelevant, that he is an enemy combatant
and does not deserve the legal protections most Americans enjoy. The government
is also blocking him from speaking with his court-appointed lawyer.

Government officials said Mr. Hamdi has not been charged because he is being
held for the protection of the country, not for prosecution.

Mr. Padilla was arrested on May 8 and has been in a brig near Charleston, S.C.,
since June 10. He was taken into custody in connection with what officials said
was a plot to build and detonate a "dirty bomb." Mr. Padilla has also not been
charged and has not had access to a lawyer.

The two foreigners jailed on terrorism charges are Zacarias Moussaoui, a French
citizen, and Richard C. Reid, a Briton. Mr. Moussaoui, accused as the "20th
hijacker," has had hearings in federal court in Alexandria, Va., where he is
representing himself. Mr. Reid's case is pending in federal court in Boston.

Some legal experts say the variety of approaches underscores the judicial
system's elasticity. "There is a learning process," said Eugene R. Fidell,
president of the National Institute of Military Justice. "The fact is, there
seems to be an unusual range of options available."

David Cole, a Georgetown University law professor, said that the evidence, or
lack of it, might explain the inconsistencies in treatment. "Where they feel
they can win a criminal case, they'll go the criminal route," Professor Cole
said. "Where they feel they can't, where they don't have the evidence,"
officials put the prisoner in a military brig, he said.

He also suggested that the Lindh case was demonstrating to the government that
public trials for some of these suspects can be tricky. For example, the
government has suggested that Mr. Hamdi, as well as some prisoners in
Guantanamo, may have information that clears Mr. Lindh. The judge in Mr. Lindh's
case, T. S. Ellis III, has told the defense lawyers that they can talk to Mr.
Hamdi if Mr. Hamdi's lawyer agrees, but the government is not agreeing that Mr.
Hamdi even has a lawyer.

Judge Ellis said denying Mr. Lindh access to a witness who could clear him would
violate his rights. He also told government prosecutors that at some point, they
would have to decide whether to go ahead and prosecute Mr. Lindh, which would
mean giving him access to Mr. Hamdi, or whether the need to keep Mr. Hamdi
isolated was so overwhelming that they would drop their case against Mr. Lindh.

Others say the multiple approaches have exposed an overreaching of presidential
authority. Michael Posner, executive director of the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, said that the government's stance in the Hamdi case showed "that
Americans now have less protection under the law than several of the noncitizens
accused of taking action against the U.S."

Administration officials said their treatment of the Americans in captivity was
proper. "We've been very careful about each one of these guys under the
circumstances and feel very comfortable about the legality of what we're doing,"
one senior official said.

He emphasized that the purpose of detaining Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla was not to
prosecute them but to keep them from rejoining any anti-American forces.

"This is not a punitive action, it's self-protection," he said.

In papers filed on Wednesday in the Hamdi case in the United States Court of
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Va., the government argued that
anyone detained in connection with the war on terrorism was an enemy combatant
and had no right to a lawyer.

Mr. Hamdi's lawyer, Frank W. Dunham Jr., argued that the government presented no
evidence that Mr. Hamdi was an enemy combatant.

The executive branch, Mr. Dunham said, "does not have the authority to detain an
American citizen incommunicado and to unilaterally withdraw from the courts the
power to inquire into the propriety of his detention."

The government's arguments in the Hamdi case startled legal experts and stirred
critics who had quieted down after a confrontation about military tribunals.

"The route they have created in this ad hoc way is devoid of any constraint on
the president's power," Mr. Cole said. "The notion that he can pick people up
off the street, label them and lock them up for the rest of their lives without
a hearing is a remarkable one."

It also prompted some, like Douglas W. Kmiec, dean of the law school at Catholic
University and a professor of constitutional law, to suggest that perhaps
President Bush should amend the Nov. 13 order that set up the military
tribunals.

President Bush issued the order before the government knew it would find
Americans suspected of involvement with foreign terrorists; the order
specifically exempted Americans from a tribunal's jurisdiction.

That exemption was a concession to make the tribunals politically palatable to
critics in Congress.

But Mr. Kmiec said that including Americans in the tribunal system would give
the prisoners a legal forum and would deflect criticism that the United States
was undermining a basic tenet of its judicial system.

"Everyone is legitimately concerned when a U.S. citizen can be detained without
charge and without access to counsel," Mr. Kmiec said. "It perplexes federal
judges."

Mr. Kmiec, who led the office of legal counsel in the Reagan administration and
the first Bush administration, said he had broached the idea with current
administration officials.

"They know there is an anomaly in the process about how different people are
being treated, and they are worried there will be more," he said.

Senior administration officials, however, said no amendment of the order was
being considered.

No tribunals have been held, and do not seem imminent, in part, officials said,
because the government is trying to get information from the prisoners, not
punish them.

"We're not in the criminal justice business, we're in the national defense
business," said a top administration official. "First things first."

Mr. Dunham, Mr. Hamdi's lawyer, remains concerned about what he calls the
"uneven" treatment. He said that Mr. Lindh seemed to be better off than his
client because at least Mr. Lindh was accused of something and could defend
himself.

"Our client hasn't been charged with any crime, and the government says that
since they haven't charged him with a crime, they can hold him forever," he
said. "It seems to be a little strange. A guy is worse off if he's not charged
with a crime."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos/Chart: "For Terrorism Suspects, a Patchwork of Legal Treatment"
AMERICANS TAKEN INTO CUSTODY: JOHN WALKER LINDHACCESS TO A LAWYER?: November
2001CHARGED WITH: YesWHERE BEING HELD OR TRIED: Conspiracy to kill Americans,
providing support to terrorists and using destructive devices during crimes of
violence. Is due to go on trial in federal court in Alexandria, Va. TAKEN INTO
CUSTODY: YASSER ESAM HAMDIACCESS TO A LAWYER?: November 2001CHARGED WITH:
NoWHERE BEING HELD OR TRIED: No charges filed. Detained in Afghanistan with Mr.
Lindh and held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, for two months. Being held by the
military in Norfolk, Va. TAKEN INTO CUSTODY: JOSE PADILLAACCESS TO A LAWYER?:
May 2002CHARGED WITH: NoWHERE BEING HELD OR TRIED: No charges filed. Implicated
in a plot to detonate a radioactive dirty bomb in Washington. Being held by the
military near Charleston, S.C. CITIZENS OF OTHER COUNTRIES TAKEN INTO CUSTODY:
ZACARIAS MOUSSAOUIACCESS TO A LAWYER?: August 2001CHARGED WITH: YesWHERE BEING
HELD OR TRIED: Conspiring with Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda as the 20th hijacker
in the Sept. 11 attacks. Is due to go on trial in federal court in Alexandria,
Va. TAKEN INTO CUSTODY: RICHARD C. REIDACCESS TO A LAWYER?: December 2001CHARGED
WITH: YesWHERE BEING HELD OR TRIED: Attempted murder and use of a weapon of mass
destruction, for trying to detonate a bomb in his shoe aboard a passenger plane.
Is due to go on trial in federal court in Boston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); WAR ON TERROR (91%); LAWYERS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); HIJACKING (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); RIGHT TO COUNSEL (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); PRISONS (74%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); DIRTY BOMBS (73%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (73%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%) TERRORISM;  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC);
AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES;  HIJACKING

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (73%) HAMDI, YASSER ESAM; LINDH, JOHN WALKER; MOUSSAOUI,
ZACARIAS; PADILLA, JOSE (ABDULLAH AL-MUHAJIR); REID, RICHARD C; SEELYE,
KATHARINE Q

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (67%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%);
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); LOUISIANA, USA
(79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (91%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: NEW YORK CITY;  WASHINGTON (DC);  AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1145 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FOLLOWING UP

BYLINE:  By Joseph P. Fried

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 576 words


Small Drink for Woman, Big Step for Equal Rights

She has a reputation for her handmade sandals, but few of her customers these
days know that she is also a footnote in New York's feminist history.

In 1970, Barbara Shaum was the first woman to step into McSorley's Old Ale
House, a legendary East Village fixture dating from the 19th century, on the day
a new city law forced it to admit women for the first time.

Renowned as a men-only bastion of sawdusted floors and time-worn furnishings,
and a target of those fighting the exclusion of women, the saloon succumbed to
an ordinance that banned discrimination against women in all public places in
the city.

Ms. Shaum's leather-goods shop was then two doors down from McSorley's, and she
was friendly with its staff even as she was active in the women's movement. So
it was not surprising that the bar's manager invited her to be the first woman
through its doors, at 15 East Seventh Street, soon after the law ended the
men-only policy. She entered just ahead of another local shopkeeper, Sara Penn.

"I might have had a token sip," Ms. Shaum, 73, recalled last week.

Her store, Barbara Shaum Leather, is now on East Fourth Street, close enough for
her to still stop in occasionally at McSorley's, she said. And she said that her
publicized entry had actually not been her first time inside the bar; at earlier
times, when it had been closed, the employees had sometimes invited her in for a
beer.

The forced end of the bar's men-only policy was really "a small thing" for
women, Ms. Shaum said. "Equal pay is more important."

Two other women who also made news on the McSorley's front at the time said last
week that the fight against the policy had been significant. The two, Faith A.
Seidenberg and Karen DeCrow, had won a court ruling voiding the policy earlier
in 1970, though the ruling was on hold when the city enacted its law.

Ms. Seidenberg, 78, a lawyer in Syracuse, said the ruling had been important as
a precedent "we built on." Ms. DeCrow, 64, who served later in the 70's as
president of the National Organization for Women, and who now practices law in
Jamesville, N.Y., said the discrimination had been part of a social pattern
"that couldn't be ignored."

Both women said they had not been to McSorley's since its barrier to women
turned to sawdust.

Wildlife in Queens Cove Survives Oil Spill's Effect

In 1990, 30 acres of wildlife-rich marshes and woods in Queens that had
repeatedly been threatened with extinction by plans for housing or other
development were saved. New York City turned the tract, bordering Little Neck
Bay, into a park, the Udall's Cove and Ravine Wildlife Refuge.

Then, 15 months ago, serious new peril for the egrets, ibises and other
denizens: nearly 1,000 gallons of heating oil got into a storm drain at a
building a mile away, and ended up in the bay, killing some of the cove's
mussels and coating other inhabitants.

But it could have been worse. "We're cautiously optimistic that no permanent
damage has been done" to the ecosystem, Liam Kavanagh, a deputy commissioner of
the city's Department of Parks and Recreation, said last week.

The legal and financial fallout is still being cleaned up. Charlotte Biblow, a
lawyer for the co-op apartment building involved, said it was questioning some
charges in the $225,000 oil cleanup bill it had been sent. On Friday, the co-op
and the State Department of Environmental Conservation agreed on a $60,000 fine
for the co-op.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DRINKING PLACES (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); WOMEN (90%); FEMINISM
& WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (89%); MEN (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (76%); ORDINANCES (76%);
GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (76%); RETAILERS (74%); LITIGATION
(74%); LUGGAGE & LEATHER GOODS STORES (69%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (63%); WILDLIFE
(62%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (62%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (61%); OIL SPILLS (60%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%) BARS;  WOMEN;  DISCRIMINATION;  WILDLIFE
SANCTUARIES;  UDALL'S COVE AND RAVINE WILDLIFE REFUGE;  OIL (PETROLEUM) AND
GASOLINE;  WATER POLLUTION;  BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

ORGANIZATION: MCSORLEY'S OLD ALE HOUSE (NYC)

PERSON: FRIED, JOSEPH P; SHAUM, BARBARA; DECROW, KAREN; SEIDENBERG, FAITH A

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%); SYRACUSE, NY, USA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1147 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yugoslav President Dismisses Milosevic-Appointed Army Chief

BYLINE:  By DANIEL SIMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 482 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, June 24


President Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia today fired the commander of the
army, as long demanded by domestic reformers and Western officials concerned by
the man's links to Slobodan Milosevic.

Gen. Nebosja Pavkovic, 56, who has been under investigation by the war crimes
tribunal in The Hague for his actions in Kosovo, created a brief furor by
refusing to accept the decision.

But he later clarified his remarks, saying he would protest to the federal
Parliament and "seek legal protection," not ask the army to back him in a
military coup. His deputy, Gen. Branko Krga, an intelligence officer seen as
politically neutral, is to take over as chief of staff on Tuesday.

"I won't be in his way," General Pavkovic said at a news conference at a
military compound in a Belgrade suburb.

The general, who led the Third Army during Mr. Milosevic's crackdown on Kosovo
Albanians, had earlier accused the United States of trying to have him fired.

Before he was dismissed by presidential decree, he urged Mr. Kostunica to resist
"undemocratic pressure from abroad."

Diplomats have made it clear that General Pavkovic's presence was preventing the
Yugoslav military from building the sort of close ties to the West that the
country's reformist political leaders have enjoyed since Mr. Milosevic was
ousted as president in October 2000.

To many nationalists in Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic, that would be
reason enough to leave him in his job. He is widely known for having been the
main military face on state television during NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia in
1999.

Mr. Kostunica said it was time to demonstrate civilian control over the armed
forces, a condition Yugoslavia must meet to join NATO exercises under the
alliance's "Partnership for Peace."

"However great Pavkovic's merits may be, and they cannot be disputed by any
means, the army now needs skills of a different kind," Mr. Kostunica said.

General Pavkovic hit back by accusing Mr. Kostunica of trying to use the army to
serve his own political party, a moderate nationalist group at odds with the
rest of the reformist bloc that ousted Mr. Milosevic, who is on trial in The
Hague on charges of genocide and other crimes.

The general asserted that he had refused an order from Mr. Kostunica last year
to raid a building belonging to the government of Serbia, which is led by the
president's archrival in the reformist camp, Zoran Djindjic. Presidential aides
denied the charge.

General Pavkovic, whom Mr. Milosevic appointed, hung on to his job after his
patron's downfall and says he refused to suppress the mass protests that led to
the overthrow. But many reformers doubted that the general was really on their
side.

General Pavkovic, who also served in the 1992-95 war in Bosnia, has denied that
the army committed war crimes or systematic human rights abuses, suggesting that
volunteer forces were more likely guilty.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MARTIAL LAW (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (75%); COUPS
(75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); MILITARY RULE (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); GENOCIDE
(72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (54%) BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION;  WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

PERSON: SIMPSON, DANIEL; KOSTUNICA, VOJISLAV (PRES); PAVKOVIC, NEBOJSA (COL)
(GEN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (93%); KOSOVO (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(89%); ALBANIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1158 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2002 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Salvadoran Says Police Tortured Prisoners

BYLINE:  Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 187 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., June 27


El Salvador's National Police tortured, beat and starved political prisoners in
secret torture chambers during that country's civil war, one of their reported
victims said today in court here.

The accuser, Carlos Mauricio, is one of three Salvadoran-born plaintiffs seeking
civil damages from two retired generals who ran El Salvador's military and
security forces, including the National Police, during much of the civil war.

The civil suit charges the generals with allowing officers and troops to commit
crimes against humanity, including rape, torture and murder against unarmed
civilians.

Mr. Mauricio and his co-plaintiffs, Dr. Juan Romagoza and Neris Gonzalez, filed
the suit under American and international law that allows torture victims to
seek redress in American courts from those who bear "command responsibility" for
the criminal acts of their subordinates.

The generals, who have retired to Florida, Jose Guillermo Garcia and Carlos
Eugenio Vides Casanova, deny responsibility and have said the plaintiffs had no
proof of abuse and that the state of the country prevented them from controlling
troops.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (95%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%);
STARVATION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); DAMAGES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (72%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (72%) POLITICAL PRISONERS;  TORTURE;  ARMAMENT,
DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;  SUITS AND LITIGATION

PERSON: MAURICIO, CARLOS

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: EL SALVADOR

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1159 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Allows Secrecy To Stand in Deportation Cases

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 410 words


The United States Supreme Court granted a Justice Department request yesterday
to allow secret deportation hearings for people arrested after Sept. 11 to
continue while the government appeals a federal judge's order to open the
hearings.

It was the justices' first action addressing any of the government's
antiterrorism policies since the attacks. Without comment, the court agreed to
stay the order to open the hearings, issued on May 28 by Judge John J. Bissell
of Federal District Court in Newark, who found the secret hearings
unconstitutional.

A similar stay motion had been rejected by Judge Bissell, and by a panel of the
United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia. An appeal
by the government to overturn Judge Bissell's order is pending before the Court
of Appeals and could ultimately put the case back before the Supreme Court.

The government has argued that opening the deportation hearings could compromise
its investigation of terrorist activity. Judge Bissell's order would allow for
secret hearings, but on a case-by-case basis after a national security interest
has been demonstrated. The government has argued that even discussing national
security interests could result in compromising revelations.

The case began with a lawsuit filed on First Amendment grounds by the American
Civil Liberties Union on behalf of The New Jersey Law Journal and the North
Jersey Media Group, a newspaper publisher. They had sought access to the
hearings after the nation's chief immigration judge, Michael Creppy, ordered
them closed in September at the direction of Attorney General John Ashcroft.

Lee Gelernt, the Civil Liberties Union lawyer handing the suit, said yesterday
that the group was disappointed by the Supreme Court's action. "It's hard to
read anything definitively into a one-line order without an opinion," Mr.
Gelernt said. "We continue to believe that we will prevail on the merits."

A spokeswoman for the Justice Department said she did not know whether hearings
would continue in secret during the appeal.

At least one hearing had been scheduled to be held openly under Judge Bissell's
order, on June 17 in Newark. But that hearing was postponed indefinitely by the
Board of Immigration Appeal, a quasi-judicial body within the Justice
Department. Regis Fernandez, a lawyer for two Jordanian cousins whose cases were
to have been heard, said he expected that the hearing would now be rescheduled,
in secret.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUPREME COURTS (92%); DEPORTATION (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JUDGES (90%);
APPEALS COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); LAWYERS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); REFUGEES (73%); ARRESTS (73%);
INVESTIGATIONS (67%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (50%) TERRORISM;  DEPORTATION;
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES;  SUITS AND LITIGATION;  NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA

COMPANY: NORTH JERSEY MEDIA GROUP INC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (94%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (82%) SUPREME COURT (US); JUSTICE DEPARTMENT; AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION; NEW JERSEY LAW JOURNAL; NORTH JERSEY MEDIA GROUP

INDUSTRY: SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%)

PERSON: BISSELL, JOHN W (JUDGE)

CITY: NEWARK, NJ, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1161 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Aid for Afghan Women

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 135 words


To the Editor:

"In Afghanistan, Where Pregnancy Is Still a Minefield" (Women's Health section,
June 23) highlights the effects of pervasive discrimination on women's lives and
health. Declarations adopted at global conferences and by United Nations
agencies have shown growing recognition that survival of pregnancy and
childbirth is a matter of human rights.

It is tragic that the Taliban's history of discrimination is echoed in the aid
policies of donor governments. International donors and the Afghan government
should invest in women's reproductive health while recognizing women as equal
partners in the political, economic and social life of Afghanistan.

LAURA KATZIVE
New York, June 24, 2002

The writer is legal adviser for global projects, international program, Center
for Reproductive Law and Policy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN'S HEALTH (91%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (90%); WOMEN (90%);
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEXUAL & REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH (88%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%);
TALIBAN (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%) PREGNANCY AND OBSTETRICS;
FOREIGN AID

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%); CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS (56%)

PERSON: KATZIVE, LAURA

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (90%)

REGION: AFGHANISTAN

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company


                             1164 of 1164 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Against Humanity

SECTION: Section 7; Column 5; Book Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 116 words


To the Editor:

Joseph Kanon's review of William F. Buckley Jr.'s "Nuremberg" (June 9) asserts
that the trials "grappled with . . . the very definition of 'war crimes.'

" In fact, war crimes were easy to define and punish because the rules of land
warfare had been developing over more than 500 years of armed combat.

What the Allies grappled with was the need to address Germany's conduct off the
battlefield, especially its treacherous aggression and the persecution of its
own citizens in the 1930's. The answer was the novel charges of crimes against
humanity and the crime against peace, which until then had been only vaguely
envisioned as justiciable crimes.

Allan A. Ryan Jr.
Cambridge, Mass.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: NUREMBERG: THE RECKONING (BOOK)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); LITERATURE (66%) BOOKS
AND LITERATURE

PERSON: RYAN, ALLAN A JR; BUCKLEY, WILLIAM F JR; KANON, JOSEPH

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (72%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (65%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (72%); UNITED STATES (65%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2002


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
