
                              1 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 21, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Crossfire: A Rights Group and Israel

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 839 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Rights Watchdog, Lost in the Mideast'' (Op-Ed, Oct. 20):

As present chairwoman and past chairman of the board of Human Rights Watch, we
were saddened to see Robert L. Bernstein argue that Israel should be judged by a
different human rights standard than the rest of the world.

Mr. Bernstein, as a founder of Human Rights Watch, has had ample access over the
years to make his argument that we should not be reporting on Israeli conduct
because Israel is a democracy. As recently as April, the full board of directors
heard -- and rejected -- Mr. Bernstein's proposal that Human Rights Watch should
focus our research and reporting resources on closed societies.

After careful consideration, we and other members of our board stressed that
democracies, too, commit serious abuses, with the United States' ''war on
terrorism'' and Israel's conduct in Gaza just the latest examples. We reaffirmed
our conviction that it is essential to hold Israel to the same international
human rights standards as other countries. To do otherwise would be a violation
of our core principle that human rights are universal.

As long as open societies commit human rights abuses, Human Rights Watch has a
vital role to play in documenting those violations and advocating to bring them
to an end.

Jane Olson Jonathan Fanton New York, Oct. 20, 2009

To the Editor:

We wholeheartedly share the concerns expressed by Robert L. Bernstein, a founder
of Human Rights Watch, about the direction that the organization -- which should
be one of the world's leading human rights groups -- has taken.

Human Rights Watch was founded more than 30 years ago with the admirable aim of
protecting dissidents from oppressive regimes, but today its leaders have lost
sight of its original ethos. Nowhere is this more so than in regard to the
Middle East.

In a region dominated by regimes that violate human rights in horrendous ways,
Human Rights Watch has instead chosen to single out Israel for condemnation,
often using highly unreliable witnesses to do so.

Not only has it failed to allocate proper resources to monitoring the
dictatorships that are rife throughout the region, but senior Human Rights Watch
officials even recently went to Riyadh to raise funds from people associated
with the Saudi regime, emphasizing the group's work demonizing Israel while
doing so.

In order that Human Rights Watch can once again fulfill the role for which it
was created, we call upon its board members to institute a full independent
review of the organization for which they are responsible.

Elie Wiesel Alan Dershowitz New York, Oct. 20, 2009

The writers are, respectively, the Nobel Peace laureate and the law professor at
Harvard University, and are members of the International Advisory Board of NGO
Monitor, based in Jerusalem. This letter was signed by five other board members.

To the Editor:

Few would disagree with Robert L. Bernstein's contention that Israel offers a
more free and open society to its citizens (both Jewish and Arab) than almost
any country in the Arab world. Yet the situation in the West Bank and Gaza is
starkly different.

Failing to make the distinction between Israel and the territories helps Mr.
Bernstein's argument, but is ultimately a disservice to the countless human
rights organizations -- Human Rights Watch included -- that rightly condemn the
unjust treatment of Palestinians living under unwanted and illegal Israeli
control.

Scott Leo New York, Oct. 20, 2009

To the Editor:

Thanks to a brave Robert L. Bernstein for pointing out the negative effects of
Human Rights Watch's focus on Israel rather than on much worse regimes. The
demonization of Israel has given a free pass to the many autocratic leaders for
whom human rights is a foreign concept.

If other apologists for these repressive countries can look at Israel and its
neighbors objectively, there can be real movement toward peace. Until then,
there is no motivation for Israel to make concessions.

Edwin Andrews Malden, Mass., Oct. 20, 2009

To the Editor:

I disagree with Robert L. Bernstein on several counts. First, Human Rights Watch
has issued dozens of reports and statements on human rights abuses in other
countries in the region in the last two or three years, many more than on
Israel. Second, the notion that democracies somehow get a free pass on human
rights is absurd. Genocides have occurred in democratic societies, and lesser
abuses are common; they are no less deplorable. The abuses of war and occupation
are particularly troubling given the power imbalances and the lack of redress by
the occupied.

Mr. Bernstein also repeats accusations about Iran as if this whitewashes Israeli
conduct. Plainly, Israel has been abusive and should be held accountable,
especially given its dependence on the United States. Crying that the ''other
guy'' is worse is the ploy of a schoolyard bully.

John Tirman Cambridge, Mass., Oct. 20, 2009

The writer is executive director of the M.I.T. Center for International Studies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY DAVID SUTER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (78%); AWARDS & PRIZES (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); WRITERS (73%); NOBEL PRIZES (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); TERRORISM
(53%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (77%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Table for Tyrants

BYLINE: By VACLAV HAVEL.

Vaclav Havel was the president of the Czech Republic from 1993 to 2003.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: Prague


IMAGINE an election where the results are largely preordained and a number of
candidates are widely recognized as unqualified. Any supposedly democratic
ballot conducted in this way would be considered a farce. Yet tomorrow the
United Nations General Assembly will engage in just such an ''election'' when it
votes to fill the vacancies on the 47-member Human Rights Council.

Only 20 countries are running for 18 open seats. The seats are divided among the
world's five geographic regions and three of the five regions have presented the
same number of candidates as there are seats,  thus ensuring there is no
opportunity to choose the best proponents of human rights each region has to
offer.

Governments seem to have forgotten the commitment made only three short years
ago to create an organization able to protect victims and confront human rights
abuses wherever they occur.

An essential precondition was better membership. The council's precursor, the
United Nations Commission on Human Rights, was folded in 2006 mainly because it
had, for too long, allowed gross violators of human rights like Sudan and
Zimbabwe to block action on their own abuses.

The council was supposed to be different. For the first time, countries agreed
to take human rights records into account when voting for the council's members,
and those member-states that failed to, in the words of the founding resolution,
''uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights''
would find themselves up for review and their seats endangered. For victims of
human rights abuses and advocates for human rights worldwide, the reforms
offered the hope of a credible and effective body.

Now, it seems, principle has given way to expediency. Governments have resumed
trading votes for membership in various other United Nations bodies, putting
political considerations ahead of human rights. The absence of competition
suggests that states that care about human rights simply don't care enough.
Latin America, a region of flourishing democracies, has allowed Cuba to bid to
renew its membership. Asian countries have unconditionally endorsed the five
candidates running for their region's five seats -- among them, China and Saudi
Arabia.

In past years, Western countries encouraged rights-respecting states from other
regions to compete for election. This year, they have ceded the high ground by
presenting a non-competitive slate for the council elections. New Zealand
withdrew when the United States declared its candidacy, leaving just three
countries -- Belgium, Norway and the United States -- running for three seats.

Even where competition is guaranteed, it is minimal. In the Eastern Europe
region -- which under the United Nations' rules includes all countries behind
the former Iron Curtain, including my own, the Czech Republic -- the countries
running for re-election are Azerbaijan and Russia, whose human rights records
oscillate from questionable to despicable. Only Hungary has stepped forward to
compete for the region's two seats. The reluctance of Eastern European states to
reclaim leadership from human rights abusers does not inspire confidence.

Like the citizens of Azerbaijan, China, Cuba, Russia and Saudi Arabia, I know
what it is like to live in a country where the state controls public discourse,
suppresses opposition and severely curtails freedom of expression. It is thus
doubly dismaying for me to see the willingness of democracies in Latin America
and Asia to sit by and watch the council further lose its credibility and
respect.

Activists and journalists in Azerbaijan and Cuba have already appealed to the
international community not to elect their nations to the Human Rights Council.
States committed to human rights and the integrity of the council cannot remain
indifferent. Countries must express solidarity with the victims of human rights
abuses and reclaim the council by simply refusing to vote for human rights
abusers in this shamefully uncontested election.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRIAN CRONIN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); VICTIMS
RIGHTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (56%)

CITY: PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); AZERBAIJAN (79%); LATIN
AMERICA (79%); NEW ZEALAND (79%); HUNGARY (79%); ASIA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
EUROPE (79%); NORWAY (79%); BELGIUM (65%); EASTERN EUROPE (65%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 20, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Watchdog, Lost in the Mideast

BYLINE: By ROBERT L. BERNSTEIN.

Robert L. Bernstein, the former president and chief executive of Random House,
was the chairman of Human Rights Watch from 1978 to 1998.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 833 words


AS the founder of Human Rights Watch, its active chairman for 20 years and now
founding chairman emeritus, I must do something that I never anticipated: I must
publicly join the group's critics. Human Rights Watch had as its original
mission to pry open closed societies, advocate basic freedoms and support
dissenters. But recently it has been  issuing  reports on the Israeli-Arab
conflict that are helping those who wish to turn Israel into a pariah state.

At Human Rights Watch, we always recognized that open, democratic societies have
faults and commit abuses. But we saw that they have the ability to correct them
-- through vigorous public debate, an adversarial press and many other
mechanisms that encourage reform.

That is why we sought to draw a sharp line between the democratic and
nondemocratic worlds, in an effort  to create clarity in human rights. We wanted
to prevent the Soviet Union and its followers from playing a moral equivalence
game with the West and to encourage liberalization by drawing attention to
dissidents like Andrei Sakharov, Natan Sharansky and  those in the Soviet gulag
-- and the millions in China's laogai, or labor camps.

When I stepped aside in 1998,  Human Rights Watch was active in 70 countries,
most of them closed societies. Now the organization, with increasing frequency,
casts aside its important distinction between open and closed societies.

Nowhere is this more evident than in its work in the Middle East. The region is
populated by authoritarian regimes with appalling human rights records. Yet in
recent years Human Rights Watch has written far more condemnations of Israel for
violations of international law than of any other country in the region.

Israel, with a population of 7.4 million, is home to at least 80 human rights
organizations, a vibrant free press, a democratically elected government, a
judiciary that frequently rules against the government, a politically active
academia, multiple political parties and, judging by the amount of news
coverage, probably more journalists per capita than any other country in the
world -- many of whom are there expressly to cover the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

Meanwhile, the Arab and Iranian regimes rule over some 350 million people, and
most remain brutal, closed and autocratic,  permitting little or no internal
dissent. The plight of their citizens who  would most benefit from the kind of
attention a large and well-financed international human rights organization can
provide is being ignored  as Human Rights Watch's Middle East division prepares
report after report on Israel.

Human Rights Watch has lost critical perspective on a conflict in which Israel
has been repeatedly attacked by Hamas and Hezbollah, organizations that go after
Israeli citizens and use their own people as human shields. These groups are
supported by the government of Iran, which has openly declared its intention not
just to destroy Israel but to murder Jews everywhere. This incitement to
genocide is a violation of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide.

Leaders of Human Rights Watch know that Hamas and Hezbollah chose to wage war
from densely populated areas, deliberately transforming neighborhoods into
battlefields. They know that more and better arms are flowing into both Gaza and
Lebanon and are  poised to strike again. And they know that this militancy
continues to deprive Palestinians of any chance for the peaceful and productive
life they deserve. Yet Israel, the repeated victim of aggression, faces the
brunt of Human Rights Watch's criticism.

The organization is expressly concerned mainly with how wars are fought, not
with motivations.  To be sure, even victims of aggression are bound by the laws
of war and must do their utmost to minimize civilian casualties. Nevertheless,
there is a difference between wrongs committed in self-defense and those
perpetrated intentionally.

But how does Human Rights Watch know that these laws have been violated? In Gaza
and elsewhere where there is no access to the battlefield or to the military and
political leaders who make strategic decisions, it is extremely difficult to
make definitive judgments about war crimes. Reporting often relies on witnesses
whose stories cannot be verified and who may testify for political advantage or
because they fear retaliation from their own rulers. Significantly, Col. Richard
Kemp, the former commander of British forces in Afghanistan and  an expert on
warfare, has said that the Israel Defense Forces in Gaza ''did more to safeguard
the rights of civilians in a combat zone than any other army in the history of
warfare.''

Only by returning to its founding mission and the spirit of humility that
animated it can Human Rights Watch resurrect itself as a moral force in the
Middle East and throughout the world. If it fails to do that, its credibility
will be seriously undermined and its important role in the world significantly
diminished.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY KELLY BLAIR)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); JOURNALISM (76%);
HAMAS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); POLITICS (75%); POLITICAL PARTY
CONVENTIONS (75%); NEWS REPORTING (74%); HEZBOLLAH (71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (71%);
WRITERS (64%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); CHINA (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Oil Industry on Trial

BYLINE: By JAD MOUAWAD

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1397 words


Fourteen years after the execution of the Nigerian author and activist  Ken
Saro-Wiwa by Nigeria's former military regime, Royal Dutch Shell will appear
before a federal court in New York to answer charges of crimes against humanity
in connection with his death.

The trial, scheduled to begin on Wednesday, will examine allegations that Shell
sought the aid of the former Nigerian regime in silencing Mr. Saro-Wiwa, a
vociferous critic, in addition to paying soldiers who carried out human rights
abuses in the oil-rich but impoverished Niger Delta where it operated.

Shell strongly denies the charges.

But the trial is the latest in a series of cases aimed at  some of the world's
biggest oil companies,  asserting  misdeeds in developing countries where they
were once seen as unassailable.  Oil companies are being sued on charges of
environmental damage, collusion with repressive governments and contributing to
human rights abuses, among others.

Chevron, for example, could face up to $27 billion in liability in Ecuador for
pollution of the jungle.

Exxon Mobil is being sued by Indonesian villagers from the province of Aceh who
allege  human rights violations committed by soldiers hired to guard a natural
gas plant.

And these legal challenges are just the latest tests for an industry
increasingly hard pressed to find new sources of petroleum.

The most prominent case of supposed company complicity  -- the execution of Mr.
Saro-Wiwa and eight other members of the Ogoni tribe --  led to fierce protests
against Shell, which  was already under heavy criticism from environmentalists
for its record in the Niger Delta. The event, which ignited worldwide
condemnation of Nigeria, prompted changes in Shell's approach to community
relations in Nigeria and elsewhere.

While civilian rule has returned to Nigeria, violence in the delta has escalated
in recent years, fueled by poverty, corruption and graft. Over the last week,
there has been a new round of fighting between government forces and militant
rebel groups, which have declared an ''all-out war'' in the region and
threatened the operations of oil companies.

The civil suit was brought by relatives of Mr. Saro-Wiwa and other victims of
Nigeria's former military regime, who are taking advantage of a Supreme Court
decision that gives foreign victims of human rights abuses a measure of access
to American courts.

The suit asserts that in the early 1990s, Shell became worried about Mr.
Saro-Wiwa's campaign to protest the impact of oil production throughout the
Niger Delta. The suit asserts that Shell feared Mr. Saro-Wiwa's activities would
disrupt its operations and tarnish its image abroad, and ''sought to eliminate
that threat, through a systematic campaign of human rights violations.''

Shell said the allegations were ''false and without merit.'' In a statement,
Stan Mays, a company spokesman, said: ''Shell in no way encouraged or advocated
any act of violence,'' and, in fact, ''attempted to persuade that government to
grant clemency.''

The case could have global repercussions for the oil industry, said Arvind
Ganesan, the head of the business and human rights practice at Human Rights
Watch.

In the last decade, oil companies have been under increasing pressure to comply
with strict standards of behavior while operating in countries with poor human
rights records and few democratic controls.

''The lesson here is that these cases aren't going away,'' Mr. Ganesan said.
''If a jury found Shell guilty, this would change the behavior of the industry
pretty quickly.''

The lawsuit was filed by the Center for Constitutional Rights, a New York law
firm specializing in human rights, on behalf of Mr. Saro-Wiwa's son and other
plaintiffs who fled Nigeria's military regime and did not trust they could sue
Shell in Nigerian courts even after civilian rule returned in 1999.

The current suit was brought under the Alien Tort Claims Act, an arcane law
written in 1789 to fight piracy, which is increasingly being used for lawsuits
asserting human rights violations that occurred overseas. The Supreme Court
ruled 6 to 3 in 2004 that foreigners could use American courts in limited cases,
like  crimes against humanity or torture. While sovereign states cannot be sued,
American courts have accepted that a wide variety of actors, including
corporations, can be called to account.

So far no corporation has been found guilty under the alien tort law, though
human rights lawyers note that several cases are still moving through the court
system.

In 2004, Unocal, a California oil company accused of using slave labor in the
construction of a pipeline in Burma during the 1990s, agreed to compensate
villagers there. The terms of the settlement were not made public.

Last year, Chevron was cleared of wrongdoing by a jury after being accused of
complicity in the shooting of Nigerian villagers who occupied an offshore oil
barge in 1998 to protest its environmental record and hiring practices.

Shell's activities in the Niger Delta, a region of mangroves and swamps roughly
the size of Maryland where most of Nigeria's oil is located, have long been
criticized by environmentalists. Shell drilled the country's first successful
well in 1956, and has since dominated Nigeria's oil sector, through decades of
civil war, military rule and authoritarian governments.

In recent years, protests against government corruption have become more
violent. The operations of Shell, in particular, have been come under attack
from militant groups seeking a greater share of the country's oil wealth.

For Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr., who returned to Nigeria from exile in 1999, the trial
could provide bittersweet vindication of his father's campaign.

''My father always said that one day Shell would be on trial,'' said Mr.
Saro-Wiwa, who now works as an adviser to the government on community issues.
''It's important for those involved in the conspiracy against my father to be
held to account. It's a communal exorcism, if you like, for Shell to account and
bear responsibility for what it did.''

The elder Mr. Saro-Wiwa, who founded the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni
Peoples in 1990, was one of the most vocal critics of Shell for the damage done
to the delta communities, including gas flaring and the destruction of mangroves
to make way for pipelines.

According to the lawsuit, a Shell official identified Mr. Saro-Wiwa as being
''influential'' in organizing the protests and sought the assistance of the
Nigerian government to silence him.

The company is also accused of paying soldiers who committed human rights abuses
and providing them with transportation, including helicopters. During a military
raid, one plaintiff, Karalolo Kogbara, was shot by Nigerian troops while she was
speaking out against the destruction of crops bulldozed to build a pipeline.

''We are not saying that Shell just did business in a bad place,'' said Jennie
Greene, a lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights. ''Shell was an actor
here. Shell wasn't just standing by.''

Mr. Saro-Wiwa was arrested in 1994 and put on trial before a special military
court along with the other Ogoni advocates, on charges that human rights groups
and Western governments said were trumped up. Despite international pressure,
Shell initially refused to intervene, saying at the time, ''the company does not
get involved in politics.''

The lawsuit charges that Shell bribed at least two crucial witnesses to change
their testimony during the trial. It also asserts that Shell's manager in
Nigeria at the time, Brian Anderson, met with Owens Saro-Wiwa, Mr. Saro-Wiwa's
brother and also a plaintiff, and triedto pressure the jailed activist to
abandon his struggle in exchange for help in securing his release. Mr. Saro-Wiwa
reportedly refused.

Shell's chief executive eventually faxed Gen. Sani Abacha, Nigeria's military
ruler, a request for a pardon after Mr. Saro-Wiwa's appeal for clemency was
denied. By then it was too late: Mr. Saro-Wiwa and the other advocates were
hanged on Nov. 10, 1995.

Shell denied it had sought to silence Mr. Saro-Wiwa.

''Shell attempted to persuade that government to grant clemency; to our deep
regret, that appeal -- and the appeals of many others -- went unheard,'' Shell
said in its statement. ''We were shocked and saddened when we heard the news.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr. says Royal Dutch Shell had a hand in his
father's execution in 1995. Protestors, inset, gathered in London shortly after
the killing.(PHOTOGRAPHS JENNIFER S. ALTMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES, ABOVE
CHARLES MILLER/ASSOCIATED PRESS, INSET)(B1)
Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr. in Manhattan this month. His father had been critical of human
rights abuses in Nigeria.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNIFER S. ALTMAN FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)
Ken Saro-Wiwa in 1993. At right, a grave digger in Port Harcourt, Nigeria,
points to where Mr. Saro-Wiwa may have been buried.(PHOTOGRAPHS, LEFT TO RIGHT,
GREENPEACE, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS
 BORIS HEGER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(B4) MAP: Nigeria is rich in oil, but its people
are impoverished. Map details the country of Nigeria.(B4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MILITARY RULE (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); CIVIL
PROCEDURE (77%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (77%); NATURAL GAS (75%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (73%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(72%); HOMICIDE (72%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (70%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (70%);
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (69%); COMMUNITY RELATIONS (68%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS
(66%); APPEALS (50%)

COMPANY: ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC (95%); EXXON MOBIL CORP (55%)

ORGANIZATION: GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL (59%)

TICKER: RDSA (LSE) (95%); RDSA (AMS) (95%); RDS.B (NYSE) (95%); RDS.A (NYSE)
(95%); XOM (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES (95%);
NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (95%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (95%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (55%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (76%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (98%); NIGER (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDONESIA (92%);
ECUADOR (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Joins Rights Panel After a Vote At the U.N.

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The United States won a seat on the United Nations Human Rights Council on
Tuesday, joining a group that the Bush administration had pilloried.

The controversy surrounding the 47-member body, which assesses the rights
records of United Nations member states, was underscored by the General
Assembly's re-electing other nations condemned by human rights organizations for
abusing their own citizens. They include Cuba, China, Saudi Arabia, Russia and
Cameroon.

''We have not been perfect ourselves,'' said Susan E. Rice, the American
ambassador, after the United States got 167 votes out of 192. ''But we intend to
lead based on the strong principled vision that the American people have about
respecting human rights, supporting democracy.''

The Bush administration considered the Human Rights Council beyond redemption
because of the group's repeated focus on Israel's treatment of the Palestinians
under occupation while playing down significant human rights failings among its
members.

But the Obama administration decided that it could be more effective in changing
the council's behavior if it joined the organization.

''While we recognize that the Human Rights Council has been a flawed body that
has not lived up to its potential,'' Ms. Rice said, ''we are looking forward to
working from within with a broad cross section of member states to strengthen
and reform the council.''

Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, said
that the body should not be considered ''the club of the virtuous.'' Ms. Pillay,
who works in conjunction with the council but does not oversee it, said that
having a strong American voice in meetings would make the group more useful.

Nations with poor human rights records are a problem, but they are a minority on
the council, said Neil Hicks, international policy director for Human Rights
First, adding that the task of the United States and its allies is to overcome
those ''ideologically opposed to human rights.''

The United States was one of three countries seeking three seats in the bloc
that represents Western Europe and a scattering of other states. Belgium and
Norway were also elected from the bloc.

Even running uncontested, American diplomats had been nervous about the outcome,
wondering if a backlash against the Bush administration's policies might prevent
the United States from garnering the 50 percent of the vote needed to win. The
voting was done by secret ballot.

Human rights organizations have been highly critical of regional blocs deciding
beforehand which of their nations will run  for election. When given a choice,
nations tend to vote for countries with the better record, said Steve Crawshaw
of Human Rights Watch.

In the contest in Eastern Europe among Russia, Hungary and Azerbaijan for two
seats, for example, Hungary trounced Azerbaijan with 131 votes to 89. Azerbaijan
has a lengthy record of repression, human rights groups said. Superpowers like
Russia generally attract large majorities, and it got 146 votes.

Others elected to the council on Tuesday were Bangladesh, Djibouti, Jordan,
Kyrgyzstan, Mauritius, Mexico, Nigeria, Senegal and Uruguay.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); SUSAN RICE (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); EUROPE (92%);
AZERBAIJAN (90%); HUNGARY (90%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); ISRAEL (79%); NORWAY (79%); BELGIUM (72%); EASTERN EUROPE (57%)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              6 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 19, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico's Drug Crackdown Fuels Rights Complaints, Report Says

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON and MARC LACEY; Ginger Thompson reported from
Washington, and Marc Lacey from Mexico City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Mexico's fight against drug traffickers generated a sixfold increase in human
rights complaints against the Mexican military between 2006 and 2008, and it is
unclear that any of those complaints resulted in prosecutions, according to a
State Department report on the effort.

The 17-page report was delivered to Congress last week as part of a joint
counternarcotics program known as the Merida Initiative. The $1.4 billion
initiative, passed by Congress last year, provides equipment and training to
Mexican security forces. But it also calls for 15 percent of the money to be
withheld until the State Department verifies that the government is meeting four
human rights requirements, including the prosecution of police officers and
soldiers responsible for abuses.

While the State Department cited several examples of progress, it was hardly a
glowing endorsement. And a key Democratic senator said the report failed to
adequately address the concerns about impunity within the Mexican military that
led him to threaten to hold up millions of dollars in United States assistance.

''It is well known that the military justice system is manifestly ineffective,''
said a statement issued Tuesday by Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, chairman
of the Senate appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations, which must
approve disbursement of the Merida assistance. ''And it is apparent that neither
the Mexican government nor the State Department has treated human rights abuses
by the military, which is engaging in an internal police function it is ill
suited for, as a priority.''

The report praised President Felipe Calderon's ''firm commitment'' to ending a
devastating wave of drug-related violence that has killed about 7,500 people in
his country since the beginning of 2008. Mexico's efforts, the report said, have
been led by about 45,000 Mexican soldiers, deployed to support and, in some
cases, replace beleaguered state and local law enforcement agencies across the
country.

Since the beginning of 2007, the report states, Mexican security forces have
seized about 65 tons of cocaine and more than 9.3  million pounds of marijuana.
Arms seizures have soared to 9,500 weapons in 2007, from 4,220 in 2006, the
report says. And the Mexican government has created a number of new mechanisms
to make it easier for citizens to anonymously file complaints against rogue
security officers.

But as the troops' presence on the streets has increased, the State Department
reported, so have the number of complaints against them. Between 2006 and 2008,
they rose to 1,230, from 182, the report said. In all, Mexico's National Human
Rights Commission has received some 2,050 complaints against soldiers since Mr.
Calderon took office at the end of 2006.

Based on those complaints, the human rights commission -- which is financed by
the Mexican government -- issued 26 recommendations for follow-up to the Defense
Ministry. The ministry agreed to consider 25 of them. And since soldiers accused
of abuses are generally prosecuted in closed military tribunals, it was
impossible to tell whether any complaints had resulted in punishments.

''The information received from the Mexican government regarding these cases,''
the report said, ''and the opaqueness of the military court system makes it
difficult to analyze the nature and the type of complaints filed, the status of
the cases against members of the military alleged to have violated human rights,
or the results of the military prosecution.''

The State Department report says the head of a newly established military human
rights directorate had announced that military courts had convicted 12 soldiers
since 2006 and were investigating an additional 52 officers in connection with
offenses including homicide, torture, kidnapping and extortion.

However, the State Department acknowledged that little was known about these
cases.

Last week, at  a summit meeting attended by President Obama, Mr. Calderon
defended his government, saying allegations of human rights abuses were being
aggressively investigated.

''In every case, there has been a scrupulous effort to protect human rights,''
he said. ''Anyone suggesting the contrary should prove a case, one single case,
where the authority did not act.''

Human Rights Watch, which has been documenting abuses in Mexico, responded hours
later with two cases, both from Mr. Calderon's home state of Michoacan, in which
soldiers accused of torture two years ago have not been prosecuted.

In an interview on Tuesday, Madeleine Penman, a spokeswoman for the Miguel
Augustin Pro Juarez Human Rights Center, called on the United States to withhold
the funds.

''There is very little evidence of action on human rights by the Mexican
government,'' she said. ''We do not think that simply backing up Felipe
Calderon's fight against organized crime helps at all with rule of law in
Mexico.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); DRUG POLICY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (78%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (77%); CANNABIS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(75%); COCAINE (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (72%)

PERSON: FELIPE CALDERON (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (56%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 1, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Reversal, U.S. Seeks Election To U.N. Human Rights Council

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The Obama administration will seek a seat on the United Nations' Human Rights
Council, announcing Tuesday that it believed working from within  was the most
effective means of altering the council's habit of ignoring poor human rights
records of member states.

The policy reverses the stance of the Bush administration, which viewed the
Geneva-based council as irredeemable for its almost exclusive focus on human
rights violations by Israel.

Susan E. Rice, the American ambassador to the United Nations, said the Obama
administration believed that by working within the council, the United States
could influence members of regional groups.

In recent years, regional blocs in the 47-member organization, particularly Asia
and Africa, which together have 26 votes, acted en masse to minimize scrutiny of
countries like Zimbabwe.

''We do not see any inherent benefit as demonstrated by recent history in being
outside the tent and simply being critical without having significant
influence,'' Ms. Rice said in a conference call with reporters after the State
Department made the announcement.

The United States shared other countries' concern that the council's work had
been ''disturbing'' in recent years, she said. ''It should become a key forum
for advancing human rights.''

The 47-member council replaced the Human Rights Commission after an outcry over
countries like Libya, which led the commission in 2003 but had a history of
abuses like assassinating government critics. Critics of the council have said,
however, that the problems had carried over from the first body to the next, and
that dividing the regional blocs was unworkable.

''That strategy did not work under the old Human Rights Commission and it won't
work under the Human Rights Council,'' said John R. Bolton, the American
ambassador in the Bush administration who first voted against the council. ''You
don't show up at every ragtag little organization that comes into existence.''

Human rights organizations generally applauded the move. Neil Hicks, the
international policy director for the nonprofit organization Human Rights First,
said countries like Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Egypt often blocked critical
examination of states in Asia and Africa. Washington needs to make more of an
effort to work on those relationships, he said.

''There really hasn't been a serious attempt led by the United States to build a
majority of states within the council to stand up for human rights,'' he said.

Several groups that support Israel said they would have preferred that the
United States pushed harder for reform before running for a seat in the May 12
election in the General Assembly.

Norway, Belgium and New Zealand were running for the three seats in the Western
bloc that includes the United States, but New Zealand was expected to withdraw.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
CONFERENCE CALLS (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); SUSAN RICE (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); ISRAEL (93%); NEW ZEALAND (92%); AFRICA (92%);
ASIA (92%); LIBYA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
EGYPT (79%); BELGIUM (50%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 11, 2009 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Inaction Seen After Taliban P.O.W.'s Died

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After a mass killing of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Taliban prisoners of war
by the forces of an American-backed warlord during the 2001 invasion of
Afghanistan, Bush administration officials repeatedly discouraged efforts to
investigate the episode, according to government officials and human rights
organizations.

American officials had been reluctant to pursue an investigation -- sought by
officials from the F.B.I., the State Department, the Red Cross and human rights
groups -- because the warlord, Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, was on the payroll of
the C.I.A. and his militia worked closely with United States Special Forces in
2001, several officials said. They said the United States also worried about
undermining the American-supported government of President Hamid Karzai, in
which General Dostum had served as a defense official.

''At the White House, nobody said no to an investigation, but nobody ever said
yes, either,'' said Pierre Prosper, the former American ambassador for war
crimes issues. ''The first reaction of everybody there was, 'Oh, this is a
sensitive issue; this is a touchy issue politically.' ''

It is not clear how -- or if -- the Obama administration will address the issue.
But in recent weeks, State Department officials have quietly tried to thwart
General Dostum's reappointment as military chief of staff to the president,
according to several senior officials, and suggested that the administration
might not be hostile to an inquiry.

The question of culpability for the prisoner deaths -- which may have been the
most significant mass killing in Afghanistan after the 2001 American-led
invasion -- has taken on new urgency since the general, an important ally of Mr.
Karzai, was reinstated to his government post last month. He had been suspended
last year and living in exile in Turkey after he was accused of threatening a
political rival at gunpoint.

''If you bring Dostum back, it will impact the progress of democracy and the
trust people have in the government,'' Mr. Prosper said. Arguing that the Obama
administration should investigate the 2001 killings, he added, ''There is always
a time and place for justice.''

While President Obama has deepened the United States' commitment to Afghanistan,
sending 21,000 more American troops there to combat the growing Taliban
insurgency, his administration has also tried to distance itself from Mr.
Karzai, whose government is deeply unpopular and widely viewed as corrupt.

A senior State Department official said that Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton and Richard C. Holbrooke, the special representative on Afghanistan and
Pakistan, had told Mr. Karzai of their objections to reinstating General Dostum.
The American officials have also pressed his sponsors in Turkey to delay his
return to Afghanistan while talks continue with Mr. Karzai over the general's
role, said an official briefed on the matter. Asked about looking into the
prisoner deaths, the official said, ''We believe that anyone suspected of war
crimes should be thoroughly investigated.''

The Back Story

While the deaths have been previously reported, the back story of the frustrated
efforts to investigate them has not been fully told. The killings occurred in
late November 2001, just days after the American-led invasion forced the ouster
of the Taliban government in Kabul. Thousands of Taliban fighters surrendered to
General Dostum's forces, which were part of the American-backed Northern
Alliance, in the city of Kunduz. They were then transported to a prison run by
the general's forces near the town of Shibarghan.

Survivors and witnesses told The New York Times and Newsweek in 2002 that over a
three-day period, Taliban prisoners were stuffed into closed metal shipping
containers and given no food or water; many suffocated while being trucked to
the prison. Other prisoners were killed when guards shot into the containers.
The bodies were said to have been buried in a mass grave in Dasht-i-Leili, a
stretch of desert just outside Shibarghan.

A recently declassified 2002 State Department intelligence report states that
one source, whose identity is redacted, concluded that about 1,500 Taliban
prisoners died. Estimates from other witnesses or human rights groups range from
several hundred to several thousand. The report also says that several Afghan
witnesses were later tortured or killed.

In Afghanistan, rival warlords have had a history of eliminating enemy troops by
suffocating them in sealed containers. General Dostum, however, has said
previously that any such deaths of the Taliban prisoners were unintentional. He
has said that only 200 prisoners died and blamed combat wounds and disease for
most of the fatalities. The general could not be reached for comment, and a
spokesman declined to comment for this article.

While a dozen or so bodies were examined and several were autopsied, a full
exhumation was never performed, and human rights groups are concerned that
evidence has been destroyed. In 2008, a medical forensics team working with the
United Nations discovered excavations that suggested the mass grave had been
moved. Satellite photos obtained by The Times show that the site was disturbed
even earlier, in 2006.

''Our repeated efforts to protect witnesses, secure evidence and get a full
investigation have been met by the U.S. and its allies with buck-passing, delays
and obstruction,'' said Nathaniel Raymond, a researcher for Physicians for Human
Rights, a group based in Boston that discovered the mass grave site in 2002.

Seeking an Investigation

The first calls for an investigation came from his group and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. A military commander in the United States-led
coalition rejected a request by a Red Cross official for an inquiry in late
2001, according to the official, who, in keeping with his organization's policy,
would speak only on condition of anonymity and declined to identify the
commander.

A few months later, Dell Spry, the F.B.I.'s senior representative at the
detainee prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, heard accounts of the deaths from
agents he supervised there. Separately, 10 or so prisoners brought from
Afghanistan reported that they had been ''stacked like cordwood'' in shipping
containers and had to lick the perspiration off one another to survive, Mr. Spry
recalled. They told similar accounts of suffocations and shootings, he said. A
declassified F.B.I. report, dated January 2003, confirms that the detainees
provided such accounts.

Mr. Spry, who is now an F.B.I. consultant, said he did not believe the stories
because he knew that Al Qaeda trained members to fabricate tales about
mistreatment. Still, the veteran agent said he thought the agency should
investigate the reports ''so they could be debunked.''

But a senior official at F.B.I. headquarters, whom Mr. Spry declined to
identify, told him to drop the matter, saying it was not part of his mission and
it would be up to the American military to investigate.

''I was disappointed because I believed that, true or untrue, we had to be in
front of this story, because someday it may turn out to be a problem,'' Mr. Spry
said.

The Pentagon, however, showed little interest in the matter. In 2002, Physicians
for Human Rights asked Defense Department officials to open an investigation and
provide security for its forensics team to conduct a more thorough examination
of the gravesite. ''We met with blanket denials from the Pentagon,'' recalls
Jennifer Leaning, a board member with the group. ''They said nothing happened.''

Pentagon spokesmen have said that the United States Central Command conducted an
''informal inquiry,'' asking Special Forces personnel members who worked with
General Dostum if they knew of a mass killing by his forces. When they said they
did not, the inquiry went no further.

''I did get the sense that there was little appetite for this matter within
parts of D.O.D.,'' said Marshall Billingslea, former acting assistant defense
secretary for special operations, referring to the Department of Defense.

High-Level Conversation

Another former defense official, who would speak only on condition of anonymity,
recalled that the prisoner deaths came up in a conversation with Paul D.
Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense at the time, in early 2003.

''Somebody mentioned Dostum and the story about the containers and the
possibility that this was a war crime,'' the official said. ''And Wolfowitz said
we are not going to be going after him for that.''

In an interview, Mr. Wolfowitz said he did not recall the conversation. However,
Pentagon documents obtained by Physicians for Human Rights through a Freedom of
Information Act request confirm that the issue was debated by Mr. Wolfowitz and
other officials.

As evidence mounted about the deaths, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell
assigned Mr. Prosper, the United States ambassador at large for war crimes, to
look into them in 2002. He met with General Dostum, who denied the allegations,
Mr. Prosper recalled. Meanwhile, Karzai government officials told him that they
opposed any investigation.

''They made it clear that this was going to cause a problem,'' said Mr. Prosper,
who left the Bush administration in 2005 and is now a lawyer in Los Angeles.
''They would say, 'We have had decades of war crimes. Where do you start?' ''

In Washington, Mr. Prosper encountered similar attitudes. In 2002, Zalmay M.
Khalilzad, then the White House coordinator for Afghanistan, made it clear that
he was concerned about efforts to investigate General Dostum, Mr. Prosper said.
''Khalilzad never opposed an investigation,'' Mr. Prosper recalled. ''But he
definitely raised the political implications of it.''

Mr. Khalilzad, who later served as the American ambassador to Afghanistan, did
not respond to a request for comment.

Mr. Prosper said that because of the resistance from American and Afghan
officials, his office dropped its inquiry. The State Department mentioned the
episode in its annual human rights report for 2002, but took no further action.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 15, 2009



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Saturday with the
continuation of an article about the American failure to investigate an allied
Afghan warlord's mass killing of Taliban captives held at a prison in
Shiberghan, in northern Afghanistan, during the American-led invasion in late
2001 misstated the year that the photograph was taken. The picture of Taliban
prisoners crammed into the prison was taken in February 2002 -- not February
2001, which would have been about eight months before the start of the invasion.


GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Bodies from a mass killing in 2001 were said to have been
buried in Dasht-i-Leili, Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
(A1)
The forces of Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, shown on horseback at a campaign rally,
were said to have killed Taliban prisoners. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID
GUTTENFELDER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Some members of the Taliban were held at a prison in Shibarghan in February
2001. A mass grave of Taliban prisoners of war is thought to be in a desert
stretch just outside Shibarghan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLARO CORTES IV/REUTERS) (A5)
MAP: Site of a Possible Mass Grave: Below are images of what is said to be a
mass grave site in a place called Dasht-i-Leili, a stretch of desert near
Shibarghan, Afghanistan. A United Nations-sponsored investigation in 2008
discovered evidence that the mass grave had been moved. (Source: American
Association for the Advancement of Science
 satellite images by Digital Globe) (A5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); ARMED FORCES (75%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(71%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (91%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SCIENCE (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (59%);
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); HAMAD KARZAI (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%);
RICHARD HOLBROOKE (57%)

CITY: SHERGHAN, AFGHANISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); TURKEY (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Alison Des Forges, 66, Human Rights Advocate, Dies

BYLINE: By SEWELL CHAN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 870 words


Alison L. Des Forges, a historian who documented the 1994 genocide in Rwanda and
was an authority on human rights abuses in Central Africa, was a passenger on
Continental Airlines Flight 3407 when it crashed near Buffalo on Thursday night,
killing all 49 people on board. She was 66.

The death was announced by Human Rights Watch, the New York-based advocacy group
where Dr. Des Forges, who lived in Buffalo, served as senior adviser for its
Africa division.

Dr. Des Forges spent four years interviewing organizers and victims of the
Rwandan genocide, in which she estimated that at least 500,000 people died. She
testified before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, based in
Arusha, Tanzania, and at trials in Belgium, Switzerland, the Netherlands and
Canada. She also appeared on expert panels convened by the United Nations and
what is now the African Union, as well as the French and Belgian legislatures
and the United States Congress.

The MacArthur Foundation recognized her work with a $375,000 ''genius'' grant in
1999. Her book ''Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda,'' published
that year, has been called a definitive account of the genocide.

''Her death is a devastating blow,'' Kenneth Roth, the president of Human Rights
Watch, wrote in an e-mail message Friday to the organization's board of
directors. ''She epitomized the human rights activist -- principled,
dispassionate, committed to the truth and to using that truth to protect
ordinary people.''

Mahmood Mamdani, a professor of government and anthropology at Columbia and the
author of a 2001 book, ''When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism and
Genocide in Rwanda,'' called her ''the leading person who sought to document the
events leading up to the Rwandan genocide, so that future generations would have
the material on hand to draw the appropriate lessons from it.''

He added, ''This was her first commitment. Her second was to identify those
responsible for atrocities, no matter what their political affiliation, and to
see that justice was done. She was so committed that no amount of political
correctness, or displeasure on the part of the authorities, deterred her from
this task.''

Scott Straus, a political scientist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison
and the author of a 2006 book, ''The Order of Genocide: Race, Power and War in
Rwanda,'' called Dr. Des Forges's book ''a turning point in the documentation
and understanding of what happened in the Rwandan genocide.''

In 2001, after a Belgian court sentenced four Rwandans, two of them Roman
Catholic nuns, to long prison terms for their roles in the genocide, Dr. Des
Forges said she was deeply impressed by the proceedings -- the first in which a
jury of ordinary citizens was asked to sit in judgment of war crimes in another
nation.

''People maybe don't even realize just how revolutionary this jury trial, so far
from the events, really is,'' she told The New York Times then. The Belgian
trial, she said, ''has been done with a great deal more depth than those in
Rwanda.''

Dr. Des Forges was also an authority on human rights violations in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire.

Before the genocide, Dr. Des Forges was part of a group convened by Human Rights
Watch and other organizations that examined rights abuses, including killings
and attacks and kidnappings of civilians, in Rwanda from 1990 to 1993.

''She was a volunteer, and eventually the executive director forced her to take
a salary,'' said Emma Daly, communications director at Human Rights Watch.

After the genocide began in April 1994, Dr. Des Forges helped persuade diplomats
in Kigali, the Rwandan capital, to move several Rwandans to safety, including a
human rights advocate, Monique Mujawamariya.

While a central focus of her work was documenting the crimes of the Hutu-led
government that organized the three-month-long genocide, Dr. Des Forges later
leveled strong criticism of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-dominated
regime led by Paul Kagame, Rwanda's president, which has been in power since the
genocide. Dr. Des Forges was among critics who accused that regime of massacring
thousands of Rwandan civilians in 1994, of killing civilians and refugees in the
eastern Congo in 1996 and 1997 and of making repeated military interventions in
the Congo.

Alison B. Liebhafsky was born on Aug. 20, 1942, in Schenectady, N.Y., the
daughter of Herman A. Liebhafsky, a chemist, and Sybil Small. She graduated from
Radcliffe College in 1964, and received a master's degree in 1966 and a
doctorate in 1972, both in history, from Yale. Her master's thesis focused on
the impact of European colonization on Rwanda's social system, and her doctoral
dissertation was about Yuhi Musinga, the mwami, or ruler, of Rwanda from 1896 to
1931, during which Germany, and later Belgium, colonized Rwanda. She was fluent
in French.

Dr. Des Forges is survived by her husband, Roger V. Des Forges, a historian of
China who teaches at the State University of New York at Buffalo; a brother,
Douglas Small Liebhafsky; a sister-in-law, Wendy Gimbel; a daughter, Jessie Des
Forges; a son, Alexander Des Forges; and three grandchildren.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Alison Des Forges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WRITERS (87%); HISTORY
(78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); AIRLINES (78%); SENTENCING (76%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); TESTIMONY (74%); JURY TRIALS (74%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY
(73%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); POLITICS
(70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (68%); FOUNDATIONS
(67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); RELIGION (50%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (50%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (50%)

COMPANY: UNITED CONTINENTAL HOLDINGS INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%); AFRICAN UNION (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

TICKER: UAL (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481112 SCHEDULED FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); NAICS481111
SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION,
SCHEDULED (58%)

CITY: MADISON, WI, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); WISCONSIN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); CENTRAL AFRICA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); CANADA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
(79%); BELGIUM (57%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 6, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

State Forces Are Accused Of Abuses In Honduras

BYLINE: By ELISABETH MALKIN; Elisabeth Malkin reported from Tegucigalpa last
week and added updated information from Mexico City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras


Rosamaria Valeriano Flores was returning home from a visit to a public health
clinic and found herself in a crowd of people dispersing from a demonstration in
support of the ousted president, Manuel Zelaya. As she crossed the central
square of the Honduran capital, a group of soldiers and police officers pushed
her to the ground and beat her with their truncheons.

She said the men kicked out most of her top teeth, broke her ribs and split open
her head. ''A policeman spit in my face and said, 'You will die,' '' she said,
adding that the attack stopped when a police officer shouted at the men that
they would kill her.

Ms. Valeriano, 39, was sitting in the office of a Tegucigalpa human rights group
last week, speaking about the assault, which took place on Aug. 12. As she told
her story, mumbling to hide her missing teeth, she pointed to a scar on her
scalp and to her still-sore left ribs.

Since Mr. Zelaya was removed in a June 28 coup, security forces have tried to
halt opposition with beatings and mass arrests, human rights groups say. Eleven
people have been killed since the coup, according to the Committee for Families
of the Disappeared and Detainees in Honduras, or Cofadeh.

The number of violations and their intensity has increased since Mr. Zelaya
secretly returned to Honduras two weeks ago, taking refuge at the Brazilian
Embassy, human rights groups say.

The groups describe an atmosphere of growing impunity, one in which security
forces act unhindered by legal constraints. Their free hand had been
strengthened by an emergency decree allowing the police to detain anyone
suspected of posing a threat.

''In the 1980s, there were political assassinations, torture and
disappearances,'' said Bertha Oliva, Cofadeh's general coordinator, in an
interview last week, recalling the political repression of the country's
so-called dirty war. ''They were selective and hidden. But now there is massive
repression and defiance of the whole world. They do it in broad daylight,
without any scruples, with nothing to stop them.''

Amid the crackdown, a delegation of foreign ministers from the Organization of
American States is scheduled to arrive in the capital, Tegucigalpa, on Wednesday
in an attempt to restart negotiations between representatives for Mr. Zelaya and
Roberto Micheletti, the de facto president.

In advance of the meeting, Mr. Micheletti lifted the decree Monday.

The abuses could have a chilling effect on presidential elections scheduled for
Nov. 29. The de facto government and its supporters argue that the elections
will close the chapter on the coup and its aftermath, but the United Nations,
the United States and other governments have said that they will not recognize
the vote if it is conducted under the current conditions.

''Elections are a risk because people won't vote,'' said Javier Acevedo, a
lawyer with the Center for Research and the Promotion of Human Rights in
Tegucigalpa. ''The soldiers and police at the polls will be the same ones as
those who have been carrying out the repression.''

Investigators from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights visited in
August, and found a pattern of disproportionate force, arbitrary detentions and
control of information.

The group asked the de facto government to provide protective measures for
dozens of politicians, union leaders, teachers, human rights workers and
journalists who say they have been followed and threatened.

The de facto government responded that strong measures were needed against Mr.
Zelaya's supporters, whom they described as vandals, a point backed up by
government television advertisements showing burning buses and street
barricades. Some of the demonstrations have turned violent as some of Mr.
Zelaya's supporters have smashed storefronts and burned tires at street
barricades. The government says that three people have been killed since the
coup.

Mr. Micheletti has said the investigators from the Inter-American Commission
were biased, noting that its president, Luz Patricia Mejia, is Venezuelan. Much
of Honduras's political and economic elite feared that Mr. Zelaya was trying to
copy Venezuela's brand of socialism as he moved toward an alliance with that
nation's president, Hugo Chavez.

The Honduran government's human rights institutions have failed to respond to
the violations with any vigor, advocates say.

The human rights prosecutor, Sandra Ponce, is on vacation, according to news
reports. Ramon Custodio, the government human rights commissioner who fought
repression in the 1980s, has generally supported the coup, although he has
criticized some actions of the de facto government.

Groups that were vulnerable to human rights abuses before the coup face even
more risk now. Since the coup, for example, there have been six murders of gay
men or transvestites, according to gay rights groups. Until 2008, the average
number of such killings each year was three to six.

The day after Mr. Zelaya returned, the police broke up a demonstration by his
supporters outside the Brazilian Embassy with tear gas. As people were fleeing,
security forces tear-gassed the Cofadeh office, just blocks away. The action,
Ms. Oliva believes, was aimed at preventing Cofadeh lawyers from intervening by
taking testimony or seeking the release of people who were detained.

Since Mr. Zelaya's return, security forces also have been rumbling through poor
neighborhoods that are the base of his support. ''They are going into
neighborhoods in a way to intimidate people,'' said Mr. Acevedo, the lawyer. In
that time, the center has documented an increasing level of violence.
Investigators have seen more than two dozen people with bullet wounds in
hospitals, and some detainees have had their hands broken and have been burned
with cigarettes, he said.

While the police and soldiers are looking for the activists who have been
organizing resistance, the sweep seems to pick up anyone who gets in their way.

Yulian Lobo said her husband was arrested in the neighborhood of Villa Olimpica
and accused of having a grenade. ''It came out of nowhere,'' she said, adding
that her husband, a driver, had not been to pro-Zelaya marches.

Lesbia Marisol Flores, 38, is a resistance activist, but when the police beat
her up, she was waiting at a bus stop after attending the wake of a 24-year-old
woman who died after she was tear-gassed outside the Brazilian Embassy on Sept.
22.

''There were eight policemen and their faces were all covered,'' she said,
adding that they had selected her at random from the group at the bus stop.
''There was no motive. It is their hobby now.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Supporters of the ousted Honduran president, Manuel Zelaya, ran
from tear gas during clashes with the police two weeks ago in the capital,
Tegucigalpa, a day after Mr. Zelaya secretly returned and holed up in the
Brazilian Embassy. Below, a man lay wounded from a shot in the head during
another rally in July.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY ESTEBAN FELIX/ASSOCIATED PRESS
ARNULFO FRANCO/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A4)
 Officers clashed with university officials in August during a pro-Zelaya
student demonstration.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ORLANDO SIERRA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE --
GETTY IMAGES)(A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); COUPS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%);
BONE FRACTURES (76%); TORTURE (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); CLINICS &
OUTPATIENT SERVICES (73%); ASSASSINATION (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%)

PERSON: MANUEL ZELAYA (91%)

CITY: TEGUCIGALPA, HONDURAS (93%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (95%); BRAZIL (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Slain Exile Detailed Cruelty Of the Ruler of Chechnya

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS; C. J. Chivers reported from Vienna; London; Moscow;
Oslo; and Grozny, Gudermes and Mesker-Yurt, Chechnya. Michael Schwirtz
contributed reporting from Moscow.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3768 words


Umar S. Israilov saw the men who had come to kill him. They confronted him in
the neighborhood where he lived in hiding in Vienna. He must have sensed their
intentions, because he ran.

For more than two years, Mr. Israilov, a Chechen in exile, had formally accused
Russia's government of allowing a macabre pattern of crimes in Chechnya. Even by
the dark norms of violence in the Caucasus, his accusations were extraordinary.

A rebel fighter turned bodyguard of Ramzan A. Kadyrov, Chechnya's current
president, Mr. Israilov had access to the inner ring of Chechen power. Mr.
Kadyrov's career has been sponsored by Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin of
Russia, who as president lifted him from obscurity with unwavering Kremlin
support.

In written legal complaints, Mr. Israilov described many brutal acts by Mr.
Kadyrov and his subordinates, including executions of illegally detained men.
One executed man, Mr. Israilov said, had been beaten with a shovel handle by Mr.
Kadyrov and Adam Delimkhanov, now a member of Russia's Parliament. Another
prisoner, the defector said, was sodomized by a prominent police officer and at
Mr. Kadyrov's order put to death.

Mr. Israilov said he and others had been tortured by Mr. Kadyrov, who amused
himself by personally giving prisoners electric shocks or firing pistols at
their feet.

Mr. Kadyrov and Mr. Delimkhanov refused to be interviewed for this article. A
spokesman for Mr. Kadyrov released a statement decrying ''a large-scale and
purposeful campaign'' to discredit Chechnya's president and government. The
campaign, the spokesman said, was the ''deeply conspiratorial initiative of some
ideologists of terrorism and an armed criminal underground.''

Since 1994, Russia's wars against nationalist and Islamic separatists in
Chechnya have been fought with sinister conduct by all sides.

Human rights organizations and independent journalists have documented patterns
of abduction, detention, disappearances, collective punishment, extrajudicial
executions and the systematic use of torture by Russian and Chechen authorities,
including Mr. Kadyrov. The separatists have unapologetically employed terrorist
attacks, including on children.

But the character of Mr. Israilov's allegations was different. He had been an
insider. And with his father, Sharpuddi -- who says that Mr. Kadyrov illegally
detained him for more than 10 months, and that his captors tortured victims with
a gas torch -- he filed complaints to Russian prosecutors and the European Court
of Human Rights in 2006 and 2007.

The Israilovs' filings, never made public, appear to have been the first formal
allegations based on the actions of Mr. Kadyrov, who has been celebrated by the
Kremlin as a hero for marginalizing the insurgency in the Republic of Chechnya
since 2004.

Taken together, their accounts offer a window into Russia's counterinsurgency
campaign and the climb to power of Chechens in Kremlin favor as the separatists'
influence waned. They also detail efforts by Chechnya's government to suppress
knowledge of its policies through official lies, obstruction and witness
intimidation.

Since last year, the Israilovs had cooperated with The New York Times, including
by providing copies of sealed court records.

Umar Israilov, 27, was a complicated figure: a participant in a particularly
ugly war, motivated at least in part by revenge. The Times spent several months
evaluating the allegations by him and his father, examining the charges against
the wealth of materials on Chechen human rights abuses, and interviewing
supporting witnesses and independent investigators who had examined the Israilov
case.

In addition, the newspaper obtained corroborating statements from another
government insider and from another victim, who fled Chechnya but remain in
hiding; they said they saw Umar Israilov being tortured.

Almost all of the people who assisted asked for anonymity, saying they feared
reprisal. Ultimately, The Times postponed publication of the Israilovs' accounts
out of concern for the safety of witnesses and people who helped the
investigation, some of whom wanted to relocate.

The threats were palpable. Several of President Kadyrov's critics have been
silenced by violence, including rivals, journalists and former detainees and
their relatives.

Moreover, Mr. Israilov told Austrian authorities last year that an agent sent
from Russia by Mr. Kadyrov had threatened him. Under questioning by
counterterrorism officials, the agent told of his mission to retrieve the
whistle-blower, according to a written summary of his interrogation, and said
Mr. Kadyrov kept a list of 300 enemies to be killed.

On Jan. 9, after consulting with one of Umar Israilov's legal advocates, The
Times notified Mr. Putin's office that it sought interviews with Russian
officials about these allegations. Mr. Israilov was prepared to publicize his
story.

Dmitri Peskov, Mr. Putin's spokesman, declined to comment in detail, saying,
''It's not wise to comment on any rumors.''

On Jan. 13, Mr. Israilov left his apartment, where he had been watching his
three young children while his pregnant wife was away, to buy yogurt at a nearby
market. Outside, he was confronted by at least two men.

They argued, and one of the men tried to pistol-whip Mr. Israilov, according to
Gerhard Jarosch, a spokesman for Austria's prosecutor. Mr. Israilov bolted. He
still had received no protection. In broad daylight on a Vienna street, he ran
for his life alone.

One of his pursuers opened fire. Mr. Israilov fell, shot in an arm, a leg and
the abdomen, according to Mr. Jarosch. A short while later, he was dead.

A Young Rebel, Caught

For Umar Israilov, the pain of Chechnya's wars began early. He was herding cows
in 1995 near his town, Mesker-Yurt, when it was struck by Russian artillery
fire. He hid until the barrage ended. When he returned home, he found his
mother's shrapnel-riddled remains. He was 13.

Mr. Israilov's anger simmered, he said, but when he asked to join the rebels,
they rejected him because of his age. The first war lasted until 1996, when the
separatists won limited independence and the Russian Army withdrew.

In 1999, during a nearly lawless period of Chechen self-rule, Mr. Israilov
attended a camp at Kurchaloi, his father said. The camp was in a network of
jihadist schools run by Shamil Basayev and Ibn al-Khattab, rebel commanders
whose drift toward terrorism put them among Russia's most wanted men.

The Russian Army blitzed Chechnya again in 1999. Mr. Israilov assumed a support
role for a guerrilla cell, monitoring Russian troops to help insurgents avoid
ambushes and maintaining an arms cache in a cemetery. The Russian military
suspected him, he said, and troops searched his relatives' houses repeatedly.
Eventually he joined the insurgency full time.

Mr. Israilov insisted that he had never been in combat or committed violence.
Such claims are common among former fighters; his could not be independently
verified.

Russian prosecutors, in an attempt to have him extradited last year, claimed he
gave insurgents a rifle for an attack on a polling station and helped rig an
explosion against a convoy in which a Russian soldier was severely wounded.

Austria denied the extradition request, calling the evidence insufficient.

By early 2003, Mr. Israilov, then 22, was living in a dug-out shelter in the
woods. On April 15, he said, he and two other fighters ventured out to buy food
and were arrested by pro-Kremlin Chechens.

An ordeal began. After being beaten for two days, he said, the three captives
were driven to a boxing club in Gudermes and presented to Mr. Kadyrov. Mr.
Israilov's clothes were bloodstained, his body bruised. His nose had been
broken.

Today, Mr. Kadyrov, 32, is Chechnya's most powerful man. Marginally educated but
bristling with intensity and self-confidence, he is not just the republic's
president but also the de facto commander of its sprawling security forces and
arbiter of much of its oil flow. He also leads an extravagant personality cult
and has officially sponsored a local resurgence in Chechen religion and culture.

As he has seized power, he has borrowed from Stalinism, Sufi Islam and Chechen
nationalism to erode the insurgency, bend a frightened society to his will and
rebuild the republic at a blur.

Along the way, he has been cast by his critics as Russia's most sadistic
gangster.

He has been accused of crimes capital, carnal and municipal, ranging from
murder, torture and kidnapping to cavorting with prostitutes and exacting
kickbacks from government workers to build monuments to his father and himself.

He has always denied all the allegations. In interviews since 2004 with The
Times, he sometimes laughed at them, and while he called himself ''a warrior,''
he insisted that he fought only for peace.

''I am a Muslim'' he said in 2006, when pressed about allegations of kidnapping.

''A good Muslim would never commit a crime,'' he said. ''He will always be
facing God, and he will always do good to people.''

He added, as he drove a reporter at high speeds through the Chechen capital,
Grozny, with assault rifles strewn about his car's seats: ''I am an official
person. I am not a bandit.''

On the day Mr. Israilov met him, Mr. Kadyrov was almost unknown. His father,
Akhmad H. Kadyrov, formerly a leading separatist mufti, had switched sides in
2000 to ally himself with the Kremlin. The reward was a plum: an appointment to
Chechnya's top administrative post.

Ramzan Kadyrov led his father's bodyguard, a growing militia of former rebels
known as the Presidential Security Service.

The service, a free-wheeling regiment with military, police and intelligence
duties, had no basis in Russian law.

''We've caught some devils,'' one of their captors said to Mr. Kadyrov as he
stepped from his gym, Mr. Israilov recalled. Mr. Kadyrov laughed and gave an
order: ''Take them to the base.''

The Torture Chamber

The town of Tsentoroi was once a rebels' redoubt. By 2003 it had become an
informal seat of power for rebels who changed sides.

Mr. Israilov was driven there, he said, and confined with other detainees in
cells outside a weight-lifting center. According to victims and human rights
groups, the weight room was one of several torture chambers run by pro-Kremlin
Chechens.

That day, Mr. Israilov recalled, officers from the F.S.B., Russia's domestic
intelligence service, beat him and tried to force him to confess to killing at
least 17 people. Mr. Israilov said he refused as Mr. Kadyrov watched.

Mr. Kadyrov finally took over. ''Ramzan slapped me in the face once; then his
guards beat me,'' he said. ''Ramzan said, 'Stop it,' and asked me questions.
Then he began beating me again.''

According to Mr. Israilov, he was beaten a few times a week for three months,
often after being tied to fitness machines. His torturers wanted information
about other rebels, he said.

On one occasion, he said, Mr. Delimkhanov, the Kadyrov associate now in Russia's
lower house of Parliament, beat him with a shovel handle just before Mr. Kadyrov
twice fired a pistol near his feet. On another occasion, Mr. Israilov said, he
was connected to wires and Mr. Kadyrov administered electric shocks. '' 'That's
the thing,' '' he recalled Mr. Kadyrov saying with a laugh. '' 'That's the
thing.' ''

He was also poked in the leg by unknown men with a heated metal rod, he said,
and struck in the lip by a fragment of a ricocheting bullet fired by another
unknown man. (Scars on Mr. Israilov's lip and leg were visible.)

Others faced worse. On his third week in captivity, Mr. Israilov said, a
cellmate, Shamil Gerikhanov, was sodomized with a shovel handle by a guard
commander.

One night he listened, he said, as Aidamir Gushayev, who had organized a rebel
cell's finances, was interrogated by Mr. Kadyrov. The future president demanded
money and grew frustrated. Mr. Israilov heard a gunshot. For a moment, Mr.
Israilov recalled, there was silence, and then there were bursts of automatic
fire. ''It sounded like each bodyguard fired an entire magazine,'' he said.

Mr. Kadyrov snarled, '' 'Gazavat,' '' he said. The word is Chechen for holy war.
It was also the guards' slang, Mr. Israilov said, for an area where victims were
buried in unmarked graves.

Two Conversions

When Mr. Israilov was captured, the insurgency had already lost Grozny, but it
remained strong. To defeat it, Russia and Mr. Kadyrov fought militarily.
Simultaneously, Mr. Kadyrov mounted a campaign of inducements, amnesty offers,
threats and violence against rebels' families to persuade separatists to change
sides.

In the summer of 2003, Mr. Israilov said, the guards led him in shackles to a
sauna, where Mr. Kadyrov made an offer: join the presidential security service
and live. The alternative, Mr. Israilov said, was clear. He accepted.

Mr. Kadyrov gave him a pistol, according to the court complaint, and Umar
Israilov began work in the ''kadyrovtsie'' -- the Kadyrovs' troops.

Asked later why he did not turn the pistol against a man he said had tortured
him, Mr. Israilov replied, ''Because I wanted to live.''

As part of its defense against these allegations, Mr. Kadyrov's office said last
month that it had no record of Mr. Israilov's having served Mr. Kadyrov. Russian
prosecutorial records from Chechnya, however, show that Mr. Israilov worked in
Mr. Kadyrov's guard beginning in late 2003.

For about 10 months, Mr. Israilov said, he worked at Tsentoroi. During this time
he saw at least 20 illegally detained people tortured, he said, with Mr. Kadyrov
participating in several sessions. Many victims were the relatives of the
boyeviki, the insurgents.

The sessions Mr. Israilov described aligned with a shift in Russia's
counterinsurgency effort -- away from mass detentions and neighborhood sweeps by
the Russian Army, to actions by Chechen units against rebels' families, a form
of pinpoint collective punishment.

''Ramzan himself said that the best way to get boyeviki out of the forest was to
do it through relatives,'' Mr. Israilov said. ''It was basically his slogan.''

One day, Mr. Israilov said, he watched the commander who had sodomized his
cellmate, Shamil Gerikhanov, plead with Mr. Kadyrov to order the victim killed.
''Take him and finish him,'' Mr. Kadyrov said. Mr. Gerikhanov was driven away
and never seen again, Mr. Israilov said; the rapist, whose first name was
Alanbek, was promoted to be a police commander in Grozny.

In early 2004, Mr. Israilov was transferred to his home village to lead a police
squad, according to his court file.

Mr. Kadyrov's stature in Chechnya was rising. His father was assassinated in
May, and Mr. Putin, then president, offered him condolences in a meeting
broadcast on state television -- a clear endorsement of his role as Moscow's
Chechen strongman.

But as the war evolved from a Russian-Chechen fight to an internecine struggle,
Mr. Israilov's father urged him to desert, saying his job required violence
against his former friends, who would retaliate. ''I told him he could not keep
that job without putting everyone in danger,'' Sharpuddi Israilov said.

That November, using a counterfeit passport bought with bribe money, Umar
Israilov and his wife, Madina Sagiyeva, fled to Belarus. There, he said, he
traveled to the border and presented his fake passport and $20 to a Belarussian
border guard, who let them cross to Poland, where they asked for asylum.

Retaliation

In late 2004, two weeks after Umar Israilov deserted, a police supervisor
appeared at a construction company in Grozny where his father worked. The
officer told the elder Israilov that Mr. Kadyrov had summoned him, and led him
to a car where his wife sat in the back. The police had already searched their
apartment, according to court filings, stolen about $6,000 of their savings and
left their three children, ages 6 to 12, locked inside. The police were looking
for Umar and his weapon.

Sharpuddi Israilov and his wife were driven to Tsentoroi, where they learned
that his son's sister-in-law had also been detained. Within minutes, Mr.
Israilov was knocked down, beaten and dragged to the weight room, according to
him and his wife.

He was handcuffed to a pool table and his legs were lashed to a fitness machine,
Mr. Israilov said. Eight Chechens began to beat, kick and stomp on him, he said.
Three teeth were knocked out.

''They watched until the moment when I was about to pass out; then they stopped
and asked a question,'' he said. ''They did not want a corpse. They wanted
information.''

He passed out. When he woke, the men told him they had learned that his son was
in Poland. They attached wires to one toe on each foot, he said, and began to
shock him, pouring water on him to intensify his pain. ''They were laughing,
watching my convulsions,'' he said.

Among the half-dozen others in the room, Mr. Israilov said, was Supyan Ekiyev,
one of Mr. Kadyrov's guards, who was accused of collaborating in an insurgent
attack. He hung by his arms from an exercise machine. His jaw appeared broken,
Sharpuddi Israilov said. His hands and legs had been burned by open flames. (The
next week, his body was found near Grozny, ''heavily distorted by torture,''
according to Memorial, a Russian human rights group.)

That night, Mr. Israilov said, Ramzan Kadyrov arrived to torture the prisoners.

By this time, the insurgency had passed its peak. A run of guerrilla operations
in 2004 had been followed by terrorist attacks, including the siege at a school
in Beslan, that showed the rebels still had sizable forces and considerable
resources.

But the terrorist attacks undercut the insurgency's support and re-energized
Russia's efforts to defeat it, expanding Mr. Kadyrov's mandate.

Mr. Kadyrov, by then a deputy prime minister, was viewed as Chechnya's
president-in-waiting. He needed only to turn 30, the post's legally required
age. He was 28.

Mr. Kadyrov did not beat the elder Mr. Israilov that night. But watching
Chechnya's most prominent man wander between victims -- beating some, shocking
others, playing billiards -- Mr. Israilov felt disgust. ''He just came in to
have fun,'' Mr. Israilov said.

In Chechnya last year, The Times found another person, unrelated to the
Israilovs, who survived detention at the compound at the same time. The former
detainee, clearly terrified, corroborated details of the treatment, including
the torture of another detainee, and described abductions and the center's
grounds in the same manner as the Israilovs, but did not want to be identified,
citing a fear that relatives would be killed.

Sharpuddi Israilov's allegations are also consistent with those of another
Chechen in hiding, who has asked that his identity remain undisclosed. The man,
who filed a complaint to the European court in 2007, said he was abducted from a
bus in November 2004 and detained for a long period at a base controlled by Mr.
Kadyrov, where he was beaten, burned by a gas flame and subjected to electric
shocks, according to the European Human Rights Advocacy Center, a London-based
organization that helps Russians and Georgians seek justice in Europe.

After Sharpuddi Israilov was detained, he and Umar Israilov said, Mr. Kadyrov
and another Chechen official called Umar in Poland and demanded his return to
Chechnya. They apparently found his Polish number on his father's phone.

Mr. Kadyrov was enraged, Umar Israilov said, and told him of the capture of his
father and other relatives. ''I will kill them all,'' Mr. Israilov recalled Mr.
Kadyrov saying.

''I will not come back,'' Mr. Israilov said, and hung up.

Escape to the West

Umar Israilov's defiance appeared to work. His relatives were not killed. His
sister-in-law and his father's wife were released. (Both have received asylum in
Europe.)

His father's detention, however, dragged on. He was transferred to Gudermes and
held until Oct. 4, 2005, more than 10 months.

Mr. Israilov said he was not tortured again but shared space with as many as 100
detainees, mostly fighters' relatives or government fighters accused of minor
crimes. Many were beaten or subjected to shocks.

Among those he saw in custody, he said, was Khamad Umarov, the 72-year-old
father of Doku Umarov, then a senior rebel commander and now president of the
separatist shadow government.

Khamad Umarov's kidnapping was reported at the time; separatist Web sites have
since reported that he died in custody.

On the day the elder Mr. Israilov was released, he said, he was dropped in front
of his home. He was bearded and scarred and had lost about 45 pounds.

In early 2006, according to his complaint to the European Court, a Russian
prosecutor asked him to sign a statement saying that he had made up his story of
detention to cover for time spent away from home with a mistress.

Mr. Israilov said he threw the paper in the prosecutor's face.

Then he fled with his wife, Shovda Viskhanova, to Norway for asylum. By that
time, Umar Israilov had moved to Austria and received asylum there.

In interviews, both men said that though they been granted the possibility of
peaceful lives, they wanted to obtain justice and hold the Russian and Chechen
governments accountable. They filed separate complaints to the European Court of
Human Rights in late 2006.

The court, established by the European Convention on Human Rights, has become a
legal venue of last resort for citizens of countries that have signed the
convention, which include Russia. Chechnya, as a republic of Russia, is covered
by Russian conventions and laws.

To hide their locations, the Israilovs provided only a post office box in a
third Western country. Unbeknownst to them, the court sought more information
but could not find them. The case was dropped and expunged from files, although
the Israilov family is resubmitting documents to have it reinstated.

In August, the Chechen who said he had been sent to Austria by Mr. Kadyrov found
Umar Israilov and asked him to withdraw his complaints or risk being killed and
having his family killed. Mr. Israilov refused, he and his lawyer said. The
Austrian government released the man and did not protect Mr. Israilov.

In the days since Mr. Israilov's killing, Austrian police and counterterrorism
officers have arrested eight Chechens in the case. All had received or applied
for asylum, the prosecutor's spokesman said. The suspects were still being
questioned and the evidence reviewed, he said, and their motives were not yet
clear.

Umar Israilov, for his part, had all but predicted his fate.

''A guy from our village works as a commander in the kadyrovtsie,'' he said at
the end of his final interview with a reporter last year. ''He told it to my
cousin: that I should be very, very careful, because Ramzan promises a bounty
for me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Umar S. Israilov's funeral Jan. 22 in Vienna. He accused
Chechnya's president of torture. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSEF POLLEROSS FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (pg.A1)
FRIEND OF THE KREMLIN: President Ramzan A. Kadyrov of Chechnya, with a golden
pistol. He has been accused of personally participating in torture. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY MUSA SADULAYEV/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
DEFECTOR KILLED AT AGE 27: Umar S. Israilov, a Chechen exile who accused Mr.
Kadyrov of rights violations, was fatally shot in Vienna last month. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY C. J. CHIVERS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A14)
IN CUSTODY: Members of Chechnya's Presidential Security Service with a suspect
in 2003. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREY YUGOV/ITAR-TASS)
A FATHER BEREAVED: Sharpuddi Israilov, right, at a Vienna mosque on Jan. 16,
three days after his son Umar, in exile in Austria, was shot and killed. Father
and son said they were tortured in Chechnya. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSEF POLLEROSS FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A15) CHART: REBEL, PRESIDENTIAL BODYGUARD, DEFECTOR, AND
MURDER VICTIM: Umar Israilov and his father, Sharpuddi, say they were captured
and tortured by forces of the pro-Kremlin Chechen leadership
Umar was recently murdered. Their complaints to the European Court of Human
Rights illuminate brutal policies used in Russia's counterinsurgency campaign
and a climate of official impunity. (pg.A14)
 MAPS: CHECHNYA (pg.A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); TORTURE (88%); TERRORISM (78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); VIOLENT CRIME
(76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(71%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); WRITERS
(69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (59%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (57%)

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); AUSTRIA (94%); EUROPE (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(90%); CAUCASIAN STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 16, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official Endorses War Report About Gaza

BYLINE: By SHARON OTTERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 546 words


A Palestinian effort to formally endorse the findings of a United Nations report
on war crimes committed during the Gaza war last winter received a strong
statement of support on Thursday from the top United Nations human rights
official, Navanethem Pillay.

Opening a two-day meeting in Geneva of the Human Rights Council, Ms. Pillay, the
United Nations high commissioner for human rights, told the 47-member council
that she concurred with the report's recommendations and its call for ''urgent
action to counter impunity.''

The report found evidence that both Israeli and Palestinian actions amounted to
war crimes but it was more harshly critical of Israel. It called on the United
Nations Security Council to monitor the two sides' compliance with its
recommendation that they conduct credible investigations into accusations of war
crimes and possible crimes against humanity in the three-week Gaza war. It also
recommended that the International Criminal Court in The Hague consider
prosecution if they did not comply.

The Palestinian push for an immediate vote on endorsing the report reversed an
earlier decision, made under American and Israeli pressure. Some form of
endorsement is expected on Friday.

In its three years of existence, the Human Rights Council has regularly issued
resolutions that condemn Israeli actions in the Palestinian territories, as did
the  Commission on Human Rights, which it succeeded.

When the council set up the fact-finding mission that wrote the report,  the
mandate was limited to investigating possible war crimes committed by Israel. It
was later widened to include Palestinian actions against Israelis.

By the Israeli military's count, 1,166 people were killed in the war:  295
noncombatants, 709 of  what it called Hamas terrorist operatives, and 162  men
whose affiliations remain undetermined.

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza said  1,417 died: 926 civilians,
236 combatants and 255 police officers.

Israel says  about 400 Gazans die of natural causes every month, possibly
accounting for the discrepancy in the numbers.

Thirteen Israelis were killed during the fighting, 10 of them soldiers and 3 of
them civilians.

Israel did not cooperate with the United Nations inquiry, and its officials have
repeatedly called the report one-sided and a sop to terrorism. Israeli officials
have warned that forwarding the report to the secretary general and the Security
Council could end any possibility of talks that could lead to a peace process.

The rights council is debating the  wording of its  draft resolution, which
calls on ''all concerned parties, including United Nations bodies,'' to take up
the report, but could be reframed to follow  a Brazilian proposal to keep the
report within the Human Rights Council's purview for now.

Douglas M. Griffiths, the American delegate at the meeting  on Thursday,
reiterated that the United States did not believe that the report was a matter
for Security Council consideration and encouraged Israel to carry out its own
investigations.

He said it was important to ''be mindful of the larger context of ongoing
efforts to restart permanent status negotiations that would lead to the creation
of a Palestinian state,'' The Associated Press reported.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations' top human rights
official, Thursday in Geneva.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JEAN PIERRE-CLATOT/A.F.P. -- GETTY
IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
TERRORISM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HAMAS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); PEACE PROCESS (72%);
ARMED FORCES (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (56%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); SWITZERLAND (93%);
UNITED STATES (93%); BRAZIL (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Woman the Mullahs Fear

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 374 words


Men hold all of the meaningful levers of political power in Iran, but it is a
woman they fear. If not, why is the mullah-led government trying to shut down
the operations of Shirin Ebadi?

Ms. Ebadi, a lawyer and her country's leading human rights activist, is the
first Muslim woman to win a Nobel Peace Prize. On Monday, the authorities
stormed her private office, seizing her computers and her clients' documents. A
week earlier, they closed her Center for Defenders of Human Rights, a coalition
of human rights groups and other activists whose members had planned to
celebrate the 60th anniversary of the United Nations' Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

When she was awarded the peace prize in 2003, the Nobel committee called Ms.
Ebadi ''a courageous person'' for standing up against Iran's bullying
government. In the years since, she has endured repeated death threats from
radical groups and regular government intimidation. That courage has never
faltered.

With presidential elections scheduled for June, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
and his allies apparently decided they could not risk letting Ms. Ebadi continue
the work she has done with distinction (and without pay) for the past 15 years
-- exposing government violations of human rights and defending human rights and
democracy activists.

No doubt the authorities were unhappy with a report produced by her center that
was cited recently by the United Nations' secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, when
the General Assembly approved a nonbinding resolution condemning Iran's human
rights record. But we suspect their ambitions go far beyond trying to suppress
one report. They are clearly hoping to intimidate Ms. Ebadi and all other
independent voices in Iran. That must not be allowed to happen.

We condemn Tehran's mistreatment of this woman of extraordinary honor and
courage. We urge the United States, Europe and other major powers to keep
pressure on Iran to ensure that no further harm comes to Ms. Ebadi and that she
remains free to do her essential work.

If Tehran wants relief from international criticism about its human rights
record, it must start by adhering to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and respecting the rights of all of its citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); RELIGION (91%); NOBEL PRIZES (90%); AWARDS & PRIZES
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ANNIVERSARIES (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ELECTIONS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(73%); APPROVALS (71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (58%); BAN KI-MOON (54%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); IRAN (88%); UNITED STATES (79%);
EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Freezes Assets of 2 Burmese Businessmen Who Backed Military Junta

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


The United States has frozen the assets of two Burmese businessmen and their
companies for aiding the military junta in Myanmar, as Human Rights Watch
assailed the regime's ''already dismal human rights record'' in its annual
report.

In one of the final actions on human rights by the departing Bush
administration, the Treasury Department punished  Win Aung and Zaw Zaw, for
supporting the junta. Mr. Win Aung, 55, a construction tycoon, has backed the
military government financially. Mr. Zaw Zaw, 42, has extensive holdings in
timber, gems, resort properties and hotels through his Max Myanmar Group.

''Congress and the administration have made clear the need to apply vigorous
sanctions against the Burmese junta as long as it continues to suppress
democratic dissent,'' said Adam J. Szubin, director of the Office of Foreign
Assets Control. He said the imprisonment of leading pro-democracy activists
marked Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, as ''one of the world's worst violators
of human rights.''

Existing sanctions also were broadened Thursday against several other entities.
Among these were the financial network of Tay Za, described by the United States
agency as ''a notorious regime henchman and arms dealer;'' 10 Singaporean firms
owned or controlled by Cecilia Ng and her husband, Steven Law; and Myanmar
Ivanhoe Copper, owner of the country's largest copper mine.

The sanctions, which freeze assets under United States jurisdiction and prohibit
Americans from doing business with the companies, were made under two executive
orders and an act of Congress in 2008. Canada, Australia, the European Union and
Switzerland have also instituted sanctions against Myanmar.

''China, Russia, India and Thailand continue to provide diplomatic support'' for
the junta, according to Human Rights Watch, the independent monitoring group
based in New York.

The group, in its annual report released Wednesday, said Myanmar's already poor
record on human rights ''worsened following the devastation of cyclone Nargis in
early May.'' The cyclone left an estimated 137,000 dead and missing, the group
said, with more than two million left homeless or in need of aid.

The ruling generals in Myanmar blocked the timely delivery of humanitarian aid
to storm-damaged areas in the Irrawaddy Delta, one of the world's most fertile
and important rice-growing regions. The junta, fearing a foreign military
invasion, refused deliveries of aid from other countries that had ships waiting
offshore. The military also kept foreign aid workers from traveling to the storm
zone for weeks.

''Two months after the cyclone, an estimated 700,000 people had received no aid
whatsoever,'' according to the Human Rights Watch report. The group also said a
constitutional referendum in May was marked by ''repressive media laws, an
almost total ban of freedom of expression,'' government corruption, ballot
stuffing, voter intimidation and coercion, and ''the continuing widespread
detention of political activists.''

The report further criticized Myanmar's forced and systematic recruitment of
child soldiers, as well as continuing attacks against civilians, particularly
ethnic minorities in Karen and Shan States. Other abuses included forced labor,
torture and sexual violence, and the arrests, imprisonment and suppression of
democracy advocates and journalists.

Human Rights Watch also noted the junta's extension of the house arrest of Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize laureate and opposition leader who
has been under house arrest for 13 of the last 19 years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); MILITARY RULE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ELECTION FRAUD (89%); MYANMAR CYCLONE NARGIS
(89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (88%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (76%); FINANCIAL
CRIME COUNTERMEASURES (76%); HOTELS & MOTELS (75%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%);
CORRUPTION (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (72%); EUROPEAN
UNION (72%); RESORTS (71%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(69%); ELECTION MONITORING (67%); DISASTER RELIEF (66%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(66%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (66%); SEVERE WEATHER (66%); COPPER MINING (65%);
REFERENDUMS (61%); VOTERS & VOTING (61%); NATURAL DISASTERS (61%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); CANADA
(79%); HONG KONG (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%); THAILAND (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (54%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Groups to Push For Exceptions To Lobby Rule

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When it came time for President Obama to pick a human rights chief, many around
him thought Tom Malinowski was the obvious choice.

As the Washington advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, Mr. Malinowski has
fought slaughter in Darfur, repression in Myanmar and torture in the United
States. He served in the State Department and on the National Security Council
under the last Democratic president. But he had one liability: he was a
registered lobbyist.

The fact that Mr. Malinowski lobbied on behalf of genocide victims rather than
military contractors, investment firms or pharmaceutical companies made no
difference. Mr. Obama's anti-lobbyist rules do not distinguish between those who
advocate for moneyed interests and those who advocate for public interests, and
so Mr. Malinowski was ruled out. But in the process, he has become the symbol of
a deep discontent among many Democrats over Mr. Obama's policy.

''It's an outrage,'' said Stephen Rickard, executive director of the Open
Society Policy Center, an advocacy organization. ''Tom is one of the most
effective and dedicated human rights activists in Washington, and you could get
20 people to say that. It's extremely unfortunate that Tom and people like Tom
can't be brought in to use their talents.''

The dispute over the policy underscores the tension between the grand gestures
of the campaign trail and the undesired consequences once in office. As a
candidate, Mr. Obama presented himself as a reformer who would purge Washington
of the insidious influence of special interests. As president, he has found some
of his own supporters among those purged.

Although Mr. Obama has issued a few waivers to allow activists to work in his
administration, the broad sweep of his rules points to the lasting damage of the
scandal surrounding the powerful lobbyist Jack Abramoff, who pleaded guilty in
2006 to  fraud, tax evasion and conspiracy to bribe public officials. The
assumption underlying the Obama policy, critics say, is that all lobbying is
suspect, even legitimate advocacy at the heart of a democratic process.

''It wasn't a problem of too much democracy,'' said Larry Ottinger, president of
the Center for Lobbying in the Public Interest. ''It was a problem of money
corrupting politics.''

David J. Kramer, who was President George W. Bush's assistant secretary of state
for democracy, human rights and labor, the job Mr. Malinowski did not get, said,
''It does not make sense to me to bar someone who lobbied not for personal or
corporate gain but for the greater good, particularly when loopholes have been
made for people in industry.''

A coalition of nonprofit groups has started a campaign to exempt lobbyists for
charitable and social welfare organizations that have tax-free status, meeting
with presidential aides and sending them a package of ideas for rewriting the
policy. Some senior officials privately agree with the effort, concluding that
they are hurting the administration by effectively barring people who lobbied on
behalf of human rights, environmental and consumer causes espoused by Mr. Obama.

But White House officials said there had been no internal debate on the matter
and flatly dismissed the proposals, adding that they would not consider any
changes because it would start the administration down a slippery slope of
declaring some lobbyists acceptable and others unacceptable.

''You can't have a value judgment,'' said Rahm Emanuel, the White House chief of
staff.

David Axelrod, the president's senior adviser, said Mr. Obama understood the
tradeoff. Public trust in government is so fragile, he said, that it was
important to stick to the campaign promise.

''It's painful,'' Mr. Axelrod said. ''There are a lot of good people out there
who are philosophically simpatico with us and are very skilled and would be very
valuable to us.''

But, he said, ''you can't have carve-outs for lobbyists you like and exclude
those that you don't. It would be very hard for people to understand that
distinction. This is one of those cases where we've had to sacrifice the help of
a lot of very valuable people.''

Mr. Obama signed his lobbying order on his first full day in office, banning
anyone who was a registered lobbyist from working for any executive agency  they
had lobbied in the past two years  or in any other agency on an issue they had
lobbied on in that time. As a practical matter, the order meant that most
registered lobbyists could not take jobs in their areas of expertise. The policy
was praised as ''groundbreaking'' in a letter from groups like Common Cause and
the League of Women Voters.

The White House has granted three waivers, the first to William J. Lynn, a
Raytheon lobbyist who became deputy defense secretary. The other two went to
Cecilia Munoz of the National Council of La Raza, who is now White House
director of intergovernmental affairs, and Jocelyn Frye of the National
Partnership for Women and Families, who is now Michelle Obama's policy director.

The Lynn waiver provoked criticism because a lobbyist for a military contractor
seemed exactly what the policy was aimed at, but Mr. Obama argued that Mr. Lynn
was uniquely qualified. Since then, the administration has eschewed waivers.
Among those left out of jobs are people like Mr. Malinowski. He declined to
comment.

The coalition of groups protesting the policy said Mr. Obama's stance was
actually hurting transparency by discouraging people from registering as
lobbyists. Some nonprofits registered many staff members even if they did little
lobbying, but now, the groups said in an April 9 letter to Mr. Obama, the
attitude has changed from ''when in doubt, report'' to ''don't report unless
clearly required.''

The issue has pitted longtime friends against each other. Norm Eisen, the White
House special counsel for ethics, is in charge of enforcing the policy. On a
White House blog, he called the restrictions ''some of the toughest ethics rules
ever imposed'' to stop those who go through ''the revolving door between
government service and the private sector in order to achieve personal gain at
the expense of the public interest.''

Before joining the White House, Mr. Eisen co-founded Citizens for Responsibility
and Ethics in Washington -- a group that is now part of the coalition protesting
his policy.

''Their denigration of lobbyists sounded great on the campaign trail, but it's a
lot harder to govern with it,'' said Melanie Sloan, the executive director
recruited by Mr. Eisen. ''They've let the political call of being anti-lobbyist
get in the way of how things really work.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tom Malinowski, the Washington advocacy director for Human
Rights Watch.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KIM JUN-HO/YONHAP)(A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (85%); EXECUTIVES (78%); CORRUPTION
(78%); POLITICS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (76%); CONSPIRACY (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (71%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (70%);
TAXES & TAXATION (70%); CHARITIES (69%); BRIBERY (67%); TAX FRAUD (67%); TAX LAW
(62%); SCANDALS (62%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (55%); GUILTY PLEAS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SUDAN (92%); MYANMAR (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 23, 2009 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Rights Group Accuses Saudi Arabia of 'Gross' Abuses

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The human rights group Amnesty International accused Saudi Arabia on Wednesday
of using its campaign against terrorism as a facade for ''a sustained assault on
human rights'' and said the rest of the world had failed to hold the authorities
to account for ''gross violations.''

Its report  said thousands of people had been arrested and detained in virtual
secrecy ''while others have been killed in uncertain circumstances.'' It accused
the Saudi authorities of using torture to extract confessions and of using their
''powerful international clout to get away with it.''

Rich in oil, Saudi Arabia is an important   Western ally, both as a bulwark
against Iran  and as a wealthy and influential player in the Middle East crisis.
But it has been under Western pressure to combat terrorism since 15 of the 19
hijackers in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks were found to be Saudi citizens.

Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, is also a Saudi national although the
authorities stripped him of his passport in the 1990s.

Abdulrahman Alhadlaq, a Saudi Interior Ministry official, told The Associated
Press that Amnesty International's assertions were ''claims that have to be
proven.''

''Our policies on human rights are very clear and the orders given are for
prisoners to be treated with respect and according to international human rights
principles,'' he said, according to The A.P.

In the 69-page report, Amnesty  said that since Sept. 11, 2001, ''and in the
wake of a series of attacks by armed groups and individuals inside Saudi Arabia,
the Saudi Arabian authorities have imposed a range of counterterrorism measures
that have worsened what was already a dire human rights situation.''

''Combined with longstanding and severe repression of any perceived dissent and
an extremely weak human rights institutional framework, these measures have
swept aside embryonic legal reforms and left people in Saudi Arabia almost
completely devoid of fundamental freedoms and protection of their human rights
,'' the report said.

''Old and new laws prescribe harsh and cruel punishments for terrorism-related
offenses, including beheading and flogging, yet they are so vaguely written that
they can be, and are, used to punish and suppress expression and activities that
are recognized and protected as legitimate the world over,'' it added.

In July 2007, it said, the Saudi Interior Ministry ''reported that 9,000
security suspects had been detained between 2003 and 2007 and that 3,106 of them
are still being held.''

The detainees include ''prisoners of conscience, targeted for their peaceful
criticism of government policies'' but ''the majority are suspected supporters
of Islamist groups or factions opposed to the Saudi Arabian government's close
links to the United States and other Western countries,'' the report said.

In a statement, Malcolm Smart, an Amnesty International official, said: ''The
abuses take place behind a wall of secrecy. Detainees are held with no idea of
what is going to happen to them. Most are held incommunicado for years without
trial, and are denied access to lawyers and the courts to challenge the legality
of their detention. This has a devastating effect on both the individuals who
are detained and on their families.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(78%); TORTURE (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%);
ARRESTS (73%); HIJACKING (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); LEGISLATION (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%); AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (95%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 8, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Cold War Ghost Reappears in Honduras, on a Solitary Quest

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras


THE coup here has brought back a lot of Central America's cold war ghosts, but
few as polarizing as Billy Joya, a former police captain accused of being the
former leader of a death squad.

He didn't sneak quietly back into national politics. He made his reappearance on
a popular evening talk show just hours after troops had rousted President Manuel
Zelaya out of bed and loaded him onto a plane leaving the country.

Mr. Joya's purpose, he said, was to defend the ouster and help calm a public
that freed itself from military rule less than three decades ago. Instead, he
set off alarms among human rights activists around the world who worried that
the worst elements of the Honduran military were taking control.

''The name Billy Joya reverberated much more than Micheletti,'' Mr. Joya
protested, perhaps a little too strenuously, referring to the head of the de
facto government, Roberto Micheletti, installed by the military. ''Instantly, my
image was everywhere.''

Mr. Joya's conflicting images -- a vilified figure who portrays himself as a
victim -- are as hard to reconcile as his life story. Human rights groups
consider him one of the most ruthless former operatives of an American-backed
military unit, known as Battalion 316, responsible for kidnapping, torturing and
murdering hundreds of people suspected of being leftists during the 1980s.

Today, Mr. Joya, a 52-year-old husband and father of four, has become a
political consultant to some of the most powerful people in the country,
including Mr. Micheletti during his failed campaign to become president last
year. Now that Mr. Micheletti has effectively secured that post, Mr. Joya has
resurfaced again as a liaison of sorts between Mr. Micheletti and the
international media.

Mr. Joya looks straight out of central casting, though not for the role of a
thug. He has more of the smooth, elegant bearing of a leading man. And in the 14
years since he was first brought to trial on charges of illegally detaining and
torturing six university students, he has undertaken a solitary quest -- one
that can at times border on obsession -- aimed not only at defending himself,
but also at vindicating the government's past fight against Communism.

In 1995, he released a 779-page volume of newspaper clippings, government
records and human rights reports meant to substantiate the military's narrative
of the cold war, which essentially accuses its opponents of having blood on
their hands as well. And in 1998, after living for a couple of years in exile in
Spain, Mr. Joya said he was the first and only military officer to surrender
himself for trial.

''Not once in 14 years has there been a single legitimate piece of evidence
linking me to these crimes,'' he said. Referring to human rights organizations,
he said, ''What they have done is to condemn me in the media, because they know
if they proceed with these cases in court, they are going to lose.''

The odds would appear to be on Mr. Joya's side. In 1989, the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights determined that the Honduran military was responsible for
systematic abuses against government opponents. Still, in the 27 years since
this country returned to civilian rule, authorities say, Honduran courts have
held only two military officials -- Col. Juan Blas Salazar Mesa and Lt. Marco
Tulio Regalado -- accountable for human rights violations.

ONLY about a dozen other officers ever faced formal charges. And most of those
cases, like Mr. Joya's, remain unresolved by a judicial system that remains
crippled by corruption.

Meanwhile, Mr. Joya has not suffered silently in legal limbo. In some ways, he
has hardly suffered at all. His business as a security consultant and political
adviser to some of the most powerful elected officials and businessmen in the
country has been lucrative.

''He is like one of those guys who went to Vietnam,'' said Antonio Tavel,
president of Xerox in Honduras. ''He had an ugly job to do once upon a time, and
now he's a regular family guy.''

Mr. Joya is the son of a businessman who helped start several successful
companies in Honduras but gambled away more money than he made. Mr. Joya, one of
four children, said he enrolled in the military academy at 14, mostly as a way
to gain early independence.

He was expelled from the academy, he said, when a teacher caught him cheating on
an exam. But instead of giving up his dream to be a soldier,  he enlisted as a
private and within two years had risen to become the youngest sergeant in the
army.

Mr. Joya joined the military police, and in 1981 -- as the Reagan administration
spent tens of millions of dollars to turn this impoverished country into the
principal staging area for a covert war against the region's left-wing guerrilla
groups -- Mr. Joya said that he and 12 other Honduran soldiers received six
weeks of training in the United States.

He acknowledged that he went on to become a member of Battalion 316. But that's
where his version of events diverges from those of his accusers. He has been
charged with 27 crimes, including illegal detention, torture and murder.

The most noteworthy case involved the illegal detention and torture of the six
university students in April 1982. The students said they were held in a series
of secret jails for eight days. During that time, the students testified, they
were kept blindfolded and naked, denied food and water, and subjected to
beatings and psychological torture.

Among those detained was Milton Jimenez, who later became a lawyer and a member
of Mr. Zelaya's cabinet. In 1995, Mr. Jimenez told The Baltimore Sun that
officers from the battalion stood him before a firing squad and threatened to
shoot him.

''They said they were finishing my grave,'' he said at the time. ''I was
convinced I was going to die.''

Edmundo Orellana, the former Honduran attorney general who was the first to try
to prosecute human rights crimes, said it was ''absurd'' that Mr. Joya remained
free.

''Billy Joya is proof that civilian rule has been a cruel hoax on the Honduran
people,'' Mr. Orellana said. ''He shows that ignorance and complicity still
reign inside our courts, especially when it comes to the armed forces.''

Absurd, Mr. Joya countered, are the charges against him. After his television
appearance, he said he received so many threats that he took his wife and
youngest daughter to the United States. Now he returns to Honduras only
intermittently to meet with clients.

PORING over dozens of newspaper clippings and court dockets during an interview,
he argued that Battalion 316 was not established until two years after Mr.
Jimenez's detention, and that it was a technical unit specializing in arms
interdiction, not counterinsurgency.

He also argued that the former students' testimony against him is rife with
contradictions. He said Mr. Jimenez, for example, later recanted his charge that
Mr. Joya was involved in his interrogations.

''It was never my responsibility to detain people, to torture people or to
disappear people,'' Mr. Joya said. ''But if those had been my orders, I am sure
I would have obeyed them, because I was trained to obey orders.

''The policy at that time was, 'The only good Communist is a dead Communist,' ''
he continued. ''I supported the policy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDGARD GARRIDO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); COUPS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); MILITARY RULE (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(78%); MURDER (77%); POLITICS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); EVIDENCE (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (50%)

PERSON: MANUEL ZELAYA (58%)

CITY: TEGUCIGALPA, HONDURAS (79%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (90%); SPAIN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bright Lights That Mask The Darkness

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN.

E-mail: haberman@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; NYC; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 734 words


Maybe Mao Zedong, that wordsmith, would have come up with a nifty aphorism for
the occasion, something snappy like ''Let a hundred light-emitting diodes
bloom'' or ''Power grows out of the barrel of a floodlight.''

Not that China's modern leaders needed, or wanted, thoughts from the chairman to
highlight the public relations coup handed to them by managers of the Empire
State Building. On Wednesday and Thursday nights, the top of the Empire State
was bathed in red and yellow, the colors of the Chinese flag. It was a tacit
tribute to the regime in Beijing.

The nighttime lights on the city's most famous building are a source of pleasure
for New Yorkers but also cause for occasional head-scratching. What was with all
the green two Sundays ago? That was for the Muslim holiday of Id al-Fitr. And
the yellow the weekend before that? A nod to the United States Open tennis
tournament.

A look at the Empire State's lighting schedule for the last year shows that
honors for individual countries are not routine. Even celebrations rooted in
national pride are more about Americans with origins in certain countries than
about the countries themselves.

So the tribute to Beijing stood out. Officially, it was described as
commemorating the 60th anniversary of the People's Republic of China. Looked at
another way, it honored the 60th anniversary of Communist rule, which in the
past caused millions of deaths and whose standard-bearers are serial human
rights offenders. In its most recent report on human rights around the world,
covering 2008, the State Department said that China's record ''remained poor and
worsened in some areas.'' Extrajudicial killings, torture, repression of ethnic
minorities and imprisonment of dissidents were but a few of the abuses cited.

Yes, the United States has sins of its own to atone for. Yes, we're only talking
about lights on a building. Call us symbol-minded, if you want. But foreign
policy statements are made all the time on and above the sidewalks of New York.
That explains why street corners are named for the likes of Nelson and Winnie
Mandela of South Africa, the assassinated Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, the murdered
Kudirat Abiola of Nigeria and the Cuban exile group Brothers to the Rescue.

It is why some New Yorkers protested this honor in lights. They included two
groups, Human Rights Watch and Human Rights in China, that have offices in the
Empire State Building.

''This anniversary has been accompanied by massive human rights abuses,'' with
tightened government controls choking off possible dissent, said Sharon K. Hom,
executive director of Human Rights in China. A similar point was made in a
letter sent to the building's managers by Carroll Bogert, associate director of
Human Rights Watch. The objection is not to honoring China or its people, Ms.
Bogert said. But this tribute, she said, celebrates a decades-long Communist
rule that is ''responsible historically for many grave violations of human
rights.''

Some Tibetans in New York and their supporters were also unhappy. Wednesday
morning, about 20 of them stood outside the Empire State's Fifth Avenue entrance
denouncing the bow to a regime that has harshly occupied Tibet for decades.
''Mao's Empire State Building,'' read one of their signs.

''Whoever came up with this idea is just promoting Communism with this symbol of
democracy lit in red lights,'' said one protester, Ngawang Palden.

AS he spoke, a lighting ceremony was held in the Empire State's lobby. ''This is
really a great gesture,'' Peng Keyu, China's consul general in New York, told
Joseph Bellina, the building's general manager. Mr. Bellina called the lights
''a symbol of unity between our countries and our peoples.''

Mr. Peng also said that in the post-Mao era, China has followed ''opening-up
policies.''

The same could not be said about the Empire State Building management. Requests
for details about the tribute, including possible financial arrangements with
China, went unanswered except for a boilerplate statement that the building
''celebrates many cultures and causes in the world community with iconic
lightings.''

The reticence perhaps suggested discomfort with a move that some New Yorkers
deemed a blunder. Mao, as usual, had something to say on that score. ''Once a
mistake is made, we should correct it,'' he wrote 60 years ago, ''and the more
quickly and thoroughly the better.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ANNIVERSARIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
LIGHT EMITTING DIODES (78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (76%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (73%); RAMADAN (73%); ELECTRONIC DIODES
(73%); MURDER (69%); TORTURE (69%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); ETHNIC GROUPS (68%);
ISLAMIC HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (68%); TENNIS (67%); SPORTS (67%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (65%); TENNIS TOURNAMENTS (52%); ETHNICITY (50%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (88%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); TAIWAN (79%); NIGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 15, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Reversal, the Palestinians Press to Advance a U.N. Report on the Gaza War

BYLINE: By SHARON OTTERMAN and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Sharon Otterman reported from
New York, and Neil MacFarquhar from Rome. Isabel Kershner contributed reporting
from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1053 words


The Palestinian leadership tried to regain lost credibility by pressing forward
Wednesday on a United Nations report on the Gaza war at a specially scheduled
debate at the United Nations Security Council, saying it would call for a formal
endorsement of the report this week in Geneva.

The Security Council debate represented the first major step in the Palestinian
effort to reverse its surprise decision two weeks ago to delay action on the
report, which found evidence of Israeli war crimes, at the Human Rights Council
in Geneva. The decision, made under American pressure after Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel threatened that advancing the report would end any
chance of peace talks, prompted a strong reaction against the Palestinian
president, Mahmoud Abbas.

Mr. Abbas is a relatively moderate leader whom the United States and Israel have
tried to bolster in the face of popular gains by Hamas, and there was a sense
that the pressure on him had backfired.

Riyad al-Maliki, the foreign affairs minister for the Palestinian Authority,
told delegates gathered at the Security Council that the Palestinians would seek
to ''rectify the malfunction that occurred'' in Geneva when the Human Rights
Council met on Thursday and Friday. He added that Palestinian leaders were
hopeful that the 47-member council would ''endorse and formally convey the
report to the appropriate United Nations agencies, in accordance with the
report's recommendations.''

Israel's ambassador to the United Nations, Gabriela Shalev, responded by
reiterating Israel's stance that the report was one-sided and biased against
Israel. The report, she said, ''favors and legitimizes terrorism'' and was
''destructive to the peace process.'' She added: ''If Israel is asked to take
further risks for peace, the international community must recognize our right to
self-defense.'' But there was no Israeli comment as harsh as Mr. Netanyahu's
earlier warnings.

The 575-page report, created by a four-member panel led by the South African
jurist Richard Goldstone, details evidence of war crimes committed by both the
Israeli forces and Palestinian armed groups in connection with last winter's
fighting, though it reserves its harshest language for Israeli actions. Foremost
among its recommendations is that allegations of war crimes by both sides should
be referred to the Security Council for possible prosecution at the
International Criminal Court in The Hague if credible investigations are not
undertaken within six months.

Israeli officials have engaged in extensive diplomatic efforts to discredit the
Goldstone report since its release in mid-September. Their efforts intensified
this week as it became clear that the Human Rights Council was no longer going
to delay until March a decision on whether to formally endorse the report.
Facing a furor at home, particularly from Hamas -- the militant Islamic group
that is the Palestinian Authority's main rival -- Mr. Abbas backtracked on his
support for the delay, instructing his ambassador in Geneva to gather enough
signatures to have the council reconvene. The council announced the special
session on Tuesday.

To shore up support for Israel before the Geneva meeting, Defense Minister Ehud
Barakspoke Tuesday night with the foreign minister of France, Bernard Kouchner;
the British foreign secretary, David Miliband; and the foreign ministers of
Spain and Norway, among other foreign officials. According to a statement
released by Mr. Barak's office on Wednesday, the Israeli minister told the
foreign officials that the Goldstone report was ''false, distorted, tendentious
and encouraged terrorism.''

In Geneva, although the Palestinians mustered the 16 votes needed to call a
special session, it was unclear just how strong a majority they could get on a
new resolution. An endorsement of the report with a less than significant
majority of the Human Rights Council would be considered weak.

Given the record of the Human Rights Council, the chance of a no vote on a
resolution appeared slim. But an official in Jerusalem said privately, because
of the delicate nature of the diplomacy, that Israel hoped to see ''at least a
moral victory -- to get all the reasonable countries on the right side of the
vote.''

Other countries expressed reservations about a resolution for a number of
reasons, namely that the Palestinians were reversing course in such a short time
span, and that a draft in circulation complicated the issue by adding demands,
including that Israel cease excavations around Al Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem and
ensure access to the holy site for Palestinian worshipers.

In compromise negotiations that were expected to continue into Thursday at
least, the Brazilians offered alternative wording for a potential resolution
that would basically keep the Goldstone report within the Human Rights Council
for the time being. Under the Brazilian language, the resolution would endorse
the findings of the report and the call for both Israel and the Palestinians to
conduct investigations into any possible war crimes. But it would stop short of
endorsing the recommendation that the matter be referred to the Security Council
or even the International Criminal Court if such investigations did not take
place.

''We feel that if we escalate this issue it might not be productive for the
peace talks,'' said Maria N. Farani Azevedo, the Brazilian ambassador to the
United Nations in Geneva.

So far, the Palestinians have been reluctant to make changes, which diplomats
and human rights organizations attributed in part to their intensive effort to
quell the domestic fallout after the previous postponement. As part of that
effort, the Security Council agreed last week to move up its monthly debate on
the Middle East to Wednesday, from next week, to discuss the report's findings.

Human Rights Watch said that internal investigations into the accusations were
crucial and that the prospect of some international action was most likely
needed to spur them.

''We are convinced that without addressing the issues contained in this report
there is no solid basis for a peace process,'' said Julie de Rivero, the Geneva
advocacy director for Human Rights Watch. ''For us, it would be important that
there is a strong endorsement of the findings.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gabriela Shalev, the Israeli ambassador, taking her seat in the
Security Council chamber. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN LANE/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

 A United Nations report detailed evidence of war crimes by Israeli forces and
armed Palestinian groups in the Gaza fighting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (94%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HAMAS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PEACE PROCESS (75%);
TERRORISM (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); HAMAS
(56%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (73%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (72%); BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); SWITZERLAND (94%);
UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Council Endorses U.N. Report on Gaza War, Sending It to Security Council

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The United Nations Human Rights Council on Friday endorsed a report that details
evidence of war crimes committed by the Israeli Army and Hamas militants during
the Gaza war last winter.

The council's vote in Geneva was, in part, an attempt to press both the Israelis
and the Palestinians to conduct their own credible investigations into the
war-crimes accusations.

But the Human Rights Council's resolution, by endorsing several dozen
recommendations within the report, also threatened action by the United Nations
Security Council and possibly the International Criminal Court should there be
no serious internal investigations.

That is considered very unlikely, however, because the United States has a veto
over the Security Council agenda.

Of the 47 members of the Human Rights Council, 25 supported the measure, 6
opposed it, 11 abstained and 5 cast no vote.

The United States and Israel had warned beforehand that moving the report
forward now would jeopardize attempts to restart peace talks between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. President Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leader,
had initially accepted delaying action on the report until March, but he
reversed course and orchestrated the two-day special session in order to quiet
domestic outrage over his initial stance.

''Our objective is to succeed in bringing those who committed crimes from the
Israeli side against our people to face justice,'' Riyad Mansour, the
Palestinian ambassador, told reporters in New York. He noted that the report
called on both Israel and the Palestinians to conduct transparent
investigations.

Since the Palestinian diplomatic corps is appointed by Mr. Abbas, the leader of
the Fatah faction, which lost Gaza to Hamas, its statements about investigations
carry limited weight. But Hamas officials in Gaza have also said that they would
investigate.

Israel said that the 575-page report was already one-sided in singling out
Israel for possible war crimes, but that the council's resolution proved even
worse by failing to mention Hamas rockets that had been fired against Israeli
civilians. The council has a long history of focusing on Israel, while ignoring
human rights abuses in other member states like China and Saudi Arabia. Aharon
Leshno Yaar, the Israeli ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, said the
resolution approved on Friday fit that pattern.

''There are still members of this council that had no interest in the report, no
interest in human rights, no interest in self defense,'' he said. ''Many of the
speakers over the past two days showed no genuine interest in the Israelis or
Palestinians, other than ensuring that the glare of Geneva is never shined
towards them.''

The Palestinians had anticipated at least 33 votes when they first presented a
similar resolution two weeks ago before withdrawing it, so support dropped
markedly this week. A few nations that had been planning to abstain voted yes at
the last minute after a clause condemning all attacks against civilians was
added, diplomats said.

The United States, which was joined by five European nations in voting against
the resolution, condemned it both for singling out Israel and for including a
long section about the control of Jerusalem, land confiscation and settlement
expansion.

''This resolution goes far beyond even the initial scope of the Goldstone report
into a discussion of elements that should be resolved in the context of
permanent status negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis,''
Douglas M. Griffiths, the American charge d'affaires in Geneva, told the
council.

The report, which the Human Rights Council had commissioned, was created by a
four-member panel led by the South African jurist Richard Goldstone.

Britain and France did not vote at all, with each saying it had requested more
time to work out a compromise resolution. China and Russia voted for the
measure, although the Russian ambassador's speech detailed what he considered
its many flaws.

The recommendations in the Goldstone report ask the United Nations secretary
general, Ban Ki-moon, to take the report to the Security Council, and the
resolution requests that he report to the Human Rights Council next March, at
its next regular session, on what actions the United Nations has taken to
implement the report. His spokeswoman, Michele Montas, said he was studying the
request.

Diplomats said they considered both requests slightly unusual, because the Human
Rights Council reports to the General Assembly, not the Security Council. The
General Assembly is also expected to take up a discussion of the report.

Mr. Goldstone was once the lead prosecutor for war crimes in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.

Although his report condemned rocket attacks by Palestinian armed groups against
Israeli civilians, it concentrated mainly on Israel's treatment of the civilian
Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip.

The report described the Israeli military assault on Gaza as ''a deliberately
disproportionate attack designed to punish, humiliate and terrorize a civilian
population, radically diminish its local economic capacity both to work and to
provide for itself, and to force upon it an ever increasing sense of dependency
and vulnerability.''

The report did not catalog the entire three-week war, which ended on Jan. 18,
instead singling out 36 cases that it said constituted a representative sample.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); AL FATAH (78%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ARMIES (78%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); INTERNAL
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); VETO (75%); APPROVALS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); HAMAS
(84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); SWITZERLAND (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karzai Vows to Review Restrictions on Women After International Criticism

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and SANGAR RAHIMI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


President Hamid Karzai ordered a review on Saturday of a new law that has been
criticized internationally for introducing Taliban-era restrictions on women and
sanctioning marital rape.

The president defended the law, which concerns family law for the Shiite
minority, and said Western news media reports were misinformed. Nevertheless, he
said his justice minister would review it and make amendments if the law was
found to contravene the Constitution and the freedoms that it guarantees.

''The Western media have either mistranslated or taken incorrect information and
then published it,'' Mr. Karzai said at a news briefing in the presidential
palace on Saturday. ''If there is anything in contradiction with our
Constitution or Shariah, or freedoms granted by the Constitution, we will take
action in close consultation with the clerics of the country.''

If changes are needed, he said, the bill would be sent back to Parliament.

Human rights officials have criticized the law, in particular for the
restrictions it places on when a woman can leave her house, and for stating the
circumstances in which she has to have sex with her husband.

A Shiite woman would be allowed to leave home only ''for a legitimate purpose,''
which the law does not define. The law also says, ''Unless the wife is ill, the
wife is bound to give a positive response to the sexual desires of her
husband.'' Critics have said that provision legalizes marital rape.

The law also outlines rules on divorce, child custody and marriage, all in ways
that discriminate against women, said Soraya Sobhrang, commissioner for women's
rights at the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.

While the law applies only to Shiites, who represent approximately 10 percent of
the population, its passage could influence a proposed family law for the Sunni
majority and a draft law on violence against women, Ms. Sobhrang said. ''This
opens the way for more discrimination,'' she said.

Mr. Karzai signed the law last week after a vote in Parliament last month, Ms.
Sobhrang said, adding that she had seen a copy of the law with his signature.

However, the presidential spokesman, Homayun Hamidzada, would not confirm that
the president had signed the law and said only that the he was still reviewing
it.

Mr. Karzai's decision to review the law came after a storm of criticism in
recent days. Canada called in the Afghan ambassador for an explanation, and
NATO's secretary general questioned why the alliance was sending men and women
to fight in Afghanistan when discrimination against women was condoned by law.

Asked about the law at a news conference in Strasbourg, France, on Saturday,
President Obama called it ''abhorrent.''

''We think that it is very important for us to be sensitive to local culture,''
he said, ''but we also think that there are certain basic principles that all
nations should uphold, and respect for women and respect for their freedom and
integrity is an important principle.''

Also on Saturday, Italy's defense minister said Italy was considering a
temporary withdrawal of the women serving in its force in Afghanistan to protest
the law, Reuters reported.

The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Navi Pillay, said the law
represented a ''huge step in the wrong direction.''

''For a new law in 2009 to target women in this way is extraordinary,
reprehensible and reminiscent of the decrees made by the Taliban regime in
Afghanistan in the 1990s,'' Ms. Pillay said in a statement posted on her
agency's Web site. ''This is another clear indication that the human rights
situation in Afghanistan is getting worse, not better.''

In addition to the clauses on when women may leave the home and must submit to
their husbands, Ms. Pillay said she was concerned about a section that forbids
women from working or receiving education without their husband's permission.

Ms. Sobhrang, who has been working on the issue for the last two years, said
women's groups and the human rights commissions had worked with Parliament to
introduce amendments but then the law was suddenly pushed through with only
three amendments. The bill as originally drawn up by Shiite clerics barred a
woman from leaving the house without her husband's permission, she said. The
parliamentary judicial commission amended that provision to say that a woman
could leave the house ''for a legitimate purpose.''

Mr. Karzai cited that provision in a news conference on Saturday, pointing out
that the final version of the law did not ban a woman from leaving her house.
But Ms. Sobhrang said even as amended the law contravened the Constitution,
which recognizes equal rights for men and women. The term ''for a legitimate
purpose'' was open to interpretation, she added.

She said Mr. Karzai had supported women's rights in the past but seemed to have
given that up in recent months. Some Western officials have speculated that he
signed the law to win the support of conservative Shiite clerics in coming
presidential elections.

Yet the leading cleric behind the Family Law, Sheik Muhammad Asif Mohseni,
complained last week that he was dissatisfied with the amendments that
Parliament had made to his original draft. Speaking on his own television
channel, Tamadun Television, he objected to the introduction of a legal age for
marriage, ''16 for women and 18 for men,'' saying that people should be able to
decide for themselves.

Human rights officials consider raising the marriage age a critical step toward
ending the common practice of forced marriages and the marriage of young girls.

Another amendment gave women longer custody of young children in the case of
divorce. In the original draft, women could have custody of a son until he was 2
years old, and a daughter until she was 7. The amended version raises the ages
to 7 for boys and 9 for girls.

Ms. Sobhrang criticized both versions for not taking into account the interests
and desires of the children.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Hamid Karzai addressed concerns about a new family law
during a news conference in Kabul on Saturday.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT
NICKELSBERG/GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (90%); FAMILY LAW (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); GENDER
EQUALITY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); WOMEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
FAMILY (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); TALIBAN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); MARRIAGE (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%);
US PRESIDENTS (74%); CHILD CUSTODY & SUPPORT (73%); RELIGION (72%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (71%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (91%); BARACK OBAMA (59%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (68%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (92%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 12, 2009 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Myanmar Sentence Draws Criticism

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Alan Cowell reported from Paris,
and Jeffrey Gettleman from Goma, Congo. Seth Mydans contributed reporting from
Bangkok, and Steven Erlanger from Paris.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton joined a chorus of predominantly
Western voices condemning the sentencing of Myanmar's pro-democracy leader, Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, on Tuesday, demanding her release and saying that, without a
change in its human rights practices, Myanmar's scheduled elections next year
would be illegitimate.

''She should not have been tried, and she should not have been convicted,'' Mrs.
Clinton told reporters in Goma, Congo, where she is on an African tour. ''We
continue to call for her release.''

''We also call for the release of more than 2,000 political prisoners, including
the American, John Yettaw,'' she said, referring to a 53-year-old man who swam
across a lake in central Yangon, Myanmar's main city, last May and spent two
nights in Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's villa. The episode led to the case against her
on charges of violating the terms of her house arrest.

Mrs. Clinton said: ''We are concerned about the harsh punishment. The Burmese
junta should immediately end its repression.'' She added that Myanmar's leaders
needed to start a dialogue with the political opposition and address human
rights obligations, ''otherwise the elections they have scheduled for next year
will have absolutely no legitimacy.''

Mrs. Clinton spoke after European governments demanded the immediate and
unconditional release of Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, threatening stricter sanctions
against the military regime there to restrict arms supplies and curb its trade
with the outside world.

In a statement, the 27-nation European Union said it was ready to impose
''targeted measures against those responsible for the verdict'' and to stiffen
some earlier measures, including an arms export ban, visa restrictions and
financial sanctions.

Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general,  called on the junta to
''immediately and unconditionally release'' Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi and ''to
engage with her without delay as an essential partner in the process of national
dialogue and reconciliation.''

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi won the Nobel Peace prize in 1991. Fourteen other winners
responded to the sentencing on Tuesday with a letter  calling on the Security
Council to investigate the junta for  ''war crimes and crimes against
humanity.'' In many parts of the world, her trial has been followed closely and
her cause has been embraced by a broad range of politicians and human rights
advocates.

''Citizens across the globe are asking world leaders to hold this brutal regime
to account,'' said Ricken Patel, director of an online campaign network called
Avaaz.org. ''Aung San Suu Kyi's detention today on spurious charges removes any
shred of legitimacy.''

Irene Khan, the secretary general of Amnesty International, said in a statement
in London that, while the Myanmar authorities ''will hope that a sentence that
is shorter than the maximum will be seen by the international community as an
act of leniency'', it ''must not be seen as such.''

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi ''should never have been arrested in the first place. The
only issue here is her immediate and unconditional release,'' Ms. Khan said.

It was not immediately clear how Myanmar's Asian neighbors would react. Asian
nations generally react cautiously to events in Myanmar, though they do
sometimes offer critical comments. Analysts said that, in this instance, they
may be willing to accept Myanmar's protestations of leniency.

President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, however, called the sentencing ''brutal and
unjust'' and said European sanctions should focus on profitable industries
including timber and ruby mining. The French foreign minister, Bernard Kouchner,
said in a statement the European Union should impose new sanctions aimed at the
Myanmar leadership ''and sparing the civilian population, which we should
continue to protect and assist.''

In Britain, Prime Minister Gordon Brown said he was ''saddened and angry'' at
her sentencing and said it was designed by the ruling military leaders of
Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, to keep her out of elections next year.

In a statement, he said: ''It is further proof that the military regime in Burma
is determined to act with total disregard for accepted standards of the rule of
law in defiance of international opinion.''

Calling on the  Security Council to impose a global prohibition on arms sales,
he added: ''The facade of her prosecution is made more monstrous because its
real objective is to sever her bond with the people for whom she is a beacon of
hope and resistance.'' France also called for an arms embargo.

The Obama administration has been reviewing American policy toward Myanmar since
February, when Secretary of State Clinton declared that the existing sanctions
against its military-run government had been ineffective.

At a meeting of the Association of South East Asian nations in Thailand last
month, Mrs. Clinton spoke in unusually detailed terms in discussing the
country's human rights record and its treatment of Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi.

''We are deeply concerned by the reports of continuing human rights abuses
within Burma,'' she said at the time, ''and particularly by actions that are
attributed to the Burmese military, concerning the mistreatment and abuse of
young girls.''

She also dismissed the charges against Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi as ''baseless and
totally unacceptable'' and said an improvement of ties with Washington depended
on the Myanmar junta's handling of human rights issues.

''Our position is that we are willing to have a more productive partnership with
Burma if they take steps that are self-evident,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (86%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(85%); MILITARY RULE (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (76%); EUROPEAN UNION
(74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); EXPORT TRADE (69%); ARMS TRADE (69%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (68%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (67%); ARRESTS (67%); NOBEL PRIZES
(65%); AWARDS & PRIZES (65%); EXPORT CONTROLS (64%); MILITARY WEAPONS (64%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (91%); AUNG SAN SUU KYI (89%); BAN KI-MOON (50%)

CITY: YANGON, MYANMAR (78%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (96%); EUROPE (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE
(79%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (69%)

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 12, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Upgrades Colombia's Human Rights Score

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The United States said Friday that it had legally certified an improvement in
Colombia's human rights record, allowing the use of $32 million in withheld
money from Washington for fighting gangs and drug smugglers.

A State Department spokesman, Ian Kelly, said Colombia must still make progress
on human rights, and he described in a statement ''several disquieting
challenges,'' including allegations of killings of civilians by soldiers and
illegal surveillance.

But, he said, the country has ''made significant efforts to increase the
security of its people,'' justifying the certification to Congress that Colombia
is meeting legal criteria on human rights and paramilitary groups and that the
money can be released.

Colombian officials insist that they are trying to end human rights abuses, but
critics say abuses remain widespread. The government has been battling a leftist
insurgency for years.

The International Trade Union Confederation says Colombia is the deadliest
country for labor rights advocates, with 49 killed last year, up from 39 in
2007, but fewer than the 78 killed in 2006.

A United Nations human rights investigator reported in June that soldiers had
killed hundreds of civilians, falsely identifying them as guerrillas slain in
combat, to bolster body counts. Officials have vowed to eliminate that practice
and punish those responsible.

''There is no question that improvement must be made in certain areas,'' Mr.
Kelly said, adding, ''Revelations of extrajudicial killings are evidence that
the armed forces' far-reaching reforms have not fully taken hold.''

The United States government will provide about $545 million to Colombia this
fiscal year, the State Department said.

Maria McFarland, senior Americas researcher at Human Rights Watch, said that the
decision was disappointing and that Colombia's government had responded to abuse
allegations only after intense pressure.

Washington is trying to reassure Latin America that a proposal to give American
forces greater access to Colombian military facilities will not create permanent
United States bases.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SMUGGLING (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); LIBERALISM (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (72%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (72%); MILITARY BASES (69%); LABOR UNIONS
(68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); LATIN AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 7, 2009 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Chechen Leader Wins Libel Suit Against Rights Worker

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ and VIKTOR KHANEVICH

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Chechnya's strongman leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, won a libel suit on Tuesday
against the director of a prominent human rights group who had linked him to the
killing of a human rights worker.

The verdict by a district court in Moscow seemed to reinforce a message already
sent by the killings of several of Mr. Kadyrov's prominent critics: that there
were limits to the criticism of political officials that would be tolerated
here.

''This rush to judgment in this lawsuit chills debate about things that should
be open to public discussion,'' said Allison Gill, the Russia office director of
Human Rights Watch. ''The authorities should encourage people to discuss current
events and be able to tolerate a certain amount of criticism.''

The court ordered Oleg P. Orlov, director of the rights group, Memorial, to pay
damages to Mr. Kadyrov and to retract his statements accusing Mr. Kadyrov of
involvement in the killing of the rights worker, Natalya Estemirova.

Ms. Estemirova, a Chechen who regularly criticized the conduct of Mr. Kadyrov's
security services, was kidnapped in July in front of her home in Grozny,
Chechnya's capital, taken to a neighboring region and shot to death.

She is not the first of Mr. Kadyrov's critics to die violently. Several who have
spoken out the loudest have turned up dead, not only in Chechnya, but in places
as far-flung as Moscow, Vienna and Dubai.

Like many of the others, Ms. Estemirova had accused Mr. Kadyrov, the Chechen
president, of employing kidnapping, torture and extrajudicial killings in his
Kremlin-backed drive to rid Chechnya of a violent separatist movement.

The day after her death, Mr. Orlov, talking about who he thought was
responsible, said: ''I know the name of this person. His name is Ramzan
Kadyrov.'' Later Mr. Orlov said he meant that Mr. Kadyrov had created an
atmosphere in which such crimes were permissible.

Mr. Kadyrov has denied involvement in the killing, insisting that violent
separatists backed by Western secret agents were probably responsible.

As in similar killings, there has been no discernible movement in the
prosecution of the Estemirova case. Officials have made no arrests and
identified no suspects in the three months since her death.

In contrast, Judge Tatyana A. Fedosova needed just two hearings and 30 minutes'
deliberation to reach a decision in Mr. Kadyrov's libel suit. She rejected
arguments by Mr. Orlov's lawyers that their client's accusations were based on
Mr. Kadyrov's record of human rights violations and his well-known hostile
relationship with Ms. Estemirova.

The judge ordered Mr. Orlov to pay the Chechen president about $660 in
compensation. The rights group Memorial must pay about $1,600, a symbolic sum in
comparison with the $300,000 total requested by Mr. Kadyrov's lawyer.

''It is a shame that the sum is so small,'' Andrei Krasnenkov, Mr. Kadyrov's
lawyer, said after the trial. ''When people begin to pay for their words, they
will begin to act correctly.''

Mr. Kadyrov said he was satisfied with the decision; the lawsuit was about
establishing truth, not about punishing Mr. Orlov, he said.

''From the very beginning, I attempted to explain to Orlov that he was not
right, and very respectfully and reasonably explained to him my opinion on this
issue,'' Mr. Kadyrov said, according to the news agency RIA Novosti.

After the court's decision on Tuesday, Mr. Orlov continued to insist that the
Chechen leader was in some way responsible for Ms. Estemirova's death.

''A significant portion of this trial consisted of a discussion of Ramzan
Kadyrov's guilt,'' Mr. Orlov said outside the courtroom. ''I think we
convincingly proved this guilt, but the court obviously did not agree with us.''

During the trial, Mr. Orlov accused Mr. Kadyrov of ''unconditional political
guilt'' in the killing of Ms. Estemirova and of creating an atmosphere in which
Chechen officials could torture, kidnap and murder with impunity.

Mr. Orlov said he would appeal the decision, and apply to the European Court of
Human Rights if that appeal was rejected.

Although Mr. Orlov said the decision would not affect the work of his employees
in Chechnya, the trial does seem to have encouraged Mr. Kadyrov.

The Chechen leader now plans to file a libel suit against the newspaper Novaya
Gazeta, said his lawyer, Mr. Krasnenkov. He said the newspaper, which once
employed Anna Politkovskaya, another Kadyrov critic who was murdered, had
published false statements about Mr. Kadyrov.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); LIBEL & SLANDER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (79%); LAWYERS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); DAMAGES (78%); JUDGES (78%); TORTURE (78%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL FINES (77%); VERDICTS (77%); SHOOTINGS (72%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (66%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 7, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

President Of Chechnya Wins Award In Libel Suit

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ and VIKTOR KHANEVICH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Chechnya's strongman leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, won a libel suit on Tuesday
against the director of a prominent human rights group who had linked him to the
killing of a human rights worker.

The verdict by a district court in Moscow seemed to reinforce a message already
sent by the killings of several of Mr. Kadyrov's prominent critics: that there
were limits to the tolerance of criticism of political officials.

''This rush to judgment in this lawsuit chills debate about things that should
be open to public discussion,'' said Allison Gill, the Russia office director of
Human Rights Watch.

The court ordered Oleg P. Orlov, director of the rights group Memorial, to pay
damages to Mr. Kadyrov and retract statements accusing Mr. Kadyrov of
involvement in the killing of the rights worker, Natalya Estemirova.

Ms. Estemirova, a Chechen who criticized the conduct of Mr. Kadyrov's security
services, was kidnapped in July in front of her home in Grozny, Chechnya's
capital, taken to a neighboring region and shot to death.

Several others who have spoken out the loudest against Mr. Kadyrov have turned
up dead, some in places as far-flung as Moscow, Vienna and Dubai.

Like many of the others, Ms. Estemirova had accused Mr. Kadyrov, the Chechen
president, of employing kidnapping, torture and extrajudicial killings in his
Kremlin-backed drive to rid Chechnya of violent separatists.

The day after Ms. Estemirova's death, Mr. Orlov, talking about who he thought
was responsible, said: ''I know the name of this person. His name is Ramzan
Kadyrov.'' Later Mr. Orlov said he meant that Mr. Kadyrov had created an
atmosphere in which such crimes were permissible.

Mr. Kadyrov has denied involvement in the killing, saying that violent
separatists backed by Western secret agents were probably responsible.

Judge Tatyana A. Fedosova rejected arguments by lawyers for Mr. Orlov that his
accusations were based on Mr. Kadyrov's record of human rights violations and
his well-known hostile relationship with Ms. Estemirova.

The judge ordered Mr. Orlov to pay Mr. Kadyrov about $660 in compensation.
Memorial must pay about $1,600, a symbolic sum compared with the $300,000 total
sought by Mr. Kadyrov's lawyer.

''It is a shame that the sum is so small,'' Andrei Krasnenkov, Mr. Kadyrov's
lawyer, said after the trial. ''When people begin to pay for their words, they
will begin to act correctly.''

Mr. Kadyrov said he was satisfied with the decision; the lawsuit was about
establishing truth, not about punishing Mr. Orlov, he said. ''From the very
beginning, I attempted to explain to Orlov that he was not right, and very
respectfully and reasonably explained to him my opinion,'' Mr. Kadyrov said,
according to the news agency RIA Novosti.

Mr. Orlov continued to insist that the Chechen leader was in some way
responsible for Ms. Estemirova's death. Outside the courtroom, Mr. Orlov said,
''I think we convincingly proved this guilt, but the court obviously did not
agree with us.''

During the trial, Mr. Orlov accused Mr. Kadyrov of ''unconditional political
guilt'' in the killing of Ms. Estemirova and of creating an atmosphere in which
Chechen officials could torture, kidnap and murder with impunity.

Mr. Orlov said he would appeal the decision, and apply to the European Court of
Human Rights if that appeal was rejected.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Chechnya's leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, said his libel suit was
not about punishment. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID TSARNAYEV/REUTERS, 2007)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); LIBEL & SLANDER (90%); LAWYERS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (79%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); DAMAGES (78%); JUDGES (78%); TORTURE (78%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL FINES (77%); VERDICTS (77%); SHOOTINGS (72%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (68%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Group Says Many Detainees Have Disappeared in China

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Months after security forces seized them in the wake of ethnic riots in July, at
least 43 ethnic Uighur men from far western China have disappeared, an advocacy
group said in a report released Wednesday.

The report, by Human Rights Watch, asserted that the number of vanished Uighurs
was probably higher, although the group could conclusively document only 43
cases during weeks of secret investigations in the Xinjiang region.

At least 197 people died and 1,600 more were injured during three days of
protests and rioting by thousands of Uighurs in early July in Urumqi, the
capital of Xinjiang. The riots, the worst ethnic violence in recent Chinese
history, led the police and security forces to round up hundreds of Uighurs,
mostly men, in subsequent weeks.

Most of the violence in the July riots was directed at Han Chinese, who have
become a prosperous majority in what was once a Uighur-dominated city.

State-run newspapers have reported that more than 200 people were charged with
crimes in connection with the protests, and 19 Uighur men were sentenced this
month -- including 11 who received the death sentence -- for their roles in the
violence. In a separate trial, one man with an ethnic Han surname received a
death sentence and another was given a 10-year prison term.

The government has insisted that those accused of violence have been treated in
accordance with Chinese law, which requires the authorities to give detained
suspects access to lawyers and to tell suspects' families where they have been
detained and why.

The Human Rights Watch report disputes that, stating that in most cases, ''the
men and boys detained in the course of these sweeps and raids have been missing
since the security forces took them away.''

''Their families' attempts to inquire about the relatives at local police
stations or with other law enforcement agencies proved futile,'' the report
stated. ''The authorities either said they had no knowledge of the arrests, or
claimed the inquiry was still ongoing without admitting the fact of detention,
or simply chased the families away.''

The report called the 43 cases ''serious violations of international
human-rights law'' as well as Chinese law.

A request for Chinese government comment on the report, sent by fax at the
government's request, was not immediately answered.

The 48-page report involved interviews with ''many dozens'' of Uighur residents
of Urumqi and at least two dozen Urumqi residents who are Han, the ethnic group
that makes up 90 percent of China's population.

The report states that while almost every Uighur interviewee claimed to know
someone who was missing after being detained by security forces, only a few were
willing to give detailed accounts of the disappearances for fear of punishment
by the authorities.

The unaccounted-for detainees, all male, were as young as 14, but most were in
their 20s, the report stated. Many were said to have disappeared during
large-scale roundups of Uighur men conducted by security forces in Urumqi
neighborhoods in the days after the riots. But others were seized in what the
report called ''targeted raids'' in ethnic Uighur parts of the capital.

Although some witnesses were uncertain who had detained the suspects, other
people interviewed for the report mentioned the Chinese military, the local
police and the People's Armed Police, a national paramilitary force.

A witness, a woman in a Uighur neighborhood, said three men in civilian clothes
came to her home on July 28. Identifying themselves as police officers, they
took away her 18-year-old son for questioning, saying he would be freed in a
couple of days.

''It's been more than three weeks, and I have no idea where he is and whether he
is still alive,'' she said. ''I went to the local police station twice -- they
did not say whether he was there or not, but said the inquiry was still
ongoing.''

Human Rights Watch said the Chinese government had not responded to an Aug. 24
request to give an account of the deaths, arrests and detentions stemming from
the Urumqi riots. The group urged Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations high
commissioner for human rights, to investigate the events in Xinjiang.

The group has posted its report on its Web site, to which the Chinese government
blocks access for its citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); RIOTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PRISONS (78%);
MEN (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE
FORCES (74%); LAWYERS (73%); ETHNICITY (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (58%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (78%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (94%); XINJIANG, CHINA (91%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suspect Is Held in Slaying of Chechen Exile

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 691 words


The police in Austria held a suspect on Wednesday in the brazen public slaying
of a Chechen exile who had formally accused Chechnya's president of ordering and
participating in kidnappings and torture, the authorities said.

The suspect is a Chechen who had been granted asylum and had lived in Austria
for years, according to Gerhard Jarosch, a spokesman for the public prosecutor's
office. Mr. Jarosch declined to release the suspect's name.

The arrest was made public as questions arose about Austria's handling of the
case and the possible role of Ramzan A. Kadyrov, Chechnya's president, in the
killing and in a prior effort to obstruct a human rights complaint that the
slain man had made.

The slain man, Umar S. Israilov, 27, was a former Chechen rebel who later worked
for Mr. Kadyrov before defecting and accusing him of gruesome human rights
violations, including using an electrical device to deliver shocks to men who
had been illegally detained by forces under his command. Mr. Israilov was shot
on the streets of Vienna on Tuesday in what appeared to be a  contract killing.

Mr. Israilov had sought protection from the Austrian authorities and had told
investigators that he had been pressed by an emissary of  Mr. Kadyrov to
withdraw the human rights  complaint, which he had made both to Russian
prosecutors and to the European Court of Human Rights.

Mr. Israilov's account of the pressure from Mr. Kadyrov appeared to be supported
by police records from Austria.

One record, provided to The New York Times by a friend of Mr. Israilov's,
included the statement given last year to counterterrorism investigators by a
Chechen who said he had been sent to Vienna by Mr. Kadyrov to bring Mr. Israilov
home, ''by the use of force if necessary.''

The man, Artur Kurmakayev, 41, of St. Petersburg, told investigators on June 10
that he worked for a secretive department under Mr. Kadyrov's direction charged
with repatriating Chechens in exile, and that for his assignment in Vienna he
had been provided two assistants from Mr. Kadyrov's presidential guard  whom  he
met in Slovakia.

He added, according to the record of his interview with the federal Office for
the Protection of the Constitution and Action against Terrorism, that ''I saw a
list in President Kadyrov's residence in the town of Gudermes, which contained
approximately 5,000 names of Chechens.

''All of these people either fought against Kadyrov or have otherwise attracted
unfavorable attention. Three hundred of the 5,000 that appear on the list have
to die.'' About 50 of the names, he warned the authorities, were of Chechens
living in Austria.

Mr. Kurmakayev told investigators that he also wanted to seek asylum in Austria,
and that if he did not ''fulfill my assignment properly'' then ''my family could
die.'' He later returned to Russia voluntarily, a lawyer who had represented Mr.
Israilov said. His whereabouts are  unknown.

A separate police record, of a statement by Mr. Israilov, described several
meetings in mid-2008 at which Mr. Kurmakayev, using the name Arbi, had urged him
to withdraw the case.

At one meeting after he had refused, Mr. Israilov told investigators, Mr.
Kurmakayev informed him that ''two people in Slovakia were waiting for me and
were set on killing me.''

''He told me I should think twice about it.''

A spokesman for Mr. Kadyrov, reached by telephone, said  he was unaware of Mr.
Israilov and his case and  the president's office would review the allegations
on Thursday before making any statement. Mr. Kadyrov has been accused of human
rights violations for years. He has always denied them, and has received
extensive political support from the Kremlin and from  Vladimir V. Putin, the
former president and current prime minister.

Mr. Jarosch, the public prosecutor's spokesman, said the police had gathered
''hard evidence'' against the suspect and that he was expected to be held in
pretrial confinement after a court hearing this week.

He said the killing remained under investigation, and the motive was not yet
clear. ''We don't have hard evidence as to whether this is a political crime,''
he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); TERRORISM (74%); ARRESTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (54%)

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (92%); SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (69%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%); SLOVAKIA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(78%); EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weighing Crimes and Ethics In the Fog of Urban Warfare

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza,
and Sabrina Tavernise from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3173 words


JERUSALEM -- Your unit, on the edges of the northern Gaza town of Jabaliya, has
taken mortar fire from the crowded refugee camp nearby. You prepare to return
fire, and perhaps you notice -- or perhaps you don't, even though it's on your
map -- that there is a United Nations school just there, full of displaced
Gazans. You know that international law allows you to protect your soldiers and
return fire, but also demands that you ensure that there is no excessive harm to
civilians. Do you remember all that in the chaos?

You pick GPS-guided mortars, which are supposed to be accurate and of a specific
explosive force, and fire back. In the end, you kill some Hamas fighters but
also, the United Nations says, more than 40 civilians, some of them children.

Have you committed a war crime?

Whatever the military and political results of Israel's 21-day war against Hamas
in Gaza, Israel is again facing serious accusations and anguished questioning
over the legality of its military conduct. As in Israel's 2006 war against
Hezbollah in Lebanon, the popular perception abroad of how Israel fights, and
hence of Israelis, may prove to be more lasting than any strategic gains or
losses.

The televised images of devastation in the crowded Gaza Strip and the large
asymmetry in deaths, especially of civilians, have created an uproar in the Arab
world and the West reminiscent of 2006.

A plethora of Western foreign ministers, United Nations officials and human
rights groups, both Israeli and foreign, have expressed shock and disgust; some
have called for investigations into possible war crimes. Such groups also say
Hamas is clearly violating the rules of war.

More than 1,100 Palestinians have died in Gaza, according to the Hamas-run
Ministry of Health, which estimates that 40 percent are women and children under
18. Israel estimates that only a quarter of the dead are civilians. Israel,
which has suffered 13 dead, 3 of them civilian, is being accused of a
disproportionate use of force. Death tolls in warfare may carry a moral weight,
but not a legal one.

Question of Proportionality

Under international law, proportionality is defined as a question of judgment,
not of numbers: Is the potential risk to civilians excessive in relationship to
the anticipated military advantage? That puts the weight on military advantage,
since civilian risk is a given and must only not be ''excessive.'' Even if the
target is legitimate, was the right weapon used to try to minimize civilian
damage? The key is the expected damage the commander anticipated from the use of
a certain weapon, and not what actually happened when it was fired.

The other key legal principle is discrimination: has a military struggled hard
enough to hit only military targets and combatants, while trying to avoid purely
civilian targets and noncombatants?

Deciding requires an investigation into battlefield circumstances that cannot be
carried out while the fighting rages, and such judgments are especially
difficult in urban guerrilla warfare, when fighters like Hamas live among the
civilian population and take shelter there. While Israel is the focus of most
criticism, legal experts agree that Hamas, a radical Islamic group classified by
the United States and Europe as terrorist, violates international law.

Shooting rockets out of Gaza aimed at Israeli cities and civilians is an obvious
violation of the principle of discrimination and fits the classic definition of
terrorism. Hamas fighters are also putting civilians at undue risk by storing
weapons among them, including in mosques, schools and allegedly hospitals, too,
making them potential military targets. While urban and guerrilla warfare is not
illegal, by fighting in the midst of civilians, often in civilian clothing,
Hamas may also bring risk to noncombatants.

But Hamas's violations tend to be treated as a given and criticized as an
afterthought, Israeli spokesmen and officials say. They say that Israel has
never sought to hit civilians, medical workers or United Nations facilities or
personnel. ''The rules of engagement are very clear,'' said Mark Regev, the
government spokesman. ''Not to target civilians, not to target U.N. people, not
to target medical staff. All this is very clear in Israeli military doctrine.''

Asa Kasher, 69, has a chair in ethics at Tel Aviv University and helped write
the Israeli military's ethical code. He still teaches in the army's College of
Command and General Staff.

He said that the Israeli Army's ethical and legal standards were high and that
he believed they were conscientiously taught to its military. But as for what
happens on the ground, he said, ''I have a general confidence in their attitudes
and decency, but who knows?''

A senior lawyer for the United Nations, who was authorized to speak only if she
remained anonymous, agreed that the Israeli code was excellent, but said that
the military was not doing enough to protect neutrals or to provide havens for
civilians. ''A proper weighing of proportionality on the battlefield is just not
happening as it should,'' she said.

Israel's chief army legal officer, whose name cannot be published under
censorship rules, called the charges ''deeply unfair and unjust,'' and spoke of
the horrible realities of war and compared Israel's behavior favorably to that
of the American military in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo.

The most intense criticism of Israel's behavior has centered on how it has
conducted the war and weighed risks to civilians, access of medical personnel to
the wounded and provision of vital supplies to civilians in Gaza who cannot
escape the sealed territory. A few events encapsulate the arguments and are
fiercely disputed.

The Fakhura School

One of the touchstones of the war so far has been the fate of a group of
Palestinian civilians fleeing the fighting who were lining up to enter a United
Nations school. They were killed on Jan. 6 in an exchange of mortar fire between
Hamas fighters and Israeli troops. The facts are disputed; John Ging, the Gaza
director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, said that 43 people died
and that no militants fired from inside the school grounds or were harbored
there. The Israeli military first said that it had returned fire at a Hamas
mortar team inside the school and killed two fighters. Then the army briefed
diplomats to say that the Hamas men were firing next to the school, and that one
mortar shell, equipped with a guidance system, had gone off target. But after
completing its initial inquiry, the army now has returned to its first version
-- that Hamas militants fired from inside the school compound. The army has also
questioned the figure of 43 dead, saying that it was manipulated by Hamas and is
too high, given the limited explosive power of a mortar shell.

The director of the Palestinian human rights group Al-Haq, Shawan Jabarin, said
in an interview that the Israelis knew that the school was sheltering civilians.

''While they did not attack the school directly, they have to take into account
civilians there. Because they didn't take that into account, and they knew the
shells would fragment, they didn't take care with civilian lives,'' he said.
''They bear the responsibility. Under international law, if you don't take all
measures to respect civilians, you bear responsibility.''

Witnesses, including Hanan Abu Khajib, 39, said that Hamas fired just outside
the school compound, probably from the secluded courtyard of a house across the
street, 25 yards from the school. Israeli return fire, some minutes later, also
landed outside the school, along the southwest wall, killing two Hamas fighters.
Nearly all the casualties were in the street outside the compound, with only
three people wounded from shrapnel inside the walls.

The United Nations relief agency takes great care not to harbor militants in its
buildings in order to protect civilians and their children, said the agency's
spokesman, Christopher Gunness. The agency normally deals with as much as half
of Gaza's population of 1.5 million, and it is eager to make clear that its
workers are neutral and not to be fired upon.

Mr. Gunness and other agency officials say that they do not want to get into a
fight with Israel over allegations of war crimes, though they stress that they
had provided the map coordinates of all agency schools, shelters and buildings
to the Israeli military. But they are troubled by regular Israeli allegations,
most recently by the Foreign Ministry and by Avi Dichter, Israel's minister of
public security and former head of the Shin Bet counterterrorism agency, that
the agency has been infiltrated by Hamas partisans and fighters, which may, Mr.
Gunness said, lead young Israeli soldiers to believe that the agency is a
justifiable target.

Israel, too, has tried to avoid a public fight with the agency, sending a senior
Defense Ministry official to express his regrets for the death of an agency
driver -- whose killing the United Nations attributed to Israel but Israel
denied it -- and to say that Israel appreciates the work the agency does in
Gaza, diplomats and Israeli officials said.

But the legal question of war crimes is different.

First, if Hamas fired from inside or even next to the United Nations school,
knowing that it was an agency building and thus trying to use its neutrality for
protection, endangering civilians, then the Hamas fighters are potentially
guilty of a crime, according to B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group. They
also, by firing, turned the place from which they fired into a legitimate
military target -- as mosques became legitimate targets because Hamas stored
large caches of rockets and weaponry inside them.

Investigators would then have to decide if Israeli troops fired back with
appropriate weapons, and with the appropriate balancing of military benefit for
the entire operation against potential civilian harm.

''The important issue is how the Israeli forces balanced the military benefit of
hitting the target with the expected collateral damage to civilians,'' said the
Israeli army chief legal officer. ''As I understand it, I don't think they
expected this number of casualties. When you look at mortar fire, you don't
expect 43 casualties -- if in fact there were 43 casualties. We think a wall
collapsed or there was another explosion. It's not clear.''

The Israeli mortars had GPS guidance, the army said. But a commander must also
consider the probability that it might miss. ''If it is rare to go off target,
then it's not something you have to take into account,'' the legal officer said.
''But I don't know how much the soldiers were aware of who was inside the
building -- maybe they should have known better, but getting information to
forces in a firefight on the ground is a problem. But if the firing was from
outside and they didn't expect the building to be hit, then that affects the
judgment.''

There is a ''field debriefing'' going on, the officer said. But it is not clear
when the investigation will be completed or whether it will be made public.
Usually field investigations are internal, with only conclusions revealed,
unlike criminal investigations and courts-martial.

The Samouni Clan

The Israeli ground invasion began Jan. 3, and in the early hours of Jan. 4, the
International Committee of the Red Cross began hearing of a large clan, the
Samounis, who were wounded and trapped by the fierce fighting around Zeitoun, in
eastern Gaza City. The Red Cross began asking the Israeli Army for access to the
wounded.

The Samouni clan said it was moved by Israeli soldiers from house to house, but
the Israeli military denies it. The last house was shelled, and some 30 members
of the extended family died, raising the question of whether the Israeli Army
targeted a house where it knew refugees were sheltering. The Red Cross was not
granted access to the area to reach the Samounis and others until Jan. 7, when
four children were found emaciated, next to their dead mothers.

It was not clear why the house was shelled, but Maj. Jacob Dallal of the Israeli
Army said an investigation showed that no specific buildings in Zeitoun had been
chosen as targets that day, and that the army only heard later about the
family's plight. He said that an inquiry showed that the army had not moved the
Samouni family from house to house, though they may have done so themselves in
response to Israeli calls to leave the battlefield.

The Red Cross, which normally works quietly, issued a rare public statement
rebuking Israel, charging that the Israeli military had failed to meet its
obligation under international humanitarian law to care for and evacuate the
wounded in a timely way.

Anne-Sophie Bonefeld, a Red Cross spokeswoman based in Jerusalem, said, ''We
were really, really shocked by the delay.'' The aim of going public, she said,
''was to try to ensure that we never have such a situation again.''

The Red Cross statement also shocked the Israelis, who work well with the Red
Cross and trust it, Mr. Regev said. ''We found it very troubling, because we
take them very seriously,'' he said. ''It is incumbent on us in difficult
situations to help the I.C.R.C. to do its job.''

Maj. Peter Lerner, spokesman for the Defense Ministry's coordination office for
Gaza, said that access to the battlefield ''is severely influenced by the combat
going on,'' adding that ''tactical coordination was there from the start and
worked in many cases, and sometimes due to intense fighting it didn't work as
well.''

But Israel then moved to set up an additional special joint operations room with
the main humanitarian agencies near Tel Aviv.

Hamas has misused ambulances and Red Crescent and United Nations symbols in the
past and is doing so during this conflict, Major Lerner charged.

''We've had gunmen coming out of ambulances and taking up positions here in the
last week; my people saw it,'' he said. ''So of course this makes the troops in
the field very wary about any vehicles approaching them, and why coordination
has to be from the top to the very bottom, all the way down the line to the unit
in the field.''

The army's chief lawyer said about the Samounis: ''There was at no stage a
policy to not take care of the wounded. We're trying to improve coordination.
But there can be no high intensity fighting in such a densely populated place
without mistakes. I'm sure there are mistakes.''

Since then, the Red Cross has noted improvements, even praising Israel for
trying to avoid civilian casualties and provide humanitarian assistance in a
briefing for Europeans in Tel Aviv, according to a European diplomat who
attended the briefing.

Pierre Wettach, head of the organization in Israel and the Palestinian
territories, said of the Israel Defense Forces in an interview: ''I believe
there is a true concern on the part of the I.D.F. to address these things, which
are extremely complicated to organize.''

Targets Challenged

Human rights groups are also troubled by Israel's strikes on buildings they
believe should be classified as civilian, like the parliament, police stations
and the presidential palace.

''Some of the targets are government offices of Hamas and the civilian
authorities,'' said Jessica Montell of B'Tselem. Unless used for military
purposes, she said, ''these are not legitimate targets,'' and added, ''we have
suspicions that the I.D.F. does not respect these regulations.''

The army attacked ''both aspects of Hamas -- its resistance or military wing and
its dawa, or social wing,'' a senior intelligence officer said. He argued that
Hamas was all of a piece and in a war, its instruments of political and social
control were as legitimate a target as its rocket caches. Since June 2007 and
the Hamas takeover of Gaza in a brief war with its secular rival Fatah, both
Israel and Egypt have tried to seal the territory. But there has been an active
smuggling trade through tunnels from Egypt, and a year ago, Hamas blew open the
Egyptian border, letting Gazans go to Egypt and shop for food, cooking oil,
medicines, refrigerators and the like. But Hamas also used the open border to
smuggle in large rockets and other weapons, Israeli officials say.

To try to stop rocket attacks from Gaza, Israel halted normal trade with Gaza
and kept it on a much reduced diet for electricity, gasoline, diesel and cooking
oil, wheat flour and many other items. The idea was a form of economic sanction,
Mr. Regev, the government spokesman, said, a reminder that Israel would not let
life be normal under Hamas.

But many human rights groups banded together to sue the government in the
Supreme Court, alleging violation of international law and ''collective
punishment of civilians.'' The Israeli government argued that there was no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, that basic necessities were provided -- using the
United Nations' figure for the minimum calories required daily for subsistence
-- and the court generally agreed. But the rockets did not stop.

The effective closure continued through a six-month cease-fire with Hamas that
ended last month, and the shortage of diesel oil for Gaza's only power
generator, for example, meant many hours a day without electricity. That put a
strain on hospitals, generators and on the water supply and sewage system, which
depend on electric pumps.

Nine Israeli human rights groups charged that the fighting had caused a crisis
in the health and sanitation systems and have petitioned the Supreme Court
again.

Sari Bashi, of the human rights group Gisha, said the current lack of
electricity had limited the access to potable water to more than 500,000 people;
she said that there was sewage in the streets and that hospitals were running on
generators missing spare parts. Ms. Montell of B'Tselem said that even though
Israel pulled out of Gaza in 2005, ''there is no legal vacuum'' and it retains
responsibility for basic needs and trade. ''The argument that it's collective
punishment of civilians I find very compelling,'' she said.

Replacement for Sanctions

But since the war began, fighting has replaced sanctions as a means for stopping
the rockets, Mr. Regev said.

Philippe Lazzarini, head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, said that since the war started, ''The number of trucks
Israel has allowed into Gaza is much higher than during the blockade.'' But he
laughed and said, ''Anything seems like a big increase when you compare it to
practically nothing.'' Major Dallal said that ''people lose sight of the context
of a war zone in a densely populated area, where every time a door is pulled
open, a soldier wonders who is behind it.''

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights said the Israeli military had acted with
''total disregard for the lives of Palestinian civilians.''

Major Dallal, however, said the fundamental question, and not just for Israel,
was, ''How does an army fight a terrorist group?''

''If we,'' he added, meaning the world, ''just see the pictures and don't use
our heads, then the terrorists will always win these public opinion battles.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: AFTER THE STRIKE: Women inspected a house damaged Jan. 6 by an
Israeli bombing near a United Nations school.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABID KATIB/GETTY IMAGES)
SHOW OF GRIEF: Men carried the bodies of three toddlers on Jan. 5. They had been
killed in an airstrike, Palestinian medical officials said.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(pg. A8)
SEALED TERRITORY: Israel's blockade of Gaza has made life difficult. Clockwise
from top left, women buying bread in Gaza City
waiting to fill gas canisters in Rafah
Gazans trying to convert stoves to diesel because of a shortage of cooking gas
and people at a United Nations food distribution center. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KHALIL
HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS
ABID KATIB/GETTY IMAGES
MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
ADEL HANA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); ETHICS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); LAW OF WAR (76%); ARMED FORCES
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HEZBOLLAH (69%); DISCRIMINATION (69%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HAMAS (83%); HEZBOLLAH (55%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (90%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (95%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weighing Crimes and Ethics In the Fog of Urban Warfare

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza,
and Sabrina Tavernise from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3194 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Your unit, on the edges of the northern Gaza town of Jabaliya, has taken mortar
fire from the crowded refugee camp nearby. You prepare to return fire, and
perhaps you notice -- or perhaps you don't, even though it's on your map -- that
there is a United Nations school just there, full of displaced Gazans. You know
that international law allows you to protect your soldiers and return fire, but
also demands that you ensure that there is no excessive harm to civilians. Do
you remember all that in the chaos?

You pick GPS-guided mortars, which are supposed to be accurate and of a specific
explosive force, and fire back. In the end, you kill some Hamas fighters but
also, the United Nations says, more than 40 civilians, some of them children.

Have you committed a war crime?

Whatever the military and political results of Israel's 21-day war against Hamas
in Gaza, Israel is again facing serious accusations and anguished questioning
over the legality of its military conduct. As in Israel's 2006 war against
Hezbollah in Lebanon, the popular perception abroad of how Israel fights, and
hence of Israelis, may prove to be more lasting than any strategic gains or
losses.

The televised images of devastation in the crowded Gaza Strip and the large
asymmetry in deaths, especially of civilians, have created an uproar in the Arab
world and the West reminiscent of 2006.

A plethora of Western foreign ministers, United Nations officials and human
rights groups, both Israeli and foreign, have expressed shock and disgust; some
have called for investigations into possible war crimes. Such groups also say
Hamas is clearly violating the rules of war.

More than 1,100 Palestinians have died in Gaza, according to the Hamas-run
Ministry of Health, which estimates that 40 percent are women and children under
18. Israel estimates that only a quarter of the dead are civilians. Israel,
which has suffered 13 dead, 3 of them civilian, is being accused of a
disproportionate use of force. Death tolls in warfare may carry a moral weight,
but not a legal one.

Question of Proportionality

Under international law, proportionality is defined as a question of judgment,
not of numbers: Is the potential risk to civilians excessive in relationship to
the anticipated military advantage? That puts the weight on military advantage,
since civilian risk is a given and must only not be ''excessive.'' Even if the
target is legitimate, was the right weapon used to try to minimize civilian
damage? The key is the expected damage the commander anticipated from the use of
a certain weapon, and not what actually happened when it was fired.

The other key legal principle is discrimination: has a military struggled hard
enough to hit only military targets and combatants, while trying to avoid purely
civilian targets and noncombatants?

Deciding requires an investigation into battlefield circumstances that cannot be
carried out while the fighting rages, and such judgments are especially
difficult in urban guerrilla warfare, when fighters like Hamas live among the
civilian population and take shelter there. While Israel is the focus of most
criticism, legal experts agree that Hamas, a radical Islamic group classified by
the United States and Europe as terrorist, violates international law.

Shooting rockets out of Gaza aimed at Israeli cities and civilians is an obvious
violation of the principle of discrimination and fits the classic definition of
terrorism. Hamas fighters are also putting civilians at undue risk by storing
weapons among them, including in mosques, schools and allegedly hospitals, too,
making them potential military targets. While urban and guerrilla warfare is not
illegal, by fighting in the midst of civilians, often in civilian clothing,
Hamas may also bring risk to noncombatants.

But Hamas's violations tend to be treated as a given and criticized as an
afterthought, Israeli spokesmen and officials say. They say that Israel has
never sought to hit civilians, medical workers or United Nations facilities or
personnel. ''The rules of engagement are very clear,'' said Mark Regev, the
government spokesman. ''Not to target civilians, not to target U.N. people, not
to target medical staff. All this is very clear in Israeli military doctrine.''

Asa Kasher, 69, has a chair in ethics at Tel Aviv University and helped write
the Israeli military's ethical code. He still teaches in the army's College of
Command and General Staff.

He said that the Israeli Army's ethical and legal standards were high and that
he believed they were conscientiously taught to its military. But as for what
happens on the ground, he said, ''I have a general confidence in their attitudes
and decency, but who knows?''

A senior lawyer for the United Nations, who was authorized to speak only if she
remained anonymous, agreed that the Israeli code was excellent, but said that
the military was not doing enough to protect neutrals or to provide havens for
civilians. ''A proper weighing of proportionality on the battlefield is just not
happening as it should,'' she said.

Israel's chief army legal officer, whose name cannot be published under
censorship rules, called the charges ''deeply unfair and unjust,'' and spoke of
the horrible realities of war and compared Israel's behavior favorably to that
of the American military in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo.

The most intense criticism of Israel's behavior has centered on how it has
conducted the war and weighed risks to civilians, access of medical personnel to
the wounded and provision of vital supplies to civilians in Gaza who cannot
escape the sealed territory. A few events encapsulate the arguments and are
fiercely disputed.

The Fakhura School

One of the touchstones of the war so far has been the fate of a group of
Palestinian civilians fleeing the fighting who were lining up to enter a United
Nations school. They were killed on Jan. 6 in an exchange of mortar fire between
Hamas fighters and Israeli troops. The facts are disputed; John Ging, the Gaza
director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, said that 43 people died
and that no militants fired from inside the school grounds or were harbored
there. The Israeli military first said that it had returned fire at a Hamas
mortar team inside the school and killed two fighters. Then the army briefed
diplomats to say that the Hamas men were firing next to the school, and that one
mortar shell, equipped with a guidance system, had gone off target. But after
completing its initial inquiry, the army now has returned to its first version
-- that Hamas militants fired from inside the school compound. The army has also
questioned the figure of 43 dead, saying that it was manipulated by Hamas and is
too high, given the limited explosive power of a mortar shell.

The director of the Palestinian human rights group Al-Haq, Shawan Jabarin, said
in an interview that the Israelis knew that the school was sheltering civilians.

''While they did not attack the school directly, they have to take into account
civilians there. Because they didn't take that into account, and they knew the
shells would fragment, they didn't take care with civilian lives,'' he said.
''They bear the responsibility. Under international law, if you don't take all
measures to respect civilians, you bear responsibility.''

Witnesses, including Hanan Abu Khajib, 39, said that Hamas fired just outside
the school compound, probably from the secluded courtyard of a house across the
street, 25 yards from the school. Israeli return fire, some minutes later, also
landed outside the school, along the southwest wall, killing two Hamas fighters.
Nearly all the casualties were in the street outside the compound, with only
three people wounded from shrapnel inside the walls.

The United Nations relief agency takes great care not to harbor militants in its
buildings in order to protect civilians and their children, said the agency's
spokesman, Christopher Gunness. The agency normally deals with as much as half
of Gaza's population of 1.5 million, and it is eager to make clear that its
workers are neutral and not to be fired upon.

Mr. Gunness and other agency officials say that they do not want to get into a
fight with Israel over allegations of war crimes, though they stress that they
had provided the map coordinates of all agency schools, shelters and buildings
to the Israeli military. But they are troubled by regular Israeli allegations,
most recently by the Foreign Ministry and by Avi Dichter, Israel's minister of
public security and former head of the Shin Bet counterterrorism agency, that
the agency has been infiltrated by Hamas partisans and fighters, which may, Mr.
Gunness said, lead young Israeli soldiers to believe that the agency is a
justifiable target.

Israel, too, has tried to avoid a public fight with the agency, sending a senior
Defense Ministry official to express his regrets for the death of an agency
driver -- whose killing the United Nations attributed to Israel but Israel
denied it -- and to say that Israel appreciates the work the agency does in
Gaza, diplomats and Israeli officials said.

But the legal question of war crimes is different.

First, if Hamas fired from inside or even next to the United Nations school,
knowing that it was an agency building and thus trying to use its neutrality for
protection, endangering civilians, then the Hamas fighters are potentially
guilty of a crime, according to B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group. They
also, by firing, turned the place from which they fired into a legitimate
military target -- as mosques became legitimate targets because Hamas stored
large caches of rockets and weaponry inside them.

Investigators would then have to decide if Israeli troops fired back with
appropriate weapons, and with the appropriate balancing of military benefit for
the entire operation against potential civilian harm.

''The important issue is how the Israeli forces balanced the military benefit of
hitting the target with the expected collateral damage to civilians,'' said the
Israeli army chief legal officer. ''As I understand it, I don't think they
expected this number of casualties. When you look at mortar fire, you don't
expect 43 casualties -- if in fact there were 43 casualties. We think a wall
collapsed or there was another explosion. It's not clear.''

The Israeli mortars had GPS guidance, the army said. But a commander must also
consider the probability that it might miss. ''If it is rare to go off target,
then it's not something you have to take into account,'' the legal officer said.
''But I don't know how much the soldiers were aware of who was inside the
building -- maybe they should have known better, but getting information to
forces in a firefight on the ground is a problem. But if the firing was from
outside and they didn't expect the building to be hit, then that affects the
judgment.''

There is a ''field debriefing'' going on, the officer said. But it is not clear
when the investigation will be completed or whether it will be made public.
Usually field investigations are internal, with only conclusions revealed,
unlike criminal investigations and courts-martial.

The Samouni Clan

The Israeli ground invasion began Jan. 3, and in the early hours of Jan. 4, the
International Committee of the Red Cross began hearing of a large clan, the
Samounis, who were wounded and trapped by the fierce fighting around Zeitoun, in
eastern Gaza City. The Red Cross began asking the Israeli Army for access to the
wounded.

The Samouni clan said it was moved by Israeli soldiers from house to house, but
the Israeli military denies it. The last house was shelled, and some 30 members
of the extended family died, raising the question of whether the Israeli Army
targeted a house where it knew refugees were sheltering. The Red Cross was not
granted access to the area to reach the Samounis and others until Jan. 7, when
four children were found emaciated, next to their dead mothers.

It was not clear why the house was shelled, but Maj. Jacob Dallal of the Israeli
Army said an investigation showed that no specific buildings in Zeitoun had been
chosen as targets that day, and that the army only heard later about the
family's plight. He said that an inquiry showed that the army had not moved the
Samouni family from house to house, though they may have done so themselves in
response to Israeli calls to leave the battlefield.

The Red Cross, which normally works quietly, issued a rare public statement
rebuking Israel, charging that the Israeli military had failed to meet its
obligation under international humanitarian law to care for and evacuate the
wounded in a timely way.

Anne-Sophie Bonefeld, a Red Cross spokeswoman based in Jerusalem, said, ''We
were really, really shocked by the delay.'' The aim of going public, she said,
''was to try to ensure that we never have such a situation again.''

The Red Cross statement also shocked the Israelis, who work well with the Red
Cross and trust it, Mr. Regev said. ''We found it very troubling, because we
take them very seriously,'' he said. ''It is incumbent on us in difficult
situations to help the I.C.R.C. to do its job.''

Maj. Peter Lerner, spokesman for the Defense Ministry's coordination office for
Gaza, said that access to the battlefield ''is severely influenced by the combat
going on,'' adding that ''tactical coordination was there from the start and
worked in many cases, and sometimes due to intense fighting it didn't work as
well.''

But Israel then moved to set up an additional special joint operations room with
the main humanitarian agencies near Tel Aviv.

Hamas has misused ambulances and Red Crescent and United Nations symbols in the
past and is doing so during this conflict, Major Lerner charged.

''We've had gunmen coming out of ambulances and taking up positions here in the
last week; my people saw it,'' he said. ''So of course this makes the troops in
the field very wary about any vehicles approaching them, and why coordination
has to be from the top to the very bottom, all the way down the line to the unit
in the field.''

The army's chief lawyer said about the Samounis: ''There was at no stage a
policy to not take care of the wounded. We're trying to improve coordination.
But there can be no high intensity fighting in such a densely populated place
without mistakes. I'm sure there are mistakes.''

Since then, the Red Cross has noted improvements, even praising Israel for
trying to avoid civilian casualties and provide humanitarian assistance in a
briefing for Europeans in Tel Aviv, according to a European diplomat who
attended the briefing.

Pierre Wettach, head of the organization in Israel and the Palestinian
territories, said of the Israel Defense Forces in an interview: ''I believe
there is a true concern on the part of the I.D.F. to address these things, which
are extremely complicated to organize.''

Targets Challenged

Human rights groups are also troubled by Israel's strikes on buildings they
believe should be classified as civilian, like the parliament, police stations
and the presidential palace.

''Some of the targets are government offices of Hamas and the civilian
authorities,'' said Jessica Montell of B'Tselem. Unless used for military
purposes, she said, ''these are not legitimate targets,'' and added, ''we have
suspicions that the I.D.F. does not respect these regulations.''

The army attacked ''both aspects of Hamas -- its resistance or military wing and
its dawa, or social wing,'' a senior intelligence officer said. He argued that
Hamas was all of a piece and in a war, its instruments of political and social
control were as legitimate a target as its rocket caches. Since June 2007 and
the Hamas takeover of Gaza in a brief war with its secular rival Fatah, both
Israel and Egypt have tried to seal the territory. But there has been an active
smuggling trade through tunnels from Egypt, and a year ago, Hamas blew open the
Egyptian border, letting Gazans go to Egypt and shop for food, cooking oil,
medicines, refrigerators and the like. But Hamas also used the open border to
smuggle in large rockets and other weapons, Israeli officials say.

To try to stop rocket attacks from Gaza, Israel halted normal trade with Gaza
and kept it on a much reduced diet for electricity, gasoline, diesel and cooking
oil, wheat flour and many other items. The idea was a form of economic sanction,
Mr. Regev, the government spokesman, said, a reminder that Israel would not let
life be normal under Hamas.

But many human rights groups banded together to sue the government in the
Supreme Court, alleging violation of international law and ''collective
punishment of civilians.'' The Israeli government argued that there was no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, that basic necessities were provided -- using the
United Nations' figure for the minimum calories required daily for subsistence
-- and the court generally agreed. But the rockets did not stop.

The effective closure continued through a six-month cease-fire with Hamas that
ended last month, and the shortage of diesel oil for Gaza's only power
generator, for example, meant many hours a day without electricity. That put a
strain on hospitals, generators and on the water supply and sewage system, which
depend on electric pumps.

Nine Israeli human rights groups charged that the fighting had caused a crisis
in the health and sanitation systems and have petitioned the Supreme Court
again.

Sari Bashi, of the human rights group Gisha, said the current lack of
electricity had limited the access to potable water to more than 500,000 people;
she said that there was sewage in the streets and that hospitals were running on
generators missing spare parts. Ms. Montell of B'Tselem said that even though
Israel pulled out of Gaza in 2005, ''there is no legal vacuum'' and it retains
responsibility for basic needs and trade. ''The argument that it's collective
punishment of civilians I find very compelling,'' she said.

Replacement for Sanctions

But since the war began, fighting has replaced sanctions as a means for stopping
the rockets, Mr. Regev said.

Philippe Lazzarini, head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, said that since the war started, ''The number of trucks
Israel has allowed into Gaza is much higher than during the blockade.'' But he
laughed and said, ''Anything seems like a big increase when you compare it to
practically nothing.'' Major Dallal said that ''people lose sight of the context
of a war zone in a densely populated area, where every time a door is pulled
open, a soldier wonders who is behind it.''

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights  said the Israeli military had acted
with ''total disregard for the lives of Palestinian civilians.''

Major Dallal, however, said the fundamental question, and not just for Israel,
was, ''How does an army fight a terrorist group?''

''If we,'' he added, meaning the world, ''just see the pictures and don't use
our heads, then the terrorists will always win these public opinion battles.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: AFTER THE STRIKE: Women inspected a house damaged Jan. 6 by an
Israeli bombing near a United Nations school.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABID KATIB/GETTY IMAGES)
SHOW OF GRIEF: Men carried the bodies of three toddlers on Jan. 5. They had been
killed in an airstrike, Palestinian medical officials said.
 (PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); ETHICS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (88%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); LAW OF WAR (76%); ARMED FORCES
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HEZBOLLAH (69%); DISCRIMINATION (69%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HAMAS (83%); HEZBOLLAH (55%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); LEBANON (78%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thailand Is Accused Of Rejecting Migrants

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


In the past month, the Thai authorities have detained as many as 1,000 boat
people from Bangladesh and Myanmar and sent them back out to sea in boats
without engines, human rights groups say. At least 300 people are reported to be
missing at sea.

The migrants are members of the ethnic Rohingya minority, mostly stateless
people who live in a cycle of poverty, repression, escape, capture and
exploitation.

The expulsions reverse a policy in which Thailand has allowed thousands of
Rohingya to land in recent years, mostly on their way to seek work in Malaysia.
In many cases those migrants are turned over to human traffickers.

Thailand denies the expulsions, saying that all arrivals are processed via legal
channels.

The reports coincide with separate criticism that Thailand has committed human
rights abuses in combating a Muslim insurgency in the south. They recall past
episodes in which the Thai military has forced out groups of refugees, sometimes
to their deaths.

In one case last month, the reports say, 410 Rohingya migrants were taken out to
sea on a Thai Navy vessel and forced onto an open barge with just four barrels
of water and two sacks of rice.

Four people were thrown overboard with their hands and feet tied as a way to
encourage the others to board the barge, according to the reports.

After drifting for two weeks, about 100 of the migrants were rescued on the
Andaman Islands, which are administered by India. About 300 remain missing after
trying to swim to shore, according to several reports from the news media and
human rights groups.

In a second case soon afterward, 580 people were reportedly seized off the Thai
coast on three overcrowded fishing boats. These were towed back out to sea after
their engines were removed, said Chris Lewa, an expert on Rohingya issues who
runs a private human rights group called the Arakan Project.

Two of those boats reached shore -- at Aceh in Indonesia and on the Andaman
Islands -- and one is missing, she said.

She said a new boatload of 46 migrants arrived Friday on Patong Island, off
Thailand's southern coast, and they were seized by the Thai military, which
until recently had not been involved in local immigration issues.

The expulsions were reported last week in the South China Morning Post in Hong
Kong. Thai officials denied Friday that any such expulsions had occurred.

''We never push them back to the sea,'' said one of the officials, Lt. Col. Tara
Soranarak, an inspector for the immigration office in Ranong Province. ''We have
our procedure to deport back the migrants to their home country after processing
them through the Thai legal system.''

Privately, Thai officials voiced concern about the Rohingya as Muslims who might
join a rebellion in southern Thailand involving people who are seeking a
separate Islamic state. Last week, Amnesty International issued a report
condemning Thailand as ''systematically engaging in torture'' against the
insurgency.

The reports of harsh treatment come in the context of a huge flow of refugees
from neighboring countries in the past three decades that has imposed a social
and economic burden on Thailand. Since the mid-1970s, Thailand has been a refuge
for millions  fleeing conflict and repression in Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar and
Laos.

''Thailand is surrounded by dangerous neighbors who have generated huge refugee
flows, and it has sometimes felt overwhelmed by these flows,'' said Kenneth
Bacon, president of the human rights group Refugees International. ''Its record
in handling them is mixed.''

In the most notorious episode, in 1979, 42,000 Cambodian refugees fleeing the
murderous Khmer Rouge were forced back down a cliff into a minefield by the Thai
military. Survivors said many of them died.

During the same period, Vietnamese boat people were victimized by Thai pirates
operating without official restraint.

Although tens of thousands of refugees now live in semipermanent camps along the
Thai border with Myanmar, some of them are periodically forced back against
their will. Last summer Human Rights Watch protested the forcible repatriation
of a group of ethnic Karen refugees who had fled military brutality in Myanmar,
formerly Burma.

The Rohingya are among the most helpless of the refugees, an abused minority in
Myanmar who migrated in large numbers to Bangladesh, where they live in poverty
and mostly without rights as a stateless minority.

Experts on the Rohingya describe an endless cycle of abuse in which migrants are
handed over to traffickers who demand money to take them to Malaysia, where many
are arrested and sent back into the hands of some of the same traffickers in
Thailand.

If at any stage they are unable to pay the traffickers, the immigrants say, they
can be sold to work on Thai fishing trawlers as indentured laborers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); NAVAL VESSELS (78%);
ALIEN SMUGGLING (78%); REFUGEES (78%); NAVIES (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (78%); MARINE VESSELS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (76%); RELIGION (73%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (71%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (56%); AMNESTY (50%)

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%)

STATE: ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS, INDIA (73%)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (94%); MYANMAR (92%); INDIA (79%); MALAYSIA (79%); INDONESIA
(79%); HONG KONG (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Report Finds Fault With Russia And Georgia

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Human Rights Watch released a comprehensive report on Friday on the brief August
war in Georgia, accusing both Russia and Georgia of using indiscriminate force
on civilians. It also said Russia had failed to prevent South Ossetian forces
from carrying out ''execution-style killings, rape, abductions and countless
beatings.''

The war began Aug. 7, when Georgia attacked Tskhinvali, the capital of South
Ossetia, a separatist enclave. Russia responded by sending columns of armor into
South Ossetia and Abkhazia, a second breakaway region, and then driving deep
into Georgia.

Early in the war, Moscow accused Georgia of ''genocide'' and said 2,000 people
had been killed in the shelling of Tskhinvali. In its report, Human Rights Watch
rejects those claims as exaggerated, and calls on Russia to acknowledge the more
recent assessments of 162 to 400 dead.

Much of the report is devoted to a meticulous description of Ossetian rampages
in ethnic Georgian villages in South Ossetia, in which houses were
systematically looted, set ablaze and bulldozed, sometimes as their inhabitants
watched. Human Rights Watch concluded that the militias' intent was ''to
ethnically cleanse these villages'' and that Russia as an occupying force was
responsible for civilians' safety.

Russian forces ''had full knowledge of what was going on,'' said Anna Neistat,
the organization's senior emergencies researcher, at a news conference in
Moscow. ''I think they just didn't care.''

The report was based on interviews with 460 victims and witnesses. Georgian
officials cooperated with the effort. Russian officials did not respond to
requests for information sent to the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of the
Interior, the Ministry of Emergency Situations and the president's office, the
report said.

Criticism of the Georgian side focuses on the shelling of Tskhinvali, starting
the night of Aug. 7. The report called the Georgian shelling ''indiscriminate''
and a violation of international humanitarian law, largely because it used Grad
multiple-rocket launching systems, which are notoriously inaccurate, in
populated civilian areas. A man whose mother and aunt were killed when a rocket
struck their yard in Tskhinvali told a researcher that it had left a 10-foot
crater.

''When it hit, all the sharp, scorching fragments flew into the house,
penetrating the walls as if it was paper,'' said the man, Alan Sipols. ''When
such a fragment hits a person, it just shreds you apart, and I cannot describe
what they turned the people I loved most into.''

Human Rights Watch also found that Georgia had used cluster bombs, which eject
dozens or hundreds of bomblets over a large area. Weeks after the war,
unexploded bomblets were scattered in fields and orchards, and farmers were too
frightened to harvest their crops.

The report characterizes some Russian air and artillery strikes as
indiscriminate, saying that in some cases weapons struck half a mile away from
military targets and even where no military target could be discerned. The
report also found that Russia had used cluster bombs -- something the
authorities vehemently denied during the war. It said Russian forces were
responsible for an attack on the main square in Gori on Aug. 12, killing six
people, including a Dutch journalist.

A Russian military official said on Friday that the allegations were untrue, the
Interfax news service reported. ''These are unproven allegations that have been
repeatedly voiced by the Georgian authorities,'' Interfax quoted the official,
Col. Gen. Anatoly Nogovitsyn, as saying. ''They have been denied on numerous
occasions.''

Most vivid are accounts of the violence unleashed by South Ossetians after
Russia had driven back the Georgian Army. The report documents 159 detentions of
ethnic Georgian civilians, two rapes of ethnic Georgian women, the torture and
execution of three prisoners of war and the razing of hundreds of houses.

A Georgian soldier, Kakha Zirakishvili, 33, told researchers that he and six
other prisoners of war had been beaten by Ossetian civilians and fighters ''with
gun butts, iron bars, whatever they had: wooden sticks, chairs even.'' Upon
release,  he had a broken rib, two broken fingers, a broken bone in his hand,
internal bruising in his chest, a broken eardrum and severe head trauma.

Human Rights Watch urged all sides to conduct independent inquiries and to let
more than 20,000 ethnic Georgian refugees return to South Ossetia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LAW OF WAR (79%); GENOCIDE (79%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (73%); UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (68%)

COMPANY: WALLS AS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531120 LESSORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (EXCEPT
MINIWAREHOUSES) (62%); SIC6512 OPERATORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (62%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (88%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); GEORGIA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Criticized, Putin Says Europe Has Rights Abuses of Its Own

BYLINE: By ANDREW E. KRAMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 441 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin responded Friday to a European official's
criticism of what appeared to be several contract killings here by saying rights
abuses occurred in Western Europe, too, citing the ill treatment of migrant
workers.

With that, Mr. Putin told the official, the president of the European
Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso, that the ''hockey puck'' was back in Europe's
zone on the issue of human rights abuses.

Even as Russia and Europe work toward better understandings on trade and energy,
European Union officials say lapses in the rule of law and democratic norms
remain major stumbling blocks to improving relations.

At a joint news conference with Mr. Putin late on Friday, Mr. Barroso said he
had raised the issue of contract murders  during a meeting that day with the
Russian president, Dmitri A. Medvedev. At that point, Mr. Putin interjected his
comments about Europe's human rights problems.

Two recent deaths have drawn wide attention. Stanislav Y. Markelov, 34, a human
rights lawyer, and Anastasia Baburova, 25, a reporter, were shot dead by a man
with a silencer-equipped pistol on a busy Moscow street last month. The gunman
escaped.

Ms. Baburova, a freelance journalist for the newspaper Novaya Gazeta, was its
fourth reporter to be killed in a contract-style attack or under mysterious
circumstances in recent years.

In November, Mikhail Beketov, a journalist for a suburban Moscow newspaper who
was campaigning against what he called local corruption, was beaten into a coma
and has yet to recover. In recent months, two former Chechen officials have been
killed in Moscow, and last month in Vienna, a former bodyguard of the Chechen
president was killed after filing a complaint against him with the European
Court of Human Rights.

Mr. Putin's response to Mr. Barroso stood in sharp contrast to a gesture last
week by Mr. Medvedev, who met with the editor of Novaya Gazeta and expressed his
''deepest sorrow'' over the reporter's death.

At the news conference on Friday, Mr. Barroso said: ''In public opinion there is
some concern regarding some recent events that happened in Russia. Namely, the
murder of some journalists and some rights activists.''

Mr. Putin said Russia was willing to discuss human rights abuses, but wanted
Europe to admit its own shortcomings. He said Russia was ''not satisfied'' with
the treatment of Russian-speaking minorities in new member states of the
European Union. He added: ''We know about the rights of migrants in Europe, and
how they are violated. So please, Mr. Barroso, here is the answering hockey puck
from the government of the Russian Federation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%);
EUROPEAN UNION (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (79%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (77%); EUROPEAN
UNION ACCESSION (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (74%); RULE OF LAW (73%); MIGRANT
WORKERS (72%); CORRUPTION (71%); SHOOTINGS (58%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COMMISSION (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (92%); JOSE MANUEL BARROSO (79%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (99%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(94%); WESTERN EUROPE (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq Says It Is Interrogating 4 Men Returned by U.S. From Guantanamo Prison

BYLINE: By MARC SANTORA; Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


Four prisoners who were being held at the American prison at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, have been sent back to their home country, Iraq, where they are being
interrogated, Iraqi officials confirmed Tuesday.

''The government is reviewing their files to see if there are any charges
against them,'' said Wijdan Mikhail Salim, the minister of human rights. If they
are not found guilty of any crimes, she said, they will be released.

The prisoners, who had been arrested in Afghanistan, were sent to Iraq more than
a month ago, according to a senior American defense official, and contradictory
statements about their fate by Iraqi officials in recent weeks have troubled
critics.

''The lack of clear information about these men's fate since their return to
Iraq raises obvious concerns,'' said Jennifer Daskal of Human Rights Watch.
''All these men have already been held for years without charge in Guantanamo
and should now be either charged by the Iraqi government and prosecuted in a
fair process, or released.''

Mrs. Salim said that reviewing their cases could take several more months.

The interim justice minister,  Safaldin al-Safi, speaking on the United
States-backed satellite channel Al Hurra, said that their families had been
informed and that Iraqi human rights officials would be allowed to visit them.

''If they have committed crimes in Iraqi law, they will be punished,'' he said
in the interview, which was broadcast Tuesday. ''If not, they will be
released.''

President Obama has ordered that the Guantanamo prison  be closed within a year,
but this case highlights some of the difficulties involved in doing so.

The four men were released while President Bush was in office, and there have
been no reported releases of prisoners since Mr. Obama's inauguration.

At least one other Iraqi remains in jail at Guantanamo, according to Iraqi
officials. The man did not express a desire to return to Iraq, Iraqi officials
said, and negotiations are under way to send him to a third country.

When the United States Defense Department released a list of detainees in 2006,
it included eight Iraqis. One of them was released in 2007 and went to his
family in Britain.

Human Rights Watch identified the four prisoners returned to Iraq as Hassan
Abdul Said, Arkan Mohammad Ghafil al-Karim, Abbas Habid Rumi al-Naely and Ali
Abdul Motalib Awayd Hassan al-Tayeea.

If the men are tried, their cases will test the nascent Iraqi justice system and
be closely monitored.

The web of events that led each man to Guantanamo could prove difficult to
unravel.

Nada Abdul Hadi Said, an older sister of Hassan Abdul Said, said that she last
saw her brother in October 1999 when he was drafted into the Iraqi Army and
stationed in Kirkuk. The next news she heard about him came from the Red Cross
in 2004, informing the family that he was a prisoner at Guantanamo Bay.

He occasionally wrote to his family, the last letter dated Aug. 28, 2008. He
placed a phone call to his sister on Aug. 7, 2008, but she said he did not say
much and provided no explanation for his arrest.

''He always said his health was good, that he was never mistreated,'' she said
by phone from her home in Basra, in southern Iraq.

Mr. Said has nine sisters, and is the only son in the family. The Red Cross
informed them that he was in Iraq earlier this month, but his sister did not
know if she would see him.

If she did see him, she said, she did not know what to expect.

''He's just too far from us,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); ARRESTS (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); ARMIES (71%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Rebel Planes Shot Down Over Capital of Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA and MARK McDONALD; Somini Sengupta reported from New
Delhi, and Mark McDonald from Hong Kong.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Two rebel fighter planes circling over the Sri Lankan capital were shot down
Friday night, with one crashing into the government tax office and injuring 42
people, according to the government. The aerial raid comes weeks after the
government announced the destruction of all rebel air bases in its final push on
rebel territory in the island's north.

The Defense Ministry said that one of the rebel planes had been shot down by the
Sri Lankan military, and that there were ''slight damages'' to the tax office,
which is near the Sri Lankan Air Force headquarters.

The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam have struck targets near the capital,
Colombo, in the past, but the government has been celebrating its near-victory
over the rebels. The approach of the rebel planes shows the rebels' continued
ability to carry out terrorist attacks far from the combat zone in the
northeastern corner of the island. A pro-rebel news portal, TamilNet, said the
pilots had intended to dive their planes into two sites run by the air force.

Also on Friday, Human Rights Watch, based in New York, reported a high death
toll in the conflict: 2,000 people in the past month alone as the government
advanced on the last wedge of territory held by the Tamil Tigers. An estimated
5,000 people have been injured, the group said in a report released Friday. It
accused both government and rebel forces of ''numerous violations of
international humanitarian law.''

Failing to distinguish between the trapped civilians and the rebels, the report
said, the government has carried out ''indiscriminate'' artillery attacks on
civilians who are trapped in the war zone, shelling hospitals and other
designated as humanitarian ''safe zones.''

Cornered and desperate, the Tamil Tigers have responded by using civilians as
human shields and forcing others, including children, into service as fighters
and porters on the battlefield, Human Rights Watch said.

The sides, the report said, ''appear to be engaged in a perverse competition to
demonstrate the greatest disregard for the civilian population.''

An estimated 250,000 civilians remain trapped in the battle zone, pinned down by
government fire or held captive by rebel forces.

''This 'war' against civilians must stop,'' said James Ross, legal and policy
director at Human Rights Watch, in a statement that accompanied the report's
release.

The report was based on a two-week fact-finding mission to northern Sri Lanka in
February, Human Rights Watch said. The Sri Lankan government's refusal to allow
independent journalists, rights monitors and most aid groups into the area has
made it difficult to report conclusively on the situation there.

The report came as John Holmes, under secretary general for humanitarian affairs
and emergency relief coordinator at the United Nations, visited the country amid
increasing concern for the fate of the ethnic Tamil civilians in the north. On
Thursday, as he prepared to tour displacement camps near the war zone, Mr.
Holmes called on both sides to try to avoid civilian casualties.

The government and the rebels, who are also known by the initials L.T.T.E., have
rejected previous criticisms leveled by United Nations agencies, humanitarian
groups and the International Committee of the Red Cross.

A Sri Lankan military spokesman, Brig. Udaya Nanayakkara, said Friday that
members of the military ''are not violating any Geneva Conventions or
humanitarian law,'' according to The Associated Press.

Those who flee and end up on the government's side are sent to government-run
internment centers, which are military-controlled, barbed-wire-rimmed camps in
which refugees are denied their liberty and freedom of movement, the report
said. Humanitarian agencies have tenuous access, but their aid comes with the
risk of supporting a long-term detention program for civilians.

''The L.T.T.E.'s grim practices are being exploited by the government to justify
its own atrocities,'' the report said. ''High-level statements have indicated
that the ethnic Tamil population trapped in the war zone can be presumed to be
siding with the L.T.T.E. and treated as combatants, effectively sanctioning
unlawful attacks.''

Mr. Ross said, ''The government seems to be trying its best to keep its role in
their ordeal away from public scrutiny.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sri Lankan soldiers on Friday near the government tax office,
where 42 people were injured when a rebel fighter plane hit it.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
ISHARA S. KODIKARA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TAX AUTHORITIES (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); AIR FORCES (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); SHOOTINGS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); AIRCRAFT
PILOTS (78%); MILITARY BASES (77%); LAW OF WAR (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY
(76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%);
TERRORISM (73%); JOURNALISM (72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (69%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (68%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Draws Fire For Report on Guantanamo

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 761 words


The Pentagon official who inspected the Guantanamo Bay prison at the behest of
President Obama and declared its conditions humane described himself Monday as a
''fresh set of eyes'' who had been given free rein to go about his work.

But detainees' lawyers and human rights groups ridiculed the 85-page report that
the official, Adm. Patrick M. Walsh, sent to the White House this weekend. They
called it a public relations gesture by the new administration to try to quiet
criticism of the prison while officials work to close it within a year.

''There is no basis to believe, other than his say-so, that this was an
independent report,'' said Vincent Warren, executive director of the Center for
Constitutional Rights.

Coming in the early days of the Obama administration, the exchange was notable
for its similarity to the back-and-forth during the Bush years over what the
Guantanamo prison is really like.

Admiral Walsh, appointed by Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates to conduct a
review of Guantanamo conditions that was ordered by the president, conceded that
there had been widespread accusations of violence against detainees, humiliating
treatment and other abuses.

But ''we found no such evidence,'' he said at a Pentagon news conference.

Rather, he said, after random visits and interviews with detainees, guards,
interrogators and commanders, his team concluded that Guantanamo complied with
the Geneva Conventions, which among other things bar ''humiliating and degrading
treatment.'' The report addressed 27 categories of treatment, including health
care and disciplinary rules.

It also proposed many possible improvements, including more human contact for
detainees and, to assure humane treatment, videotaping their interaction with
guards.

But detainees' lawyers issued their own report, and produced letters from some
of their clients, describing severe isolation, brutal tactics and detainees so
addled by hopelessness that some banged their heads against the concrete walls
of their cells. ''Just let me die,'' one detainee was quoted as saying.

Several of the critics focused on the fact that the finding of humane conditions
came from a senior official of the very department, the Pentagon, that has been
running the Guantanamo prison through years of international criticism. Admiral
Walsh is the vice chief of naval operations, and the prison is  on a naval base
at the southeastern tip of Cuba.

''The real question is, Is this administration going to expect us to view this
as a closed issue?'' said Tom Parker, advocacy director for terrorism,
counterterrorism and human rights at Amnesty International.

''If they are,'' Mr. Parker added, ''they're going to be disappointed.''

Amnesty International and several other human rights groups have long been
denied permission for independent inspections of the prison that would include
interviews with detainees. The International Committee of the Red Cross does
visit Guantanamo, but, in keeping with its longtime  policy intended to abet its
access to detention centers and the like, its reports are issued only to those
who run the centers, not to the public.

Rear Adm. Frank Thorp IV, the Navy's chief of information, said the criticism of
Admiral Walsh's report did not take note of its detailed nature or the fact that
it had been made public.

In addition, ''Admiral Walsh has a longstanding reputation for honesty and
credibility,'' Admiral Thorp said.

The White House did not respond to a request for comment about the criticism.

But in the community of lawyers and human rights monitors who have helped make
the prison an international issue, there was a certain familiarity to Monday's
dispute. For years they have been the chief source of information about a center
that in the past, at least, was a place of documented instances of mistreatment.

Sarah Havens, a New York lawyer who has been visiting clients there since 2004,
said she was not surprised that the military was reporting that it had been
doing a good job. But, Ms. Havens said, her observations during a recent visit
were different from Admiral Walsh's.

''In my experience,'' she said, ''the conditions at Guantanamo are worse than
they have ever been. The detainees are at a breaking point.''

Admiral Walsh, in contrast, referred to a ''high quality of care'' at Guantanamo
and said commanders were always working on improvements.

Describing one of the concrete prison buildings that detainees' lawyers have
described as reminiscent of something medieval, he said: ''It's new. It's
modern.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); NAVIES (89%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (79%); LAW OF WAR (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); INSPECTIONS (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); ARMED FORCES (72%); TERRORISM (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (91%); ROBERT M GATES (58%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Concerns Keep U.S. From Talks On Racism

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The first United Nations conference in eight years to address the issue of
racism will open Monday in Geneva without delegations from the United States and
a few important allies, but with President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran as a
headline speaker.

The American boycott was prompted by concerns that the conference would be a
flashback to the initial world summit meeting against racism in 2001 in Durban,
South Africa, which critics said served as a platform to bash Israel.

The boycott came after extended haggling over the meeting's draft document, with
negotiators removing contested references about Israel's treatment of the
Palestinians, about the defamation of religion and compensation for slavery.

But the first paragraph of the draft document reaffirms the final communique
from Durban, where the United States and Israel walked out. That section, along
with a reference to incitement that Washington said might infringe on  free
speech, prompted the United States to announce its boycott with ''regret'' over
the weekend. Canada and Israel had already said they would not attend, and
others who joined the boycott included the Netherlands, Italy and Australia.

The decision was greeted with elation by American organizations supporting
Israel, which had been protesting for months, but dismayed some rights
organizations and African-American groups who accused the administration of
skipping a historic opportunity to right past wrongs.

President Obama said Sunday that he ''would love'' to participate in a
conference that addressed racism and discrimination, but not one with the
baggage of the previous gathering.

''Unfortunately, even though I think other countries made great efforts to
accommodate some of our concerns and assured us that this conference would be
more constructive, our participation would have involved putting our imprimatur
on something that we just don't believe,'' the president said.

His remarks were echoed by other governments who pulled out on Sunday. ''Several
countries that still have a great deal to do in the area of human rights are
misusing the summit to elevate religion above human rights, to place unnecessary
restrictions on freedom of expression, to ignore discrimination based on sexual
orientation and to implicitly single out Israel and put it in the dock,'' said
the Dutch foreign minister, Maxime Verhagen.

The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Navi Pillay, said  the
boycotting countries had allowed Middle East politics to intrude into a
conference on  discrimination.

''I am shocked and deeply disappointed by the United States' decision not to
attend,'' Ms. Pillay said in a statement. ''A handful of states have permitted
one or two issues to dominate their approach to this issue, allowing them to
outweigh the concerns of numerous groups of people that suffer racism and
similar forms of intolerance.''

Human rights groups said countries that boycott the conference were  losing the
chance to set the record straight on racism. ''These governments are ceding the
floor to more radical voices,'' said Juliette de Rivero, the Geneva advocacy
director at Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); RACE &
RACISM (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
BOYCOTTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (88%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); POLITICS (77%); FOREIGN POLICY
(76%); LIBEL & SLANDER (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (73%); GAYS & LESBIANS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (72%); BARACK OBAMA (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); ISRAEL (95%); SWITZERLAND (92%); SOUTH AFRICA
(92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Hatred from Mr. Ahmadinejad

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 392 words


The fear all along has been that the United Nations conference on racism would
be manipulated into yet another forum for demonizing Israel. All too
predictably, Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad -- who has called the
Holocaust a myth and has advocated Israel's destruction -- did just that.

In an ugly speech on Monday that served to divide and incite rather than find
constructive solutions to racism, Mr. Ahmadinejad said the formation of the
state of Israel left ''an entire nation homeless under the pretext of Jewish
suffering'' in order ''to establish a totally racist government in occupied
Palestine.''

We commend France and other European nations for walking out in protest.

There are legitimate questions to be raised about Israel's handling of the Gaza
war, which had a disturbingly high number of civilian casualties. The Israeli
military last month investigated allegations of abuses made by Israel's own
soldiers and quickly concluded that crucial data were based on ''hearsay.'' We
agree with the nine Israeli human rights groups that have called for an
independent inquiry. A spotlight also must be focused on the Palestinian
militant group Hamas, which controls Gaza. Human Rights Watch said in a new
report  that Hamas has been killing and maiming political opponents.

The last United Nations conference on racism -- in 2001 -- deteriorated into an
Israel-bashing spectacle. Israel was the only country singled out in the final
conference communique. Many participants, including the Russians, worked hard to
try to ensure that this year's meeting would be different. While there have been
improvements in the communique, as now written, it would affirm the conclusions
of the last one, implicitly still singling out Israel.

The United Nations conference can never have credibility, or value, if it is
used to attack one country -- Israel -- especially when so many other countries
have truly abysmal human rights records, including China, Sudan and Iran.

After weighing the issue, President Obama decided not to send an American
delegation to the conference. Perhaps it would have been better if his
administration had been present to fight for an improved communique until the
end. Ceding the podium to Mr. Ahmadinejad and his ilk is not the most effective
strategy --  for defending Israel or for promoting human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HOLOCAUST (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); HAMAS (82%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (91%); BARACK OBAMA (57%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Aid Groups Are Slowly Reaching Sri Lanka's War Refugees

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Eleven days after the Sri Lankan government declared victory over Tamil rebels
in the country's north, aid organizations are slowly beginning to get freer
access to the 265,000 civilians displaced by the fighting, but not quickly
enough to meet the vast needs, according to aid officials in the region.

Sri Lankan officials have eased restrictions on vehicle traffic in the camps,
allowing workers from organizations like the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the United Nations and Doctors Without Borders better access to the
ethnic Tamils displaced by the fighting who are living in sprawling and squalid
camps, according to aid workers.

Sarasi Wijeratne, spokeswoman for the Red Cross in Sri Lanka, said that the
organization had access to the camps, but that ''clear procedures are still
lacking.''

Mahinda Samarasinghe, Sri Lanka's minister of disaster management and human
rights, told the United Nations Human Rights Commission this week that the
government was committed to making sure the displaced residents got help.

''There is absolutely no issue in terms of giving access,'' he said. ''We have
given access and we will continue to give access to complement government
efforts in looking after the needy.''

But aid officials say that conditions in the camps clumped around the northern
district of Vavuniya remain horrifically crowded and that basic items like
cooking pots and blankets are in short supply.

''These people in the camps need more assistance,'' said Elizabeth Byrs, a
spokeswoman for the United Nations in Geneva. ''They are in a dire situation.
The camps are overcrowded, and we need to build much more shelters.''

At the Vavuniya hospital, where thousands of the wounded have been treated since
the last weeks of brutal fighting between the rebels and the government, nearly
2,000 patients are packed into a facility with 400 beds, according to Doctors
Without Borders. Surgeons who normally would perform five surgeries a day are
doing more than two dozen.

''The hospital is very packed,'' said Hugues Robert, head of mission for Doctors
Without Borders in Sri Lanka.

The United Nations estimates that at least 7,000 civilians were killed in the
bloody final push of the battle to defeat the rebels, known as the Tamil Tigers,
who had waged guerrilla warfare for 25 years. Human rights groups have accused
the government of shelling civilians who had fled to safe zones. Verifying the
total civilian death toll has been impossible because access to the displaced by
rights investigators and independent journalists has been severely restricted.

Despite this, Sri Lanka successfully fought off efforts to begin an
investigation by the United Nations Human Rights Council this week into possible
war crimes in Sri Lanka.

Several European nations supported a resolution calling for an investigation of
both the actions of the Tamil Tigers, who are accused of using civilians as
human shields, and the government, but Sri Lanka introduced its own resolution,
in effect congratulating itself on its victory. Several crucial allies, like
India, China and Pakistan, helped pass that resolution, which contained much
weaker language urging the government to allow access to displaced people by aid
groups.

The displaced say they are being held hostage by the government in camps that
have become little more than open-air prisons. Government officials say that the
displaced are being corralled for their own safety and to allow the military to
flush out Tamil Tiger fighters hiding among the civilians.

United Nations officials said that the civilians must be allowed to return to
their homes quickly.

''The civilians should be able to leave the camps and go back their families,''
Ms. Byrs said. ''It is a trauma for these people to be kept in these camps.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on May 30 about aid organizations being given freer
access to civilians displaced by the recently ended fighting between Tamil
rebels and the government in Sri Lanka referred incorrectly at one point to the
United Nations body that was considering an investigation of possible war crimes
there. As the article correctly noted elsewhere, it is the Human Rights Council,
not the Human Rights Commission.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Civilians at a refugee camp outside Vavuniya, in northern Sri
Lanka. The camps around this town are woefully overcrowded.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID
GRAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (92%); DISASTER RELIEF (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); REFUGEES (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MEDICAL CHARITIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); FOOD
CHARITIES (78%); WAR CRIMES (77%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (57%); DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (57%);
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 19, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civic Groups Wary as Russia May Ease Curbs

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


President Dmitri A. Medvedev introduced legislation this week that he said would
partly relax restrictions on civic organizations. The new measures were
tentatively welcomed by human rights groups, which have long criticized the
government for hampering civic development.

Rights groups warned, however, that the proposed changes, which the Russian
Parliament must pass before they become law, will only begin to loosen the legal
and bureaucratic constraints imposed in large part by Mr. Medvedev's
predecessor, Vladimir V. Putin.

Since becoming president last year, Mr. Medvedev has in some respects sought to
distance himself from Mr. Putin's hard line, at times seeking advice from
journalists and opposition politicians.

Last month, Mr. Medvedev convened an advisory board of civic leaders and
government officials to draft revisions to the laws governing nongovernmental
organizations.

Under Mr. Putin, now prime minister, officials often vilified these groups as
fronts for foreign intelligence agencies or terrorist groups, especially after
the so-called colored revolutions, in which pro-democracy groups -- some backed
by Western donors -- helped topple Kremlin-friendly governments in neighboring
countries.

In recent years, the Russian government has deliberately sought to undercut the
work of civic groups by subjecting them to intense bureaucratic oversight and
harassment by law enforcement and tax agencies, as well as to a concerted public
campaign meant to sow suspicions about their activities, Human Rights Watch said
in a report released Thursday.

Groups that have been active in politics and human rights advocacy have been
especially vulnerable to legal reprisals, the report said.

In remarks made Wednesday, Mr. Medvedev admitted that civic groups in Russia
were ''burdened by pounds of regulations.''

He said the new legislation would strip away some of the bureaucracy involved in
registering the organizations and limit inspections by government agencies. It
will also reduce penalties for mistakes in paperwork.

''It seems that President Medvedev is prepared to work on strengthening civil
society and guarantees of basic rights and freedoms in Russia,'' said Matthew
Schaaf, an author of the Human Rights Watch report. But, he said, ''the
legislation concerns only part of the problems that nongovernmental
organizations face.''

Mr. Schaaf and others said the new legislation, if passed, would ease
restrictions for only about a third of Russia's nongovernmental groups and would
not apply to any group that received foreign financing.

Yuri Dzhibladze, the president of a Russian nongovernmental organization and a
member of Mr. Medvedev's advisory board, said it was necessary to seek modest
reforms initially to build enough political will to eventually overturn the
Putin-era curbs.

''For us,'' he said, ''it is important that this work is not limited to these
first steps, that these are not just symbolic changes.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(79%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); TAX LAW (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); TAX
AUTHORITIES (69%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (53%); TERRORISM (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

PERSON: DMITRY MEDVEDEV (79%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (79%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (78%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 31, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria Confirms Death Of Islamic Sect's Leader

BYLINE: By ADAM NOSSITER; Adam Nossiter reported from Dakar, and Alan Cowell
from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal


Nigerian security forces on Thursday confirmed the death of the leader of a
fundamentalist Islamic sect in the city of Maiduguri, apparently ending a fierce
five-day campaign against the group that may have left hundreds dead across
northern Nigeria.

A military spokesman would not say exactly how the leader, Mohammed Yusuf, was
killed, though news agencies widely reported that he was killed after being
captured. Human Rights Watch quickly issued a statement saying that ''the
killing in police custody of criminal suspects has become an extremely worrying
pattern in Nigeria.''

The group's compound -- a mosque, a clinic and living quarters -- was flattened
after an all-out military assault on Wednesday that left bodies scattered about
the area, reports and photographs from the scene suggested.

''Everything has been destroyed,'' said Isa Umar Gusau, a reporter for The Daily
Trust, a Nigerian newspaper, in a  phone interview on Thursday from Maiduguri.
He said he had seen about 50 bodies in the compound.

Nigeria, a fractious confederation of hundreds of linguistic and ethnic groups,
is regularly riven by bloody religious strife. But this latest episode of
violence has surprised even experienced observers, because of the intensity of
the military response. Human rights groups expressed concern over civilian
casualties -- the exact number is not known -- in an armed operation in a
densely populated area, within a crowded metropolis. These rights groups often
accuse the military of heavy-handedness in dealing with civil unrest.

Authorities blamed the religious sect, known as Boko Haram, for attacks on
police stations on Sunday and Monday, and for amassing bombs, shells and
fighters in preparation for a religion-inspired war on the state. The group's
name is a Hausa expression connoting distaste for Western education.

The authorities responded fiercely: the army quickly took over from the police,
and sect buildings were strafed with gunfire and shells. In Maiduguri, a city of
more than a million, frightened residents stayed indoors. Several thousand
people were displaced from their homes. Estimates of the dead from reporters and
observers are in the hundreds, though authorities have refused to give a death
toll.

''Maiduguri town is free,'' said the military spokesman, Col. Mohammed Yerima,
in a phone interview from Abuja.

''It's just the pockets of fundamentalists that we are mopping out,'' he said.
''We have dislodged the fundamentalists out of Maiduguri, and they have
withdrawn to the outskirts.''

Colonel Yerima rebutted assertions from critics that the operation had been
heavy-handed, saying loss of life had been kept ''to the barest minimum.''

But questions lingered even as the operation drew to a close.

''Once you call in the army, the response is always the same,'' said Jibrin
Ibrahim, director of the Center for Democracy and Development in Abuja, a
leading West African research group. ''You show them the area, and they bulldoze
the area. That's what they've always done in situations like this.''

A leading Nigerian human rights official, Shimaki Gad Peter of the League for
Human Rights, said that during the operation, it would have been ''difficult to
differentiate between sect members and non-sect members because they are not
carrying uniforms.''

Colonel Yerima alluded indirectly to the difficulty of distinguishing between
innocent civilians and sect members. ''We announced to the civilians that they
should leave that place,'' he said.

''Anybody found in that area is a member of that organization,'' he continued,
adding: ''That is what we suppose because we give notice for people to get out
of that place. The fundamentalists use people as a shield.''

With the gunfire over on Thursday, a semblance of calm returned to the battered
city. The police and the military kept tight control on movement in the streets.

''Lots of stop and search by police, to make sure the dissidents don't get back
in the city,'' said Mr. Gusau, the Daily Trust reporter, by phone from
Maiduguri. ''They are searching every road in the city, searching individuals,
stopping people who have maybe changed their identities.''

The area of military operations ''is completely destroyed,'' Mr. Gusau
reiterated.

Descriptions like that gave pause to human rights officials who were unable to
survey the damage firsthand. ''My feeling is that there was an excess use of
force,'' Mr. Peter said. ''I thought this was supposed to be a police action.
This is like warfare.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CITY LIFE (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(90%); ARMIES (89%); BOKO HARAM (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES
(78%); NEWS REPORTING (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); RIOTS
(70%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (66%); ETHNICITY (52%); ETHNIC GROUPS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

CITY: ABUJA, NIGERIA (79%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (52%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (98%); SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Latest Tragic Symbol of an Unhealed Congo: Male Rape Victims

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: GOMA, Congo


It was around 11 p.m. when armed men burst into Kazungu Ziwa's hut, put a
machete to his throat and yanked down his pants. Mr. Ziwa is a tiny man, about
four feet, six inches tall. He tried to fight back, but said he was quickly
beaten down.

''Then they raped me,'' he said. ''It was horrible, physically. I was dizzy. My
thoughts just left me.''

For years, the thickly forested hills and clear, deep lakes of eastern Congo
have been a reservoir of atrocities. Now, it seems, there is another growing
problem: men raping men.

According to Oxfam, Human Rights Watch, United Nations officials and several
Congolese aid organizations, the number of men who have been raped has risen
sharply in recent months, a consequence of joint Congo-Rwanda military
operations against rebels that have uncapped an appalling level of violence
against civilians.

Aid workers struggle to explain the sudden spike in male rape cases. The best
answer, they say, is that the sexual violence against men is yet another way for
armed groups to humiliate and demoralize Congolese communities into submission.

The United Nations already considers eastern Congo the rape capital of the
world, and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton is expected to hear from
survivors on her visit to the country next week. Hundreds of thousands of women
have been sexually assaulted by the various warring militias  haunting these
hills, and right now this area is going through one of its bloodiest periods in
years.

The joint military operations that began in January between Rwanda and Congo,
David and Goliath neighbors who were recently bitter enemies, were supposed to
end the murderous rebel problem along the border and usher in a new epoch of
cooperation and peace. Hopes soared after the quick capture of a renegade
general who had routed government troops and threatened to march across the
country.

But aid organizations say that the military maneuvers have provoked horrific
revenge attacks, with more than 500,000 people driven from their homes, dozens
of villages burned and hundreds of villagers massacred, including toddlers
thrown into open fires.

And it is not just the rebels being blamed. According to human rights groups,
soldiers from the Congolese Army are executing civilians, raping women and
conscripting villagers to lug their food, ammunition and gear into the jungle.
It is often a death march through one of Africa's lushest, most stunning
tropical landscapes, which has also been the scene of a devastatingly
complicated war for more than a decade.

''From a humanitarian and human rights perspective, the joint operations are
disastrous,'' said Anneke Van Woudenberg, a researcher for Human Rights Watch.

The male rape cases span several hundred miles and possibly include hundreds of
victims. The American Bar Association, which runs a sexual violence legal clinic
in Goma, said that more than 10 percent of its cases in June were men.

Brandi Walker, an aid worker at Panzi hospital in nearby Bukavu, said,
''Everywhere we go, people say men are getting raped, too.''

But nobody knows the exact number. Men here, like anywhere, are reluctant to
come forward. Several who did said they instantly became castaways in their
villages, lonely, ridiculed figures, derisively referred to as ''bush wives.''

Since being raped several weeks ago, Mr. Ziwa, 53, has not shown much interest
in practicing animal medicine, his trade for years. He limps around (his left
leg was crushed in the attack) in a soiled white lab coat with ''veterinaire''
printed on it in red pen, carrying a few biscuit-size pills for dogs and sheep.

''Just thinking about what happened to me makes me tired,'' he said.

The same is true for Tupapo Mukuli, who said he was pinned down on his stomach
and gang-raped in his cassava patch seven months ago. Mr. Mukuli is now the lone
man in the rape ward at Panzi hospital, which is filled with hundreds of women
recovering from rape-related injuries. Many knit clothes and weave baskets to
make a little money while their bodies heal.

But Mr. Mukuli is left out.

''I don't know how to make baskets,'' he said. So he spends his days sitting on
a bench, by himself.

The male rape cases are still just a fraction of those against women. But for
the men involved, aid workers say, it is even harder to bounce back.

''Men's identity is so connected to power and control,'' Ms. Walker said.

And in a place where homosexuality is so taboo, the rapes carry an extra dose of
shame.

''I'm laughed at,'' Mr. Mukuli said. ''The people in my village say: 'You're no
longer a man. Those men in the bush made you their wife.' ''

Aid workers here say the humiliation is often so severe that male rape victims
come forward only if they have urgent health problems, like stomach swelling or
continuous bleeding. Sometimes even that is not enough. Ms. Van Woudenberg said
that two men whose penises were cinched with rope died a few days later because
they were too embarrassed to seek help. Castrations also seem to be increasing,
with more butchered men showing up at major hospitals.

Last year, Congo's rape epidemic appeared to be easing a bit, with fewer cases
reported and some rapists jailed. But today, it seems like that thin veneer of
law and order has been stripped away. The way villagers describe it, it is open
season on civilians.

Muhindo Mwamurabagiro, a tall, graceful woman with long, strong arms, explained
how she was walking to the market with friends when they were suddenly
surrounded by a group of naked men.

''They grabbed us by the throat and threw us down and raped us,'' she said.

Worse, she said, one of the rapists was from her village.

''I yelled, 'Father of Kondo, I know you, how can you do this?' ''

One mother said a United Nations peacekeeper raped her 12-year-old boy. A United
Nations spokesman said that he had not heard that specific case but that there
were indeed a number of new sexual abuse allegations against peacekeepers in
Congo and that a team was sent in late July to investigate.

Congolese health professionals are becoming exasperated. Many argue for a
political solution, not a military one, and say Western powers should put more
pressure on Rwanda, which is widely accused of preserving its own stability by
keeping the violence on the other side of the border.

''I understand the world feels guilty about what happened in Rwanda in 1994,''
said Denis Mukwege, the lead doctor at Panzi Hospital, referring to Rwanda's
genocide. ''But shouldn't the world feel guilty about what's happening in Congo
today?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Clockwise from top left, Kazungu Ziwa, Shabani Lufuno, Matata
Badoda and Ngabu Bita are Congolese men who were recently raped, and agreed to
be photographed. (pg.A1)
Mitima Mohigirwa, 24, was raped by five soldiers after being abducted by a
militia. More photographs are at nytimes.com/world.
A camp for internally displaced people in Rutshuru. More than 500,000 Congolese
have been driven from their homes.
 Tupapo Mukuli is the lone man in the rape ward at Panzi Hospital in Bukavu.
Male cases are a fraction of those of women. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JEHAD NGA FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A7) MAP: For years, eastern Congo has been a reservoir of
atrocities. (pg.A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (91%); MEN (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); ARMIES (75%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (71%); BUSINESS &
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (69%); ALLIANCES & PARTNERSHIPS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (50%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); AFRICA
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan's Army Said to Be Linked To Many Killings

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ and PIR ZUBAIR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1180 words

DATELINE: MINGORA, Pakistan


Two months after the Pakistani Army wrested control of the Swat Valley from
Taliban militants, a new campaign of fear has taken hold, with scores, perhaps
hundreds, of bodies dumped on the streets in what human rights advocates and
local residents say is the work of the military.

In some cases, people may simply have been seeking revenge against the ruthless
Taliban, in a society that tends to accept tit-for-tat reprisals, local
politicians said.

But the scale of the retaliation, the similarities in the way that many of the
victims have been tortured and the systematic nature of the deaths and
disappearances in areas that the military firmly controls have led local
residents, human rights workers and some Pakistani officials to conclude that
the military has had a role in the campaign.

The Pakistani Army, which is supported by the United States and in the absence
of effective political leadership is running much of Swat with an iron hand, has
strenuously denied any involvement in the killings. The army has acknowledged
that bodies have turned up, but its spokesmen assert that the killings are the
result of civilians settling scores.

''There are no extrajudicial killings in our system,'' said Col. Akhtar Abbas,
the army spokesman in Swat. ''If something happens, we have a foolproof
accountability system.''

But neighbors of the victims and Swat residents say there is something more
going on than revenge killings by civilians.

A senior politician from the region and a former interior minister, Aftab Ahmed
Sherpao, said he was worried about the army's involvement in the killings.
''There have been reports of extrajudicial killings by the military that are of
concern,'' he said. ''This will not help bring peace.''

Pakistan's military operations against the Taliban in Swat, begun in May under
public pressure from the United States, has been hailed by Washington as a
showcase effort of the army's newfound resolve to defeat the militants. The
American ambassador, Anne W. Patterson, visited Mingora, the biggest town in
Swat, last week, becoming the first senior American official to go to Swat since
the army took over.

Now, concerns over the army's methods in the area threaten to further taint
Washington's association with the military, cooperation that has been questioned
in Congress and has been politically unpopular in Pakistan.

The number of killings suggests that the military is seeking to silence any
enthusiasm for the Taliban and to settle accounts for heavy army casualties,
said a senior provincial official who spoke on the condition of anonymity for
fear of reprimand by the army.

A sullen, uncertain atmosphere prevails in Mingora, where people interviewed
last week in shops, homes and government institutions nervously complained of
the arbitrary and unpredictable army rule.

Bodies, some with torture marks and some with limbs tied and a bullet in the
neck or head, have been found on the roads of Mingora and in rural areas that
were militant strongholds.

Reports on Sept. 1 in two national daily newspapers, Dawn and The News, said the
bodies of 251 people had been found dumped in Swat.

The Human Rights Commission, a nongovernmental organization, disputed that all
the victims had been killed by civilians, saying last month that there were
credible reports of retaliatory killings by the military. It said that witnesses
had seen mass graves and that in some cases, the bodies appeared to be those of
militants.

The exact number of alleged killings was impossible to calculate because the
presence of human rights monitors was limited by the authorities, the commission
said. The International Committee of the Red Cross, which investigates illegal
killings, was ordered by the military to leave Swat last month over matters
unrelated to the killings, a senior Pakistani government official and the Red
Cross said.

In one case, a family filed a petition with the army command last week
describing the alleged killing of their son while in military custody. The army
has initiated an inquiry, Colonel Abbas, the military spokesman in Swat, said.

The family of the man, Akhtar Ali, 28, said he was arrested at his electrical
shop in Mingora in the early evening of Sept. 1 by a group of soldiers. Four
days later, Mr. Ali's body was returned to the family home ''tortured to
death,'' a petition signed by his mother, Jehan Sultana, said.

Colonel Abbas said the army did not acknowledge that Akhtar Ali had been in
military custody. If the inquiry found that a member of the army was guilty of
the death, he would be disciplined, he said, ''whatever the rank.''

According to the family's account, family members went to army headquarters in
Mingora the day after his arrest. ''We were assured he would be released,'' the
petition said. A day or two later they were told he would be home the next day.

Instead, at 6 a.m. on Sept. 5, security forces dropped his body on the doorstep,
the statement said. ''There was no place on his body not tortured,'' the
petition said. Nails were ''hammered into his body, and cigarettes burned into
the skin.''

The petition said Mr. Ali had no relationship with the Taliban.

In another alleged retaliatory killing, a man in his mid-20s, also called Akhtar
Ali, was arrested in Mingora on July 22, shortly after the army declared the
city safe.

His father, Aziz Ullah, said Mr. Ali had been taken away by soldiers near the
family home. The next morning, Mr. Ali's body was found on the street not far
from where he had been picked up, Mr. Ullah said.

''He had spoken in the mosque in favor of the Taliban, but he never picked up a
gun,'' he said.

The Human Rights Commission report said residents also described mass graves in
Kukarai  village and in an area between the villages of Daulai  and Shah Dheri.
Witnesses said some of the bodies in the graves appeared to be those of Taliban
militants, the report said. The army has rejected any suggestion that soldiers
were involved.

The chief spokesman for the military, Gen. Athar Abbas, said the graves were the
result of the Taliban killing their wounded as they retreated and dumping the
bodies. The military was dealing with arrested militants through the courts and
was seeking changes in the law of evidence to ensure more convictions, General
Abbas said.

About 250 to 300 people told the commission of suspected retaliatory killings, a
commission official said. In some cases, five people told the group about the
same single episode, he said.

A well-to-do landlord, Sher Shah Khan, who had criticized what he termed the
army's early reluctance to confront the militants, said he was not worried about
the reports. ''If the security services kill in the same manner as the Taliban
killed, people have no problem.''

But the principal of a girls' school, Ziauddin Yousafzi, said the military was
making examples of the wrong people.

''The state cannot be barbaric,'' he said. ''If people see the bodies of the top
leaders of the Taliban rather than the body of people like Akhtar Ali, they will
be jubilant.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mingora residents surrounded a man found blindfolded, bound and
shot in the head last month.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL KAMBER FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)(A12) MAP: Pakistan's army wrested control of Swat from the Taliban. Map
details Mingora, Pakistan.(A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 29, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Ends Terrorism Case Against Zimbabwe Activist

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


Zimbabwe's Supreme Court tossed out terrorism charges against the prominent
human rights activist Jestina Mukoko on Monday, ruling that she herself had been
terrorized when state security agents abducted and tortured her.

''I am so relieved, I can barely express it,'' Ms. Mukoko said when contacted by
telephone not long after leaving the courtroom in tears. ''I knew the court was
handing down its judgment, but I did not know which way it would go.''

The ruling represented a rare triumph for human rights activists in Zimbabwe,
though it remains to be seen whether the decision signifies any real shift from
the repression that has marked much of President Robert Mugabe's three decades
in power.

Ms. Mukoko was taken from her home by armed men at daybreak on Dec. 3, barefoot
and still in her nightgown, while her teenage son looked on helplessly. She was
not seen again for nearly three weeks, and later testified that she was held in
secret locations, where she was tortured in an attempt to extract a false
confession. She said her captors made her kneel on gravel and repeatedly beat on
the soles of her feet with rubber truncheons.

At the time of Ms. Mukoko's abduction, Mr. Mugabe already had entered a
power-sharing deal with the opposition leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, who had bested
him in a March 2008 election. Mr. Tsvangirai later dropped out of a runoff vote
because of state-sponsored attacks against his followers.

International pressure led to the fragile power-sharing agreement, which
continues to be threatened by disagreements between Mr. Mugabe and Mr.
Tsvangirai, and the arrest, abduction and torture of activists and politicians
whom Mr. Mugabe considers to be adversaries.

Ms. Mukoko led a civic group that monitored and documented those sorts of
abuses. She was accused of involvement in a plot to topple Mr. Mugabe with
insurrectionists receiving military training in Botswana.

The jailing of Ms. Mukoko and dozens of other activists has been cited by
Western diplomats as a sign of Mr. Mugabe's unwillingness to restore the rule of
law. The Zimbabwean judiciary has been deeply compromised in recent years, with
many judges accepting luxury cars and farmland from the Mugabe government.

On Monday, despite her victory in court, Ms. Mukoko said the abuses continued.
''We are still daily getting cases of human rights violations,'' she said.

The Supreme Court's decision was not entirely unexpected. Ms. Mukoko was
released on bail in March only to have the bail revoked in May. She was then
again freed after an international outcry and protests from Mr. Tsvangirai. In
June, at a hearing before the Supreme Court, a prosecutor admitted that Ms.
Mukoko had been abducted illegally.

Irene Petras, executive director of Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, said
Monday's decision ''can be read as a movement toward the restoration of an
independent justice-delivery system.''

But she said she did not want to sound overly optimistic, complaining that the
government continued to pursue trumped-up charges against the innocent. ''The
office of the attorney general should have refused to prosecute this case in the
very beginning,'' she said.

Harrison Nkomo, one of Ms. Mukoko's lawyers, has himself been jailed. He
dismissed the notion that Monday's decision represented a significant return to
the rule of law. ''No, this was a one-shot, a rare judgment,'' he said. ''Don't
read anything else into it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jestina Mukoko, a human rights activist, left the Supreme Court
in Harare, Zimbabwe, Monday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); BAIL (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); EXECUTIVES
(74%); POLITICS (74%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (74%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); MOTOR
VEHICLES (50%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (79%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (59%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (98%); BOTSWANA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 24, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reports Press Sri Lanka On Possible War Atrocities

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and VIKAS BAJAJ; Lydia Polgreen reported from New
Delhi, and Vikas Bajaj from Mumbai, India.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


International pressure is mounting on Sri Lanka's government to investigate
atrocities that may have been committed during the final stages of its war with
the Tamil Tiger insurgency as two new reports from the European Union and the
State Department detailing alleged human rights abuses were released this week.

The reports come as Sri Lanka also faces intensifying criticism for its decision
to keep more than 250,000 Tamils who were displaced by the fighting in closed
camps that critics have likened to internment camps. The government says it
plans to allow 80 percent of these people to return to their homes by the end of
January, but insists that it must first weed out any remaining Tamil Tiger
rebels hiding among them.

The European Union report could lead to the withdrawal of trade concessions
worth tens of millions of dollars to Sri Lankan garment and fisheries
industries. It represents the first threat of a serious sanction against the Sri
Lankan government as a result of its conduct of the war.

Economists and business officials said the loss of the trade concessions, known
as GSP-plus, could be a serious blow to an  ailing Sri Lankan economy. The
country's  garment industry will probably bear the brunt of the impact because
as much as 60 percent of the country's apparel exports go to the European Union.

Tariffs on some products could go to between 5 percent and 18 percent, from zero
or near zero, said E. M. Wijetilleke, the secretary general and chief executive
of the National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka. Such increases could sink
smaller companies that cannot cut costs to match bigger and lower-cost producers
in China and India, he added.

''Some small-scale firms will not be able to survive and they will have to lay
off the workers from their jobs,'' Mr. Wijetilleke said. ''There will be a huge
impact on the economy.''

The garment industry in Sri Lanka employs about 270,000 workers directly and an
additional 50,000 indirectly, according to estimates by Oxford Analytica, a
research firm.

The State Department report, which was released Thursday, was largely a catalog
of mostly unverified abuses by Sri Lankan forces and the Tamil Tigers based on
reports from the American Embassy in Colombo, Sri Lanka's  commercial capital.

Because of limited access to the war zone by independent aid groups, human
rights investigators and journalists, the report does not draw conclusions but
urges  Sri Lanka to investigate the allegations.

Asked why the report did not take a tougher line, a State Department spokesman,
Ian C. Kelly, defended the conclusions at a briefing with reporters this week.

He said the Obama administration was calling on the Sri Lankan government to
open the closed areas to international scrutiny, to investigate the allegations
and to bring to justice anyone responsible for atrocities.

So far, the Sri Lankan government has proved adept at eluding international
scrutiny and seemingly indifferent to even the harshest criticism of the Western
countries on human rights issues.

It  maneuvered its allies on the United Nations Human Rights Council to
transform a stern demand for an international war crimes inquiry into a
resolution celebrating its triumph over the Tigers. Efforts by Western countries
to stall a $2.6 billion loan to Sri Lanka from the International Monetary Fund
also failed.

International efforts to press Sri Lanka to release Tamil civilians from
army-run camps in the country's north have borne little fruit. More than halfway
to the government's self-imposed deadline to let almost all of the displaced
people return to their homes, fewer than 10 percent have been allowed to leave,
according to the United Nations, human rights organizations and aid groups. And
some who have left the camps have been settled in other camps rather than being
sent home, according to Brad Adams of Human Rights Watch.

''I think it is fair to say now they never intended to keep their commitment to
return the displaced because they have consistently reneged on their promises,''
Mr. Adams said. ''Their promises are not to the international community, they
are to the people in the camps.''

Sri Lankan officials rejected this, saying the government had  begun relocating
41,685 people from the camps to their homes in what was the battle zone. They
denied that the Tamil civilians were being held prisoner.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A child slept in a makeshift cradle at a camp in northern Sri
Lanka for Tamil civilians displaced by the fighting.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ERANGA
JAYAWARDENA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); GARMENT WORKERS (89%); APPAREL MFG (88%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (79%); EXPORT TRADE (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LAYOFFS (77%);
JOURNALISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
(77%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (75%); FISHERIES (68%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (67%);
WRITERS (60%); EXECUTIVES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (57%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); INDIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); CHINA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europe Ends Its Attempt To Penalize Uzbekistan

BYLINE: By STEPHEN CASTLE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS


Despite concerns over human rights abuses in Uzbekistan, the European Union
lifted its last remaining sanctions against that country's government on
Tuesday, ending an arms embargo imposed in 2005.

The embargo was one of several measures taken against the Uzbek government after
its troops fired on unarmed protesters in the city of Andijon and then rejected
calls for an international inquiry into those killings.

Though the number of deaths is disputed, hundreds are thought to have lost their
lives. The decision on Tuesday, criticized by human rights groups, is likely to
stoke the debate over the effectiveness of sanctions against governments with
poor human rights records.

European Union officials said the decision to lift the Uzbekistan embargo
followed the release of some political prisoners and the abolition of the death
penalty there.

The European Union applies sanctions against a number of governments, including
bans on travel visas for officials from Zimbabwe and arms embargoes against
other countries, including Myanmar, as well as China after the Tiananmen Square
killings in 1989.

The European Union imposed an arms embargo on Guinea after a violent outburst
last month in which troops fired on demonstrators. Protesters say that more than
150 people died and that women were raped, though the figures are disputed by
the Guinean authorities.

The European Union also imposed a ban on travel visas for members of Guinea's
governing National Council for Democracy and Development ''and individuals
associated with them responsible for the violent repression or the political
stalemate in the country.''

Both decisions had been agreed upon by European Union diplomats and were
officially approved by its foreign ministers without discussion at a meeting in
Luxembourg.

Maisy Weicherding, a Central Asia specialist for Amnesty International, said the
decision on Uzbekistan showed a failure to follow through on tough European
language. ''If the E.U. wants to use sanctions, they need to have teeth,'' she
said. ''With Uzbekistan, the E.U. has shown that its sanctions lack teeth.''

She also expressed ''hope that for Guinea, they are not going to follow the same
example.''

Amnesty International has contended that the number of human rights defenders in
prison has decreased only marginally, to around 12 from 20 to 30, and that
several thousand more people may have been jailed on political grounds.

In 2005, in addition to the arms embargo, the European Union downgraded
diplomatic talks with the Uzbek government and imposed a visa ban on 12 Uzbek
officials, which remained in place until October last year.

European Union officials said they would ''closely and continuously observe the
human rights situation in Uzbekistan'' and ''assess progress made by the Uzbek
authorities'' within a year.

Germany has led the move to lift the sanctions, contending that engagement with
the Uzbek government is likely to be more fruitful. Critics said Germany was
motivated by its desire for influence in Central Asia and its dependence on
Uzbek transit bases for its military operations in Afghanistan.

But a European Union diplomat from Germany, who spoke anonymously according to
protocol, said the lifting of the measures was supported by most European
governments.

On the matter of reorganizing the European Union, the organization's hopes of
ratifying the Lisbon Treaty will have to wait:  The Czech Republic's
Constitutional Court said Tuesday that it needed more time to rule on whether
the treaty complied with the country's Constitution. That means that European
leaders are unlikely to be able to decide this week on two leadership posts
created by the treaty, which would consolidate decision making and create a
strong presidency.

The Czech Republic is the last holdout on the treaty; Ireland ratified it this
month.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMS
EMBARGOES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (76%); PRISONS (74%); LANGUAGE &
LANGUAGES (73%); APPROVALS (72%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (71%); POLITICS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%)

COUNTRY: EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%); EUROPE (94%);
GUINEA (94%); GERMANY (91%); LUXEMBOURG (79%); CHINA (79%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%);
MYANMAR (79%); BELGIUM (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Thailand Accused of Returning Migrants to Sea, Where Many Are Missing

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


In the past month, the Thai authorities have detained as many as 1,000 boat
people from Bangladesh and Myanmar and sent them back out to sea in boats
without engines, human rights groups say. At least 300 people are reported to be
missing at sea.

The migrants are members of the ethnic Rohingya minority, mostly stateless
people who live in a cycle of poverty, repression, escape, capture and
exploitation.

The expulsions reverse a policy in which Thailand has allowed thousands of
Rohingya to land in recent years, mostly on their way to seek work in Malaysia.

Thailand denies the expulsions, saying that all arrivals are processed via legal
channels.

The reports coincide with separate criticism that Thailand has committed human
rights abuses in combating a Muslim insurgency in the south. They recall past
episodes in which the Thai military has forced out groups of refugees, sometimes
to their deaths.

In one case last month, the reports say, 410 Rohingya migrants were taken out to
sea on a Thai Navy vessel and forced onto an open barge with just four barrels
of water and two sacks of rice.

Four people were thrown overboard with their hands and feet tied, in order to
encourage the others to board the barge, according to the reports.

After drifting for two weeks, about 100 of them were rescued on the Andaman
Islands, which are administered by India. About 300 remain missing after trying
to swim to shore, according to several reports from the news media and human
rights groups.

In a second case soon afterward, 580 people were reportedly seized off the Thai
coast on three overcrowded fishing boats. These were towed back out to sea after
their engines were removed, said Chris Lewa, an expert on Rohingya issues who
heads a private human rights group called the Arakan Project.

Two of those boats reached shore -- at Aceh in Indonesia and on the Andaman
Islands -- and one is missing, she said.

She said a new boatload of 46 migrants arrived Friday on Patong Island, off
Thailand's southern coast, and were seized by the Thai military, which has not
until recently been involved in local illegal immigration issues.

The expulsions were reported this week in the South China Morning Post in Hong
Kong. Thai officials denied Friday that any such expulsions had occurred.

''We never push them back to the sea,'' said  Lt. Col. Tara Soranarak, inspector
in the Ranong immigration office. ''We have our procedure to deport back the
migrants to their home country after processing them through the Thai legal
system.''

Privately, Thai officials voiced concern about the Rohingya as Muslims who might
join a rebellion in southern Thailand in which some people are seeking a
separate Islamic state. This week Amnesty International issued a report
condemning Thailand as ''systematically engaging in torture'' against the
insurgency.

The reports of harsh treatment come in the context of a huge flow of refugees
from neighboring countries that has imposed a social and economic burden on
Thailand. Since the mid-1970s, Thailand has been a refuge for millions  fleeing
conflict and repression in Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar and Laos.

''Thailand is surrounded by dangerous neighbors who have generated huge refugee
flows, and it has sometimes felt overwhelmed by these flows,'' said Kenneth
Bacon, president of the human rights group Refugees International. ''Its record
in handling them is mixed.''

In the most notorious episode, in 1979, 42,000 Cambodians fleeing the murderous
Khmer Rouge were forced  into a minefield by the Thai military. Survivors said
many of them died.

During the same period, Vietnamese boat people were victimized by Thai pirates
operating without official restraint.

Although tens of thousands of refugees now live in semipermanent camps along the
Thai border with Myanmar, some of them are periodically forced back. Last summer
Human Rights Watch protested the forcible repatriation of a group of ethnic
Karen refugees who had fled military brutality in Myanmar.

The Rohingya are among the most helpless of the refugees, an abused minority in
Myanmar who migrated in large numbers to Bangladesh, where they live in poverty
and mostly without rights as a stateless minority.

Experts on the Rohingya describe an endless cycle of abuse in which migrants are
handed to traffickers who demand money to take them to Malaysia, where many are
arrested and sent back into the hands of some of the same traffickers in
Thailand.

If at any stage they are unable to pay the traffickers, the immigrants say, they
can be sold to Thai fishing trawlers as indentured laborers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); NAVAL VESSELS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); NAVIES (78%);
DEPORTATION (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); MARINE VESSELS (78%); TORTURE
(77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (76%); RELIGION (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (56%); AMNESTY (50%)

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%)

STATE: ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS, INDIA (73%)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (94%); MYANMAR (92%); INDIA (79%); MALAYSIA (79%); INDONESIA
(79%); HONG KONG (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Van Spirits Away Protester in Egypt, Signaling Crackdown on Criticism Over Gaza

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


State security came for Philip Rizk on Friday night. He had just finished a
six-mile protest walk with about 15 friends to raise support for Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip when he was detained for hours and then hustled into an unmarked
van and driven off. He has not been seen or heard from since.

For two days the authorities denied that he was being held. Then on Sunday, at
10 p.m., a security official at the American University in Cairo, where Mr. Rizk
studies, was able to confirm his arrest to his family. His mother and father
tried to get some sleep, but at 1 a.m., security agents showed up at their door,
five plainclothesmen and two guards carrying automatic weapons.

After searching their apartment, the security agents tried to take his father,
Magid, away, too. He refused to go, and the authorities backed off when
representatives of the German Embassy and Amnesty International arrived in the
middle of the night. Philip Rizk's mother, Judith, is German, and he has dual
Egyptian-German citizenship.

''It's like a bad movie,'' Mrs. Rizk said.

The war in Gaza has left its mark in Egypt. The authorities here have been
increasingly frustrated with criticism at home and abroad for refusing to fully
open the border between Rafah and Gaza.

Now, according to the accounts of five witnesses to Mr. Rizk's arrest, and
interviews with his parents, his sisters, human rights lawyers and some of his
professors, it appears that the Egyptian authorities have turned to the
country's emergency law to silence criticism of its Gaza policy. The law,
adopted to combat terrorism after President Anwar el-Sadat was gunned down in
1981, allows the government to detain people without charge and effectively
eliminates any right to due process.

The government acknowledges holding about 1,800 prisoners without charge under
the emergency law, but human rights groups say the number could be closer to
10,000. The law is routinely used against members of the Muslim Brotherhood, a
banned but tolerated social and political movement. Dozens of Brotherhood
followers have been arrested since the start of the Gaza conflict.

''Officially, nobody knows where Philip is,'' said Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui, deputy
director in the Middle East and North Africa for Amnesty International. ''Philip
has disappeared.''

A spokesman for Egypt's Interior Ministry, which handles all matters of internal
security, was furious at being asked about the case. The spokesman is a general,
but talked only on the condition that he not be identified by name  because of
the security nature of his work. He declined to answer  questions, and said:
''This happened within the framework of the Egyptian law. You can go to the
office of the general prosecutor. I have no information about Philip. Who said
they don't know where he is? What is the secret behind the interest of The New
York Times in Philip? Are you working for human rights organizations?''

The general was angry; the Rizk family was terrified.

Judith and Magid Rizk live in a small, neat apartment, in a rare quiet section
of Cairo. Mr. Rizk is a small book publisher, a man who wears starched white
shirts and sweater vests. He is not a political man. But he said he supported
his son's interests in social causes. ''This is his niche, his passion,'' Mr.
Rizk said. He does not want to antagonize the authorities. He said he just
wanted his son back in time for his birthday.

Philip Rizk turns 27 on Thursday.

''We don't know where he is; we have not talked to him. We don't know if he is
eating, if he is sleeping; we don't know what they are doing to him,'' Mrs. Rizk
said. She was tired, scared and, after having lived her adult life in Egypt,
stunned that men with machine guns and riot gear had come to her door. The
family started a Facebook page to gather and publicize pleas for his release.

Mr. Rizk appears tall and thin as he walks through the scenes of a 28-minute
movie he made, ''The Palestinian Life, Village Stories.'' After he graduated
from Wheaton College in Illinois with a degree in philosophy, he moved to Gaza
to work with an Anglican charity. He lived there for two years, and during that
time made his rather somber documentary of average Palestinians trying to
survive. ''I found that because violence makes news, the stories of ordinary
people never get out,'' he said in the introduction. His film, he said,
celebrated samud, or the steadfastness, of the Palestinians.

When he returned to Cairo, he enrolled in a master's program in Middle East
studies at the university. He also joined a group in Cairo called the Popular
Committee in Solidarity With the Palestinian People. It was a left-leaning group
of mostly young activists. About a month ago, the group decided to stage a
symbolic march to Gaza. About half of the participants were Egyptian and half
foreign.

The group met Friday morning and took a bus north from Cairo to the Qalyubiya
governate, an hour away. The demonstrators walked for about two hours, waving
Palestinian flags and talking with local residents.

Mr. Rizk carried a handwritten sign in Arabic reading: ''We are fed up. Open the
Rafah border.''

When the walk was over, the marchers climbed into small buses or their own cars
for the ride back to Cairo and were quickly detained. Witnesses described being
surrounded by large numbers of police officers for about four hours and being
promised that everything was routine and that they would be released soon. A
human rights lawyer arrived. The marchers were taken to a local police
department and told that their passports would be copied and that they would
then be released.

At that point, the police asked to speak to Mr. Rizk. After some negotiating he
agreed to enter the police station with the lawyer, but the police distracted
the lawyer and hustled Mr. Rizk out a back door. He managed to phone his
friends, who said they threw themselves in front of the van he was in, but were
pulled off by the police. Three members of the group chased the van in their car
for more than half an hour, until they were stopped at a roadblock.

Security police officers started visiting the homes and offices of other young
people involved in the trip. Sarah Carr, a dual British-Egyptian citizen and
reporter for the English-language Daily News, who covered the event, was too
afraid to go home, or to work after hearing that the police had inquired about
her. Katharine Hall, 20, of Britain, was sitting in a cafe in downtown Cairo
when her roommate phoned to tell her that the police had come to their door. ''I
don't know where I'll be, and I am not telling you,'' Ms. Hall said as her
cheeks flushed red. ''They are trying to scare me. So I don't want them to find
me.'' She left the cafe.

On Sunday, about 50 students and faculty members at the American University in
Cairo's campus held a small demonstration calling on the authorities to release
Mr. Rizk. The signs they held up said, ''Where is Philip?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Students and faculty members of the American University in Cairo
on Sunday protested the detention of a demonstrator. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAWN
BALDWIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); CORRECTIONS (75%); TERRORISM (72%); DUE PROCESS
(70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (68%);
LAWYERS (66%); COUNTERTERRORISM (63%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (91%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (90%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);
AFRICA (75%)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Alison Des Forges, Activist for Rwanda, Dies at 66

BYLINE: By SEWELL CHAN and DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 976 words


Alison L. Des Forges, a human rights activist and historian who tried to call
the world's attention to the looming genocide in Rwanda in 1994 and who later
wrote what is considered the definitive account of the eventual slaughter of
more than 500,000 Rwandans, was among the passengers killed Thursday when
Continental Airlines Flight 3407 crashed near Buffalo. She was 66 and lived in
Buffalo.

Her death was confirmed by Human Rights Watch, the New York-based advocacy
group; Dr. Des Forges was senior adviser for its Africa division for nearly 20
years.

Although she lived in Buffalo, Dr. Des Forges (pronounced deh-FORZH) spent much
of her adult life in Rwanda and the Great Lakes region of Africa. She was among
a group of activists who investigated killings, kidnappings and other rights
abuses of civilians in Rwanda from 1990 to 1993.

In May 1994, several weeks into the mass killing of Rwanda's Tutsi minority, Dr.
Des Forges called for the killings to be officially declared a genocide. By then
about 200,000 people had been killed.

''Governments hesitate to call the horror by its name,'' Dr. Des Forges wrote in
The New York Times, ''for to do so would oblige them to act: signatories to the
Convention for the Prevention of Genocide, including the United States, are
legally bound to 'prevent and punish' it.''

Peacekeepers should be sent into the country and economic sanctions imposed, Dr.
Des Forges said, concluding, ''Can we do anything less in the face of genocide,
no matter what name we give it?''

After a Tutsi-led rebel group took power after ending the killings, Dr. Des
Forges spent four years interviewing organizers and victims of the genocide. She
testified before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, based in
Arusha, Tanzania, and at trials in Belgium, Switzerland, the Netherlands and
Canada. She also appeared on expert panels convened by the United Nations and
what is now the African Union, as well as the French and Belgian legislatures
and the United States Congress.

The MacArthur Foundation recognized her work with a $375,000 ''genius'' grant in
1999. Her authoritative book, ''Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in
Rwanda,'' was published that year.

On its Web site, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum said Dr. Des
Forges' book provides ''a meticulously detailed description of the organization
of the campaign that killed some half million Tutsi,'' adding that it ''analyzes
the failure of the international community to intervene in the genocide.''

Mahmood Mamdani, a professor of government and anthropology at Columbia
University and the author of the book ''When Victims Become Killers:
Colonialism, Nativism and Genocide in Rwanda'' (2001), called Dr. Des Forges
''the leading person who sought to document the events leading up to the Rwandan
genocide, so that future generations would have the material on hand to draw the
appropriate lessons from it.''

In 2001, after a Belgian court sentenced four Rwandans, two of them Roman
Catholic nuns, to long prison terms for their roles in the genocide, Dr. Des
Forges said she had been deeply impressed by the proceedings -- the first in
which a jury of ordinary citizens was asked to sit in judgment of war crimes in
another nation.

''People maybe don't even realize just how revolutionary this jury trial, so far
from the events, really is,'' she told The Times then. The Belgian trial, she
said, ''has been done with a great deal more depth than those in Rwanda.''

Dr. Des Forges was also an authority on human rights violations in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire.

While a central focus of her work was documenting the crimes of the Hutu-led
government that organized the three-month-long genocide, Dr. Des Forges later
leveled strong criticism of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-led rebel
movement headed by Paul Kagame, now Rwanda's president. His government has been
in power since the genocide.

Dr. Des Forges was among critics who accused the Kagame government of massacring
thousands of Rwandan civilians in 1994, of killing civilians and refugees in the
eastern Congo in 1996 and 1997, and of making repeated military interventions in
the Congo. The government barred her from entering the country last year.

Alison B. Liebhafsky was born Aug. 20, 1942, in Schenectady, N.Y., the daughter
of Herman A. Liebhafsky, a chemist, and Sybil Small. She graduated from
Radcliffe College in 1964 and received a master's degree in 1966 and a doctorate
in 1972, both in history, from Yale.

Her master's thesis focused on the impact of European colonization on Rwanda's
social system, and her doctoral dissertation was about Yuhi Musinga, the mwami,
or ruler, of Rwanda from 1896 to 1931, during which Germany, and later Belgium,
colonized Rwanda.

Dr. Des Forges is survived by her husband, Roger V. Des Forges, a historian of
China who teaches at the State University of New York at Buffalo; a brother,
Douglas Small Liebhafsky; a daughter, Jessie Des Forges; a son, Alexander; and
three grandchildren.

Dr. Des Forges' efforts went beyond historical documentation.

Theodore S. Dagne, an Africa analyst for the Congressional Research Service,
worked with Dr. Des Forges in Africa and in Washington. On Friday, he recalled
how she fought to save the life of a human-rights associate in Rwanda, Monique
Mujawamariya.

''On Day 1'' of the genocide, Mr. Dagne said, ''Alison was calling Monique hour
after hour as they were going door to door killing people; Monique tells Alison
they are close.''

Ms. Mujawamariya managed to escape by crossing the border.

''Day after day, for months,'' Mr. Dagne said, ''Alison lobbied everybody she
could think of in Kigali and Washington and finally arranged for Monique to come
to this country.''

Ms. Mujawamariya now lives in Canada, he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: Alison Des Forges

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Alison L. Des Forges, second from left, before a panel
discussion in New York City in 2005.(PHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL HAWTHORNE/GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HISTORY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); WRITERS (77%); ACCIDENTAL
FATALITIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
HOLOCAUST (73%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%);
AIRLINES (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (70%);
TESTIMONY (67%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%);
FOUNDATIONS (60%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(60%); WEB SITES (50%)

COMPANY: UNITED CONTINENTAL HOLDINGS INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

TICKER: UAL (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481112 SCHEDULED FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); NAICS481111
SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION,
SCHEDULED (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
CANADA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%); BELGIUM
(57%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2009 Sunday
                                National Edition

Belgium Sues To Compel Prosecution Of a Chadian

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Belgium has filed an international lawsuit against Senegal, the latest step in a
long effort to prosecute the exiled former president of Chad on charges of war
crimes, torture and crimes against humanity.

The Belgian government argues that Senegal, where Chad's former leader, Hissene
Habre, is living in comfortable exile, must either start its own planned trial
or extradite him to face the charges in a Belgian court. Because Senegal has
done neither, it is violating international law, the Belgian lawsuit said.

The complaint was filed on Thursday at the International Court of Justice, the
United Nations' highest court, which sits in The Hague and deals with disputes
between nations.

''We're hoping this will speed things up, because victims of the regime have
been fighting for a trial for 18 years,'' said Reed Brody, a lawyer for Human
Rights Watch who has advised Chadian rights groups. ''This case has had so many
setbacks, it's only through the persistence of Chadian victims that it has
survived.''

Mr. Habre fled to Dakar, Senegal's capital, when he was overthrown in 1990 after
eight years of oppressive rule.

A Chadian truth commission said in 1992 that his government had killed up to
40,000 opponents and tortured many others. Survivors of the prisons run by the
dreaded political police  have described  atrocities, including the torture and
killing of fellow prisoners.

Mr. Habre's government received extensive support from Western countries,
including the United States and France, which saw Chad, a former French colony,
as a bastion against neighboring Libya. The Reagan administration provided
covert support to help Mr. Habre take power in 1982 and continued to provide him
with military aid.

Mr. Habre was first indicted in Senegal in 2000, but the government quickly
decided that it would not deal with the case. Chadian victims then filed
complaints in Belgian courts, which accepted the case on the principle that
grave human rights crimes qualified for ''universal jurisdiction.''

After four years of investigations, Belgium issued an international arrest
warrant for Mr. Habre in 2005. But rather than extraditing him, Senegal sought
advice from the African Union. That group called on Senegal to prosecute the
case ''in the name of Africa,'' rather than letting a trial be held in Europe.

Since then, Senegal has adapted its laws and Constitution to make prosecution
possible and has said it will try Mr. Habre if international donors pay all the
costs, estimated at nearly $36 million.

No contributions have been offered by the African Union, which sought the trial,
but Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Switzerland, among others, have pledged
money.

European governments have asked for a detailed budget and prosecution plan, but
diplomats said Senegal was stalling. Fearing that Mr. Habre may flee, Belgium
has asked the court in The Hague for an urgent order to Senegal to keep the
former president under house arrest and close surveillance.

Human Rights Watch has lobbied for the trial to start because many of the
victims and witnesses are old and others have died. The group  also said that
victims had been threatened by some of Mr. Habre's supporters in Chad and that a
lawyer of one of the victims  had been severely wounded by a grenade.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Hissene Habre of Chad in 1987. He was overthrown three
years later. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOMINIQUE FAGET/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TORTURE (90%); EXTRADITION
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%);
ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); BUDGETS
(71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (57%); UNITED
NATIONS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (58%); PARIS, FRANCE (54%)

COUNTRY: SENEGAL (99%); BELGIUM (96%); CHAD (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); AFRICA
(93%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (91%); LIBYA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official Faults Evidence and Foreign States Linked to Guantanamo
Interrogations

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A United Nations human rights official, investigating practices at Guantanamo
Bay, has concluded that evidence obtained from the interrogations there is
tainted and that foreign law enforcement and intelligence officials who took
part in those interrogations violated their legal obligation to reject the use
of torture and arbitrary detention.

The official, Martin Scheinin, is the special rapporteur on human rights and
counterterrorism, an unpaid position created in 2005 by the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights.

''When evidence is obtained through cruel and inhumane treatment, we will be
faced with situations where the courts decide they don't have proper evidence,''
Mr. Scheinin said in a telephone interview. ''There may be suspicions of
terrorism, but evidence is tainted, so courts have only one option, to drop the
case. They should have thought about that from the beginning, but didn't.''

Mr. Scheinin, who visited the detention center at Guantanamo in December 2007,
published a report on Friday criticizing foreign governments that took part in
the Guantanamo interrogations or condoned them while using the intelligence
obtained. The document, first reported in The Washington Post on Friday, is
nonbinding. It will be discussed with member states at the United Nations Human
Rights Council in Geneva on March 10.

The United States military has allowed intelligence and law enforcement
officials from more than a dozen countries to interrogate Guantanamo inmates,
Mr. Scheinin said. Those countries -- including France, Germany, Britain, Italy,
Spain and Jordan -- and many other agencies have provided questions for American
interrogators to ask. Some detainees ''were interrogated under torture in other
countries before reaching Guantanamo,'' said Mr. Scheinin, citing Western agents
who questioned detainees in Pakistan.

While President Obama signed an executive order in January to close the
Guantanamo Bay detention camp within a year, the Pentagon has regularly said
that prisoners are treated in accordance with international law and are not
tortured. But the detainees in general were kept without being charged or tried.

''Guantanamo is not primarily for investigation, but for the gathering of
intelligence,'' Mr. Scheinin said.

The harshest part of the report accuses Western states of aiding or being
complicit in torture. ''The active participation by a state through the sending
of interrogators or questions, or even the mere presence of intelligence
personnel at an interview with a person who is being held in places where he is
tortured or subject to other inhuman treatment, can be reasonably understood as
implicitly condoning torture,'' Mr. Scheinin says in his report. ''States must
introduce safeguards preventing intelligence agencies from making use of such
intelligence.''

He cited the prospect of Guantanamo's closing as ''the pendulum swinging back,''
but said national governments should investigate their involvement to make
better rules and strengthen oversight of intelligence agencies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); PRISONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CRUEL &
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); CORRECTIONS (75%); TERRORISM
(71%); US PRESIDENTS (70%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (93%); SPAIN (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
GERMANY (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); FRANCE (77%)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Torture and the Rule of Law

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 622 words


To the Editor:

''Tales From Torture's Dark World,'' by Mark Danner (Op-Ed, March 15), reminds
us in great detail that the fundamental human rights of detainees were indeed
violated consistently over a period of years.

The ''alternative set of procedures'' used by American personnel included
slamming detainees repeatedly into a wall using a neck collar for leverage,
confining detainees in a coffinlike sensory-deprivation tank, forcing detainees
to urinate and defecate on themselves, and waterboarding. These amount to war
crimes.

Permission to use these tactics was sought and given by some of the most senior
figures in the Bush administration. It is a national scandal that the
highest-ranking American held criminally accountable for the systemic abuses
committed in American-run detention facilities in Abu Ghraib, Bagram Air Base
and the various ''black sites'' operated by the C.I.A. is a junior
noncommissioned officer.

Mr. Danner's article is a timely reminder of why there must be a nonpartisan and
independent inquiry into detainee treatment and policies. Accountability is the
cornerstone of justice. We will not be able to restore America's reputation in
the world until we can demonstrate that we hold our own leaders to the same
standard that we hold those in other nations.

Tom Parker  Washington, March 16, 2009

The writer is policy director for terrorism, counterterrorism and human rights
at Amnesty International USA.

To the Editor:

Among the revelations included in the secret International Committee of the Red
Cross report obtained by Mark Danner is new, concrete evidence of supervision by
health professionals of torture at C.I.A. ''black sites.'' While shocking, these
accounts are not surprising.

Over the last seven years, the Bush administration engaged in an unprecedented
assault on the core foundations of medical ethics. The statements of former
senior officials and government reports reveal how physicians, psychologists and
other members of the healing professions were used to break the bodies and minds
of detainees in American custody.

Restoring our nation's commitment to the rule of law, human rights and medical
ethics can be accomplished only through holding perpetrators of these crimes to
account.

Any commission of inquiry established by Congress or the White House must
address the role of health professionals in detainee abuse. State ethics boards
must investigate and sanction practitioners who were involved. And the
Department of Justice must follow the evidence of torture wherever it leads.

Frank Donaghue Chief Executive Physicians for Human Rights Cambridge, Mass.,
March 15, 2009

To the Editor:

Mark Danner's recounting of the repulsive, inhumane techniques used on suspected
terrorist leaders at ''black sites'' -- techniques that President George W. Bush
proudly and openly labeled ''an alternative set of procedures'' -- makes one
almost physically ill.

But much worse than this physically nauseating feeling is the spirit-numbing,
immutable image of our president assuring us time and time again, ''The United
States does not torture.''

Dorian de Wind  Austin, Tex., March 15, 2009

The writer is a retired Air Force major.

To the Editor:

If any American citizens retain any doubt that our country has participated in
torture, they need only read Mark Danner's description of the report from the
International Committee of the Red Cross and reflect on how they would feel if a
loved one in the service of our country were captured and subjected to this
treatment.

The tragedy is that it will happen, and we will not occupy the moral high ground
when we object -- to our everlasting shame!

Jim Colquhoun  Southwest Harbor, Me., March 15, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY FELIX SOCKWELL)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RULE OF LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ETHICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(88%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); MEDICAL ETHICS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (75%);
SCANDALS (74%); PUBLIC POLICY (74%); WRITERS (73%); EXECUTIVES (72%); TERRORISM
(69%); PSYCHOLOGY (62%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (74%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2009 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Court Weighs Criminal Inquiry on Torture for 6 Bush-Era Officials

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Scott Shane and Eric Schmitt contributed reporting
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: LONDON


A Spanish court has taken the first steps toward opening a criminal
investigation into allegations that  six former high-level Bush administration
officials violated international law by providing the legal  framework to
justify the torture of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, an official close to
the case said.

The case, against former Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales and others, was
sent to the prosecutor's office for review by Baltasar Garzon, the crusading
investigative judge who ordered the arrest of the former Chilean dictator
Augusto Pinochet. The official said that it was ''highly probable'' that the
case would go forward and that it could lead to arrest warrants.

The move represents a step toward ascertaining the legal accountability of top
Bush administration officials for allegations of torture and mistreatment of
prisoners in the campaign against terrorism. But some American experts said that
even if warrants were issued their significance could be more symbolic than
practical, and that it was a near certainty that the warrants would not lead to
arrests if the officials did not leave the United States.

The complaint under review also names John C. Yoo, the former Justice Department
lawyer who wrote secret legal opinions saying the president had the authority to
circumvent the Geneva Conventions, and Douglas J. Feith, the former under
secretary of defense for policy.

Most of the officials cited in the complaint declined to comment on the
allegations or could not be reached on Saturday. However their defenders have
said their legal analyses and policy work on interrogation practices, conducted
under great pressure after the 2001 terrorist attacks, are now being unfairly
second-guessed after many years without a terrorist attack on the United States.

The court case was not entirely unexpected, as several human rights groups have
been asking judges in different countries to indict Bush administration
officials. One group, the Center for Constitutional Rights, had asked a German
prosecutor for such an indictment, but the prosecutor declined.

Judge Garzon, however, has built an international reputation by bringing
high-profile cases against human rights violators as well as international
terrorist networks like Al Qaeda. The arrest warrant for General Pinochet led to
his detention in Britain, although he never faced a trial. The judge has also
been outspoken about the treatment of detainees at Guantanamo Bay.

Spain can claim jurisdiction in the case because five citizens or residents of
Spain who were prisoners at Guantanamo Bay have said they were tortured there.
The five had been indicted in Spain, but their cases were dismissed after  the
Spanish Supreme Court ruled  that evidence obtained under torture was not
admissible.

The 98-page complaint, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, is
based on the Geneva Conventions and the 1984 Convention Against Torture, which
is binding on 145 countries, including Spain and the United States. Countries
that are party to the torture convention have the authority  to investigate
torture cases, especially when a citizen has been abused.

The complaint was prepared by Spanish lawyers, with help from experts in the
United States and Europe, and filed by a Spanish human rights group, the
Association for the Dignity of Prisoners.

The National Court in Madrid, which specializes in international crimes,
assigned the case to Judge Garzon. His acceptance of the case and referral of it
to the prosecutor made it likely that a criminal investigation would follow, the
official said.

Even so, arrest warrants, if they are issued, would still be months away.

Gonzalo Boye, the Madrid lawyer who filed the complaint, said that the six
Americans cited had had well-documented roles in approving illegal interrogation
techniques, redefining torture and abandoning the definition set by the 1984
Torture Convention.

Secret memorandums by Mr. Yoo and other top administration lawyers helped clear
the way for aggressive policies like waterboarding and other harsh interrogation
techniques, which the C.I.A. director, the attorney general and other American
officials have said amount to torture.

The other Americans named in the complaint were William J. Haynes II, former
general counsel for the Department of Defense; Jay S. Bybee, Mr. Yoo's former
boss at the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel; and David S.
Addington, who was the chief of staff and legal adviser to Vice President Dick
Cheney.

Mr. Yoo declined to comment on Saturday, saying that he had not seen or heard of
the petition.

Mr. Feith, who was the top policy official at the Pentagon when the prison at
Guantanamo was established, said he did not make the decision on interrogation
methods and was baffled by the allegations. ''I didn't even argue for the thing
I understand they're objecting to,'' he said.

But Mr. Boye said that lawyers should be held accountable for the effects of
their work. Noting that the association he represents includes many lawyers, he
said: ''This is a case from lawyers against lawyers. Our profession does not
allow us to misuse our legal knowledge to create a pseudo-legal frame to
justify, stimulate and cover up torture.''

Prosecutions and convictions under the Torture Convention have been rare.

Reed Brody, a lawyer at Human Rights Watch who has specialized in this issue,
said that even though torture was widely practiced, there were numerous
obstacles, including ''a lack of political will, the problem of gathering
evidence in a foreign country and the failure of countries to pass the necessary
laws.''

This year for the first time, the United States used a law that allows it to
prosecute torture in other countries. On Jan. 10, a federal court in Miami
sentenced Chuckie Taylor, the son of the former Liberian president, to 97 years
in a federal prison for torture, even though the crimes were committed in
Liberia.

Last October, when the Miami court handed down the conviction, Attorney General
Michael B. Mukasey applauded the ruling and said: ''This is the first case in
the United States to charge an individual with criminal torture. I hope this
case will serve as a model to future prosecutions of this type.''

The United States, however, would be expected to ignore an extradition request
for former officials, although other investigations within the United States
have been proposed. Calls for the Justice Department to open a criminal
investigation have so far been resisted by the Obama administration, but for
more than four years, the Justice Department ethics office has been conducting
its own investigation into the work of Mr. Yoo and some of his colleagues.

While the officials named in the complaint have not addressed these specific
accusations, Mr. Yoo defended his work in an opinion column in The Wall Street
Journal on March 7, warning that the Obama administration risked harming
national security if it punished lawyers like himself.

''If the administration chooses to seriously pursue those officials who were
charged with preparing for the unthinkable, today's intelligence and military
officials will no doubt hesitate to fully prepare for those contingencies in the
future,'' Mr. Yoo wrote.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 5, 2009



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about a Spanish
judge's criminal inquiry into allegations that six Bush administration officials
broke international laws banning torture misidentified, in some copies, a
foreign defendant in a Miami federal case brought under a law that allows the
United States to prosecute torture in other countries. The defendant in that
case, concerning torture committed in Liberia, was Chuckie Taylor, also known as
Charles Arthur Emmanuel, the son of former Liberian President Charles Taylor --
not the former president himself.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Baltasar Garzon, front, in Madrid. He has built an
international reputation by bringing cases against human rights violators.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY SUSANA VERA/REUTERS)
Alberto R. Gonzales
Douglas J. Feith
John C. Yoo
Jay S. Bybee
David S. Addington
 William J. Haynes II (pg.A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (91%); ARREST WARRANTS
(91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); LAWYERS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); JURISDICTION
(78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); AL-QAEDA (68%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (66%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (65%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (78%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (52%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SPAIN (94%); CUBA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico: Army Accused of Human Rights Abuses

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 159 words


The Mexican Army, deployed across the country to combat drug cartels, is
committing major human rights abuses and is not being held accountable for its
illegal acts, Human Rights Watch charged in a report released Wednesday.
Accusing the army of killing, torture, rape and arbitrary detention in recent
years, the New York-based advocacy group said not one military investigation
into abuses has led to a conviction of a soldier. ''The need to improve public
security in Mexico is clear,'' Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas director for Human
Rights Watch, said in a statement. ''But, to be effective, any strategy to
address security must also deal with the rampant impunity for military abuses
committed during public security operations.'' While the government had no
immediate response to the report, President Felipe Calderon has consistently
defended the military and labeled the drug cartels ''the principal threat to the
human rights of all Mexicans.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); CARTELS (88%);
TORTURE (88%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

PERSON: FELIPE CALDERON (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (87%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (95%); UNITED STATES (87%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Push in Spain to Limit Reach of the Courts

BYLINE: By VICTORIA BURNETT and MARLISE SIMONS; Victoria Burnett reported from
Madrid, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: MADRID


Spain's crusading judges could lose their power to investigate human rights
violations that occur anywhere in the world after Spanish lawmakers called for
restrictions of the judiciary's reach.

Lawmakers approved a nonbinding proposal late Tuesday urging the Socialist
government to change a law -- currently the most far-reaching in Europe -- that
enables investigators to probe alleged human rights crimes regardless of where
they are committed or where the defendants live.

Spanish lawyers have gained a reputation for activism in recent years by using
the principle of universal jurisdiction to pursue cases against suspected human
rights violators overseas, most famously the former Chilean dictator Gen.
Augusto Pinochet.

Baltasar Garzon, Spain's most high-profile judge, invoked the principle in March
when he sought to investigate six former Bush administration officials, accusing
them of violating the Convention Against Torture by giving legal cover to
torture at the American prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

However, the Guantanamo case and one filed against Israeli officials this year
created a diplomatic headache for the government of Prime Minister Jose Luis
Rodriguez Zapatero and prompted calls for a change in the law.

Some legal experts in the government and judicial officials have fretted that
Madrid's National Court, which deals with international crimes and terrorism,
could become a judicial free-for-all. Diplomats, meanwhile, worried that the
Guantanamo investigation would hurt Spanish efforts to forge warmer ties with
the Obama administration.

Under the proposed change, which was put forward by the opposition Popular
Party, courts would be allowed to pursue cases only if the victims were Spanish
or if the accused were on Spanish territory. It was not immediately clear when
the government might try to push the legislation in Parliament.

Israel complained in January after the National Court decided to investigate
seven current or former Israeli officials over an air attack in Gaza that killed
a top Hamas militant in 2002 but also 14 other people, including 9 children.

Despite numerous cases that invoke the principle of universal jurisdiction,
Spain has secured only one conviction, that of an Argentine man named Adolfo
Scilingo in 2005 for his involvement in ''dirty war'' killings of left-wing
dissidents. But Spain's arrest warrant against General Pinochet led to his house
arrest in Britain and eventually led Chile to start its own prosecutions.

Human rights lawyers say the Spanish law is effective in pressing countries to
bring their own criminals to justice. Spain has become a prominent venue for
filing complaints, especially after Belgium limited its own universal
jurisdiction law in 2003. Courts like the International Criminal Court in The
Hague can handle only a limited number of cases.

''The cases brought in Spain are a way of persuading or forcing the courts of
others countries to deal with the crimes they are not dealing with at home,''
Reed Brody, an international law specialist for Human Rights Watch in Brussels,
said by telephone on Wednesday. ''For instance, the cases brought in Spain
against Americans may help persuade the Obama administration to try the cases
where they belong. ''

It was unclear Wednesday whether any change in the law would affect the case
involving the Bush-era officials, who are accused of creating a legal framework
to justify torture. A Spanish prosecutor recommended against pursuing the case,
which named former Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales, among others, and
passed it from Judge Garzon to another judge, who has not yet said whether he
will open an investigation.

Judge Garzon has since opened an investigation into complaints of torture filed
by four former Guantanamo detainees and is using as evidence documents on
interrogation techniques recently declassified by the United States government.
The case did not name any specific American official.

Gonzalo Boye, who represents the four former detainees, said that a new law
would be unlikely to affect his case.

He said he had filed medical reports for all four saying that they suffered
serious physical and mental injuries from their mistreatment at Guantanamo.

''The victims I represent have direct links to Spain, so a Spanish court will
have jurisdiction anyway,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Judge Baltasar Garzon, left, has opened an inquiry into
complaints of torture filed by four former Guantanamo detainees.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
ANDREA COMAS/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); JURISDICTION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%);
LIBERALISM (78%); TORTURE (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HOUSE
ARREST (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); ARREST WARRANTS
(76%); ARRESTS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); HAMAS (72%); TERRORISM (70%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); JOSE LUIS RODRIGUEZ ZAPATERO (59%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (97%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (92%); CHILE
(92%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 7, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Moscow Reporter, Facing His Obituary Daily

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1246 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


After the most recent attack on Sergei Kanev -- attempted strangulation with a
wire, in his apartment's stairwell here -- his editor visited him and delicately
suggested that he take a six-month sabbatical from crime reporting, in America.

Mr. Kanev still chortles with delight recalling this story, as if he had been
advised to take up tap dancing. He is the kind of reporter who sleeps with a
police scanner beside his bed. Without work, ''I would die of boredom,'' he
said.

And yet, his life has bent under the weight of danger. A specialist in police
corruption and organized crime, he crosses powerful people and half expects to
be killed for it. He has rigged up two cameras inside a bag he carries with him,
so there will be a record if someone comes for him. His most recent girlfriend
long since threw up her hands, so only his parents are left to beg him to quit
the job, saying fear for his safety is wrecking their old age.

''I understand them,'' said Mr. Kanev, who is 46. ''I have no answer for them.''

This has been a brutal year in Russia, not just for muckraking journalists, but
also for human rights workers and a whole network of advocates who investigate
public officials and extremist groups.

In the past year alone, the Committee to Protect Journalists has documented 3
killings of journalists and 19 work-related assaults. Amnesty International has
documented one killing of a human rights worker and 16 attacks during the same
period.

Bit by bit, in the Vladimir V. Putin era, the ranks of people willing to hold
the powerful to account are thinning. Their work is increasingly marginalized,
so that most Russians never learn what corruption or human rights abuses they
have uncovered. And while most do not blame the government for the attacks
themselves, they say failure to investigate and punish the crimes has set a
permissive, and dangerous, tone.

''This is the point where people are justifiably making decisions about the rest
of their lives,'' said Tanya Lokshina, deputy director of the Moscow office of
Human Rights Watch. ''You can't keep approaching people and telling them, 'I
have this spare room in my apartment, and you are welcome to stay there for a
couple of months.' That is not a solution to the problem.''

Mr. Kanev is not the most obvious standard-bearer for press freedom. Stout,
ruddy and a chain smoker, he could be equally mistaken for a Russian beat cop or
a bandit circa 1992, the kind with ''a raspberry-colored sport coat and a huge
mobile phone,'' said Dmitri A. Muratov, editor in chief of Novaya Gazeta, where
Mr. Kanev works as a freelancer.

He is also a reporter for ''Line of Defense,'' a true-crime show on Moscow's
Third Channel.

If the Soviet Union had lasted, Mr. Kanev might have remained what he was, a
disc jockey expressing his dissent by playing Donna Summer, who had been
blacklisted by the Communist Party for ''propagandizing sex.''

But the deluge of the 1990s swept through his disco -- two fatal attacks
unfolded on his watch -- and he  volunteered to work the graveyard shift for a
television news show.

By 2005, his material had become consistently critical of the police, and he
lost his job at NTV, one of Russia's three national networks.

That is how he wound up writing for Novaya Gazeta, a newspaper known for two
things: its pugnacious assaults on the Russian government, and the number of its
staff members who have been murdered.

''The most dangerous thing right now is not to criticize the authorities,'' said
Yulia Latynina, a columnist at the newspaper. ''It's to criticize people who can
kill you. The people Kanev writes about can kill. That is his problem.''

The amiable chaos of the newspaper's office froze up in January, when a masked
gunman fatally shot Stanislav Markelov, the newspaper's lawyer, and a young
reporter, 25-year-old Anastasia Baburova.

That made five employees who had died under violent or suspicious circumstances
since 2000, and the first since the investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya
was found shot to death in  her elevator in October 2006.

Mr. Muratov, the editor, put two of his reporters under armed protection  and
instituted a policy under which any reporters with sensitive information are
required to publish immediately, reducing the benefit of killing them.

Mr. Kanev, for his part, shrugs off the idea that protection is even possible.

''Look, if you want a safe job, work in a library,'' he likes to say. In the
meantime, he goes about his workday with what can only be called joy.

On a recent Tuesday, Mr. Kanev climbed a staircase behind a mattress salesroom
and was led into an office where a tired-looking businessman recited the details
of his son's kidnapping. Mr. Kanev mopped his brow with a napkin and took no
notes.

A few hours later, at the newspaper's office, he received a gaunt, black-suited
visitor from the Interior Ministry. As he walked the man out, Mr. Kanev was so
happy with what he had learned that he actually began to skip down the hall,
making the linoleum squeak.

''It's like a thread,'' he said. ''You pull it, and pull it, and pull it.''

Mr. Kanev learned about risks early in his career, when six thugs from
Zelenograd tied him to a chair with speaker wire and pressed a scalding iron to
his chest, demanding he surrender a videotape.

Since then, he has ratcheted up his ambitions. Early columns on police kickbacks
and petty corruption  have given way to detective work on Ms. Politkovskaya's
murder and on a kidnapping ring based in Uruguay -- a case in which he suggests
that former or current government security agents play a role. The stakes have
grown, along with his sense of mission.

''We try to reach our citizens to say, 'Look, people, it's enough,' '' Mr. Kanev
said. ''Let's take back our country. This is where we were born, right?''

Last August, as Mr. Kanev was returning to his apartment, two men slipped into
the stairway behind him. One wrenched away his bag, full of law enforcement
documents, and the other tightened a wire around his throat, leaving him slumped
in the stairwell.

His mother, Nina, heard about it from a television report, deepening her despair
over her only child. She has spent years trying to convince him that the work he
does is not worth the sacrifice.

''It's useless. It's like hitting a stone wall with your forehead,'' said Mrs.
Kaneva, 71, a retired kindergarten teacher. ''You can hit it as long as you want
and get bruises and lumps if you're lucky, or otherwise get crippled, or lose
your life. How does that address injustice?

''He says, 'Mom, if I don't do this job, who will do it?' And I say: 'One man on
a battlefield is not a warrior.' ''

Mr. Kanev's angry response is from the family's history: When Nina Kaneva was 4,
her father was arrested as an enemy of the people, and she never heard from him
again. Mrs. Kaneva hid the story, afraid that she would be ostracized.

''I tell her, 'All your life you were afraid to talk,' '' Mr. Kanev said. ''I
don't want to live that way.''

And so, this bargain: He signs his name to every article.  If, walking in his
darkened stairwell, he senses someone behind him, he switches on the cameras in
his backpack.

And when young people come to him to ask about investigative journalism, he can
no longer in good conscience encourage them.

''First I tell everything I know,'' Mr. Kanev said. ''Then I say, 'Maybe you can
find another profession.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Stanislav Markelov, a Russian lawyer, was killed in
January.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKHAIL VOSKRESENSKY/REUTERS)(A1)
 Sergei Kanev, investigative journalist and crime reporter, near his office in
Moscow. His mother objects to his dangerous work.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES HILL FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JOURNALISM (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); WRITERS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRUPTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (87%); FREELANCE
EMPLOYMENT (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); ORGANIZED CRIME (72%); DANCE (56%);
MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (50%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 20, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rwandans Judging Genocide, Their Way

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1051 words


The documentary filmmaker Anne Aghion asks a lot of tough questions in ''My
Neighbor, My Killer,'' the fourth and last in her series of films about the 1994
genocide in Rwanda. But the most difficult, posed on the posters for her new
film, may be this: after the killing has ceased, and order has been restored,
''How do you make it right again?''

Ms. Aghion has spent nearly a decade, starting in 1999, searching for answers to
that question. She has issued progress reports along the way  in the form of
three documentaries, each running less than an hour; one won her an Emmy. But
she said that ''My Neighbor, My Killer'' is the film she set out to make when
she began.

''People in Rwanda sometimes asked me, 'Why are you here now and not then?' ''
she said. But they also told her, she continued, '' 'Our troubles are not over,
you have to come back and film more.' The idea that they can inscribe themselves
in the bigger picture is part of the healing process and is important to them.''

''My Neighbor, My Killer'' is  to be shown on Saturday, Monday and Wednesday  at
Lincoln Center as part of the 20th Human Rights Watch International Film
Festival. At Saturday's screening Ms. Aghion will be honored with the Nestor
Almendros Award for ''courage in filmmaking,'' named for the Oscar-winning
Spanish cinematographer who was also a director of a pair of documentaries about
the absence of human rights in Cuba.

''In making films about human rights, there is always a tension between the
material, which can sometimes be difficult to watch or take in, and the
aesthetics of filmmaking,'' said John Biaggi, the festival's director.

''But I think that because of Anne's seriousness in this endeavor, her skill as
a filmmaker, and the time and emotional effort she has made, people have wanted
to see these films and find them to be very powerful.''

The Rwandan genocide itself has been addressed in feature films like ''Hotel
Rwanda,''''Sometimes in April'' and ''Shake Hands with the Devil,'' as well as
in several  books. In little more than three months in mid-1994, from 800,000 to
one million people were killed in the storm of ethnic violence that followed the
assassination of the country's president, Juvenal Habyarimana.

The perpetrators were almost exclusively Hutus, while the primary victims were
minority Tutsis.

Ms. Aghion, however, focuses on the aftermath of the killing  and the trauma  it
inflicted on those who survived. The vehicle she found to bring those problems
from the abstract to the concrete reality of daily life was the ''gacacas,''
community tribunals set up by the Rwandan government to judge those accused of
committing genocide.

More than 11,000 such tribunals were set up, so rather than track the process in
the entire country, Ms. Aghion concentrated on a single district. More
specifically, she followed the cases of a small group of widows, mostly Hutus
married to Tutsis, and the Hutu men who killed the husbands and children of
those women.

''The international community is not very good at keeping our focus on a place
like Rwanda when it's off the front pages,'' said Sheldon Himelfarb, a conflict
management specialist at the United States Institute of Peace, one of the
sponsors of Ms. Aghion's film. ''There's a certain weariness and emotional
fatigue that all of us wrestle with when we watch the news on a regular basis
and see war after war, death after death. Films like this break through that
problem by telling the human story.''

Indeed, the peasant women whom Ms. Aghion interviewed at length bore witness to
their terrible experience in an eloquent and heart-wrenching fashion. ''I curl
up into myself, neither living nor dead,'' one woman who lost her husband and
children says matter-of-factly. Another describes the patrols armed with
machetes that wiped out her family and neighbors as acting as if they were
merely ''cutting banana trees.''

But Ms. Aghion, 49, a  graduate of Barnard College who works and lives in  New
York and Paris, also manages to show some sympathy for the perpetrators,
particularly one man clearly wrestling with his conscience and who wants to make
amends to his victims.

''I became very attached to him,'' she said. ''He seriously struggled to come to
terms with what he had done.''

In the first film of her career, ''The Earth Moved Under Him,'' a look at the
lives of Nicaragua's urban poor,  Ms. Aghion also served as a narrator. But for
her Rwanda project, she used no   narration at all and offered only a minimum of
expository footage.

''I didn't think there was a need for explanation,'' she said. ''One thing I try
to do is make the viewer connect emotionally with what is going on, and if my
voice is there, it prevents that from happening.''

For much the same reason, Ms. Aghion  also chose not to incorporate the film of
swollen corpses floating in rivers or being unearthed from mass graves that
became all too familiar in 1994.

''Those images have been shown enough and would only detract from what I was
doing,'' she said. ''I wanted to work on after, not what had happened before.''

In 2006 Ms. Aghion took a break from the Rwanda project and spent four months in
Antarctica. The film that resulted from that trip,  released  just last month,
was ''Ice People,'' a study of geologists working in one of the bleakest
landscapes on earth.

''I wouldn't have been able to finish Rwanda if I hadn't been to Antarctica,''
she said. ''It's been very, very intense, this work. I needed distance
emotionally, to think about something else'' before coming back for the last
stage.

With ''My Neighbor, My Killer,'' which was shown at the Cannes Film Festival in
May, Ms. Aghion has concluded her Rwanda project, she said, or at least the film
aspect of it. She has accumulated about 350 hours of footage, which she would
like to  make available to human-rights and academic researchers and perhaps use
as the basis for  a book.

''This really is a seminal film,'' relevant to the experience of people in other
zones of conflict,  ranging from Bosnia to Darfur, Mr. Biaggi said. ''It allows
someone who has never set foot in the country to understand how difficult and
psychologically complicated it must be to try to sew this society back together
again, and that really is a rare thing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: My Neighbor, My Killer (Movie); My Neighbor, My Killer (Movie)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ann Aghion. (pg. C1)
 In ''My Neighbor, My Killer,''  a community tribunal, established by Rwanda's
government, judges those accused of genocide. (PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY OF ANNE
AGHION) (pg. C9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); FILM (90%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS
(90%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); VISUAL ARTISTS (89%); ARTS
FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (78%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (78%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (77%); CINEMATOGRAPHY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
FESTIVALS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); CUBA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Islamic Radicalism Is Casting a Shadow on Morocco's Liberal Beacon

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER and SOUAD MEKHENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1238 words

DATELINE: CASABLANCA, Morocco


Morocco has long been viewed as a rare liberalizing, modernizing Islamic state,
open to the West and a potential bridge to a calmer Middle East that can live in
peace with Israel.

But under pressure from Islamic radicalism, King Mohammed VI has slowed the pace
of change. Power remains concentrated in the monarchy; democracy seems more
demonstrative than real. While insisting that the king is committed to deeper
reforms, senior officials speak instead of keeping a proper balance between
freedom and social cohesion. Many discuss the threat of extremism in neighboring
Algeria.

Since a major bombing of downtown hotels and shopping areas by Islamic radicals
in 2003, and a thwarted attempt at another bombing campaign in 2007, there has
been a major and continuing crackdown on those suspected of being extremists
here.

In 2003, anyone with a long beard was likely to be arrested. Even now, nearly
1,000 prisoners considered to be Islamic radicals remain in Moroccan jails. Six
Islamist politicians (and a reporter from the Hezbollah television station,  Al
Manar) were jailed recently, accused of complicity in a major terrorist plot.
The case was full of irregularities and based mainly on circumstantial evidence,
according to a defense lawyer, Abelaziz Nouaydi, and Human Rights Watch.

In a rare interview, Yassine Mansouri, Morocco's chief of intelligence, said
that the arrested politicians ''used their political activities as a cover for
terrorist activities.''

''It was not our aim to stop a political party,'' he said. ''There is a law to
be followed.''

Morocco is threatened, Mr. Mansouri said, by two extremes -- the conservative
Wahhabism spread by Saudi Arabia and the Shiism spread by Iran. ''We consider
them both aggressive,'' Mr. Mansouri said. ''Radical Islam has the wind in its
sail, and it remains a threat.''

Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, especially active in Algeria, remains a major
problem for Morocco, Mr. Mansouri said. Officials say it is appealing to the
young and has recreated a training route to Afghanistan through Pakistan, and it
just sponsored a suicide bombing in Mauritania.

Foreign Minister Taieb Fassi Fihri said: ''We know where the risks to our
stability are. We know kids are listening to this Islamic song, so we have to
act quickly.''

King Mohammed, who celebrated his 10th year on the throne this year, has vowed
to help the poor and wipe out the slums,  called ''bidonvilles,'' where
radicalism is bred. One such slum, Sidi Moumen, where the bombers lived, is
being redeveloped. Half of it has already been ripped down, and some 700
families shipped to the outskirts of the city, where they are provided a small
plot of land at a cheap price to build new housing.

Hamid al-Gout, 34, was born in Sidi Moumen and built his own hovel here. Nearly
everyone has been to prison, he said, and Islamist political groups quietly hold
meetings. ''Sometimes we talk, 12 or 14 people, about our lives,'' he said, then
added carefully, ''But there is no radical thinking here now.''

Abdelkhabir Hamma, 36, said that he had been told that if he and his family did
not leave by the end of the year, they would be thrown out. He said that while
many respect the king, few trust other authorities.

The king sees himself as a modernizer and reformer, having invested heavily in
economic development, loosened restraints on the news media, given more rights
to women and shed light on some of the worst human-rights abuses of the past.
These are remarkable steps in a region dominated by uncompromising examples of
state control, like Algeria, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt.

Because the king, a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad, is also revered as the
''Commander of the Faithful,'' challenges to Moroccan Islam are taken very
seriously.

In March, the king cut diplomatic ties to Iran, accusing Tehran of ''intolerable
interference in internal affairs'' by trying to spread Shiism in Morocco and
recruiting Moroccans in Europe, especially in Belgium, to participate in acts of
terrorism, Mr. Mansouri said.

The king has tried to be more inclusive, traveling for instance to the north of
Morocco, where his father had refused to go. The north is also a hotbed of
extremism and home for many of the Qaeda bombers of Madrid. The king held a
traditional ceremony of mutual allegiance, or baiaa, this year in Tetouan and
highlighted significant development funds there.

But Morocco's response has also been to slam the brakes on reform, even of the
corrupt judiciary and of laws governing women's rights, in order not to inflame
conservative and traditional views of Islam, especially in the countryside and
among the poor, where extremists fish. For that reason, too, the king has not
put Morocco forward as an interlocutor between Israel and the Palestinians, as
his father did. The view here is simply that Israel -- and other, harder-line
Arab states -- must move first, before Morocco exposes itself.

The crackdown has also damaged Morocco's human rights record. Muslim prisoners
are treated roughly in jail, sometimes sodomized with bottles, said Abdel-Rahim
Moutard, a former prisoner himself, his hands broken during interrogations. He
runs Ennasir, a rights organization for prisoners. But when they emerge from
prison, they get little help, even from the mosques or Ennasir.

''A lot of them are shocked that their country would treat them this way,'' Mr.
Moutard said. ''After the bottle treatment, every time he goes to the toilet
he'll remember, and he will think of vengeance.''

The main Islamist party, the Party for Justice and Development, is effectively
neutered, but officials want to ensure that it does not combine with the
Socialists. So for recent elections for local authorities, the palace created
the Authenticity and Modernity Party, run by Fouad Ali El Himma, 46, who as a
youth had been chosen, like Mr. Mansouri and other boys from varied backgrounds,
to study with the young king. Mr. Himma is also a former deputy interior
minister.

The effort is to provide an alternative -- sanctioned informally by the palace
-- but also to try to mobilize Moroccans, who do not see their participation as
having much effect on weak governments, to vote. The new party won, with 22
percent of the vote on a turnout of 52 percent; Mr. Himma is seen as a future
prime minister.

In an interview, Mr. Himma spoke passionately about the commitment of the king
to aid the poor and reform the country. Morocco ''has always been a country of
transit, and we have found the cement for all this -- our multifaceted
monarchy,'' he said.

Critics, however, see the king and his friends as a closed, anti-democratic
''monarchy of pals.'' The king has concentrated much economic power in the
palace, argues Aboubakr Jamai, former editor of Le Journal Hebdomadaire --
becoming Morocco's chief banker, insurer and industrialist. Moves toward a more
democratic system, with more power to the Parliament, or even a constitutional
monarchy, are off the table, certainly for now.

The officials readily concede that poverty, illiteracy and corruption remain
serious challenges. The king, they say, has made judicial reform a key goal.

Yet in a nationally televised address on his 10th anniversary as king, Mohammed
VI spoke of poverty and development. But he did not use the word ''corruption,''
and he spoke only once of ''social justice,'' making no mention of judicial
reform.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sidi Moumen, a slum in Casablanca where bombers from attacks in
2003 and 2007 had lived, is being redeveloped. Half of it has already been
ripped down. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEHAD NGA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
King Mohammed VI, on horse, held a ceremony of mutual allegiance in July in
Tetouan in the north, a hotbed of extremism. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROYAL PALACE, VIA
ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A4)
 Ahmed Gueddou, a laborer, at his hovel in Sidi Moumen. About 700 families there
have been shipped to Casablanca's outskirts. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEVEN ERLANGER/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(pg.A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
POLITICS (88%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
AL-QAEDA (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); PRISONS
(73%); INTERVIEWS (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); LAWYERS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%); SLUM DWELLINGS (63%); RETAILERS (55%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (52%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

COUNTRY: MOROCCO (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (92%); ALGERIA (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); MAURITANIA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Release of Russian Who Killed Chechen Woman Stokes Tensions

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


A former Russian tank commander imprisoned for murdering a young Chechen woman
was freed ahead of schedule on Thursday, provoking exasperation in Chechnya and
rekindling animosities born of nearly a decade of intermittent war.

The former commander, Yuri D. Budanov, a decorated Russian Army colonel before
he was stripped of his rank, was sentenced to 10 years in prison in 2003, but a
court in the Ulyanovsk region agreed last month to grant him early parole for
good behavior. A last-minute appeal by the victim's lawyer failed to keep him in
custody.

News of the court's decision last month to grant Mr. Budanov's parole led to
protest rallies in Chechnya, the restive republic in Russia's Caucasus region.
Human rights groups and Chechen officials, two sides that often clash, have
raised a single voice of alarm over Mr. Budanov's release.

''It shows that Russian justice shows mercy to war criminals if their victims
are Chechens,'' said Natalya Estemirova from Memorial, a human rights group
based in Grozny, the Chechen capital.

Mr. Budanov was the highest-ranking officer among only a handful of Russian
soldiers punished for what human rights groups say were numerous atrocities
committed by federal forces in two wars against Chechen separatists. For many in
Chechnya he has become a hated symbol of those atrocities.

He has admitted to abducting Elza Kungayeva, an 18-year-old Chechen woman, and
strangling her in a fit of rage in his quarters in March 2000, thinking her to
be an enemy sniper. In proceedings that highlighted the capriciousness of
Russian justice, he was initially acquitted on grounds that he was temporarily
insane at the time of the killing, and convicted in a second trial.

The conviction raised expectations among battle-weary Chechens that their
submission to Russian authority would at least open avenues for addressing
wartime grievances. Few others were punished, however, despite voluminous
evidence of extrajudicial killings, abductions and torture committed by Russian
soldiers.

Though the fight against separatists has largely ended and Chechnya is now
firmly under Moscow's control, the republic has yet to truly reckon with the
years of bloody conflict that left thousands dead.

Rather, open discussion of the war and its legacy has been stifled by a
Kremlin-installed government, which, under Chechnya's strong-arm president,
Ramzan A. Kadyrov, has imposed a whitewashed official history that has sought to
play down Russian responsibility.

Yet, in a region where loyalties to clan can supersede national pride and
murderous blood feuds can rage for decades, some say Mr. Budanov's release --
just under a year and a half before the end of his prison term -- now threatens
to disrupt Chechnya's tenuous stability.

''This will only benefit the militants, because for them there is no clearer
demonstration of the futility of appealing to the Russian authorities,'' said
Stanislav Y. Markelov, a lawyer for Ms. Kungayeva's family.

Even Mr. Kadyrov, a former separatist fighter, who later became a loyal Kremlin
backer, has spoken out vehemently against Mr. Budanov's release.

''Even if he repented, someone convicted for such a brutal and cynical killing
of an innocent underage schoolgirl should not be granted parole,'' Mr. Kadyrov
said this week, according to Interfax. ''Moreover, he deserves a more severe
punishment.''

Chechnya's human rights ombudsman, Nudri S. Nukhazhiev, has released evidence he
says links Mr. Budanov to several other killings during his tour of Chechnya,
and has called on prosecutors to open a new case against him.

''Budanov is a criminal who represents a danger to society,'' Mr. Nukhazhiev
said in a statement. ''He is capable of committing further crimes and should be
imprisoned for life.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In Grozny, Russia, last month, people held pictures of missing
relatives while protesting the early release of a Russian tank commander who
killed a Chechen.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID TSARNAYEV/REUTERS)
 Yuri D. Budanov in 2003, when he was imprisoned.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXANDER
BLOTNITSKY/AFP -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MURDER (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); PAROLE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PRISONS (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); SENTENCING (78%); ARMIES
(78%); INSANITY DEFENSE (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%);
TORTURE (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); ACQUITTAL (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Prisons, Similar Issues For President

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Carlotta Gall contributed reporting from Kabul,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1377 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For months, a national debate has raged over the fate of the 245 detainees at
the United States military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

But what may be an equally difficult problem now confronts the Obama
administration in the 600 prisoners packed into a cavernous, makeshift prison on
the American air base at Bagram in Afghanistan.

Military personnel who know Bagram and Guantanamo describe the Afghan site as
tougher and more spartan. The prisoners have fewer privileges and virtually no
access to lawyers. Many are still held communally in big cages. The Bush
administration never allowed journalists or human rights advocates inside.

Problems have also developed with efforts to rehabilitate former jihadists, some
of whom had been imprisoned at Guantanamo. Nine graduates of a Saudi program
have been arrested for rejoining terrorist groups, Saudi officials said Monday.

President Obama must now decide whether and how to continue holding the men at
Bagram, most of them suspected of being Taliban fighters. Under the laws of war,
they are being held indefinitely and without charge. He must also determine
whether to go forward with the construction of a  $60 million prison complex at
Bagram that, while offering better conditions for the detainees, would also
signal a longer-term commitment to the American detention mission.

Mr. Obama tried last week to buy some time in addressing the challenges Bagram
poses even as he ordered Guantanamo closed. By a separate executive order, Mr.
Obama directed a task force led by the attorney general and the defense
secretary to study the government's overall policy on detainees and to report to
him in six months.

But human rights advocates and former government officials say that several
factors -- including expanding combat operations against the Taliban, the
scheduled opening of the new prison at Bagram in the fall and a recent federal
court order -- will probably force the administration to deal with the vexing
choices much sooner.

''How the Obama administration plans to deal with detention in Afghanistan is an
open question,'' said Tina M. Foster, executive director of the International
Justice Network, a human rights organization in New York. ''How will this
administration differ from the Bush administration in its conduct of detention
in Afghanistan?''

The population at Bagram has increased nearly sixfold over the past four years,
driven not just by the deepening conflict in Afghanistan but also by the fact
that the Bush administration in September 2004 largely halted the movement of
prisoners to Guantanamo, leaving Bagram as the preferred alternative to detain
terrorism suspects.

Bush administration lawyers argued this month that the Bagram detainees were
different from those at Guantanamo. Virtually all of the Bagram prisoners were
captured on the battlefield and were being held in a war zone, the lawyers
contended, and they could pose a security threat if released. On Thursday, Judge
John D. Bates of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia
gave the Obama administration until Feb. 20 to ''refine'' the government's legal
position with respect to four men who are seeking to challenge their detention
at Bagram under habeas corpus, a right that the Supreme Court has granted for
detainees at Guantanamo.

The four plaintiffs were taken  to Bagram from outside Afghanistan and have been
imprisoned there without access to any legal process, many of them for over six
years, said Ms. Foster, who is representing the detainees.

Judge Bates issued his order after Mr. Obama signed his directives on Thursday,
and the judge cited the presidential orders as ''indicating significant changes
to the government's approach to the detention, and review of detention, of
individuals currently held at Guantanamo Bay.'' He noted that ''a different
approach could impact the court's analysis of certain issues central to the
resolution'' of the Bagram cases as well.

At a White House briefing about the executive orders last Thursday, a senior
administration official was asked whether terrorism suspects captured by
American authorities would continue to be sent to Bagram. The official said not
to expect any changes to existing policies in Afghanistan for at least six
months, pending the completion of the task force's review.

A Justice Department spokesman, Dean Boyd, declined to comment on Judge Bates's
order, saying that government lawyers were studying it.

The challenges confronting the Obama administration at Bagram do not extend to
the much larger American detention operations in Iraq, where the United States
now holds about 15,000 prisoners. Under a security agreement with the Iraqi
government, the United States will begin next month to release up to 1,500
detainees a month. Fighters captured and imprisoned in Iraq are afforded legal
protections under the Geneva Conventions.

Human rights advocates are already pressing the administration to revamp the
review process for releasing or transferring the Bagram detainees, all but about
30 of whom are Afghans. This process, which the military calls ''unlawful enemy
combatant review boards,'' involves reviews of the status of each prisoner every
six months. Human rights lawyers criticize the process as a sham and have called
for a return to the longstanding battlefield reviews called for by the Geneva
Conventions.

More broadly, Mr. Obama's move away from the Bush administration's aggressive
detention policies will have to be reconciled with his plans to increase combat
operations in Afghanistan, a step that will almost inevitably generate new waves
of detainees.

''The decisions about detention in and around Afghanistan are linked to
strategic decisions Obama needs to make on the Afghanistan war,'' said Matthew
Waxman, a professor at Columbia Law School who served in the Department of
Defense overseeing detainee policies under the Bush administration. ''Does a
proposed 'surge' in Afghanistan, for example, include an expanded detention
mission? How does detention fit within a counterinsurgency strategy in
Afghanistan?''

Mr. Waxman said one approach the Obama administration might consider is whether
it can defend a narrower definition of enemy combatant than the broad one
asserted by the Bush administration.

In 2005, the Bush administration began trying to scale back  American
involvement in detention operations in Afghanistan, mainly by transferring
Bagram prisoners to an American-financed high-security prison outside of Kabul
guarded by American-trained Afghan soldiers.

The American military has handed over about 20 to 30 detainees a month since
2007, or more than 500 detainees in all, according to Lt. Col. Mark Wright, a
Defense Department spokesman.

But United States officials conceded more than a year ago that the new Afghan
prison could not absorb all the Bagram prisoners. The officials have also
acknowledged serious problems in the security-court system in Afghanistan in
which the transferred detainees are being tried.

Another question confronting the Obama administration is whether to go ahead
with the construction of a 40-acre detention complex to replace the existing
prison. After the prison was created in early 2002, it became a primary
screening site for prisoners captured in Afghanistan, Pakistan and elsewhere.

Harsh interrogation methods and sleep deprivation were used routinely, and two
Afghan detainees died there in December 2002 after being beaten by American
soldiers and hung by their arms from the ceiling of isolation cells.

Conditions and treatment have improved markedly since then, but there are still
only minimal areas for the prisoners to exercise.  The new detention center at
Bagram is supposed to incorporate some of the lessons learned by the United
States in Iraq. Classrooms will be built for vocational training and religious
discussion, and there will be more space for recreation and family visits,
officials said.

''The tragedy is, the U.S. is spending tens of millions of dollars building
better detention facilities, but still has no process in place to handle these
guys,'' said Sam Zarifi, director of Amnesty International's Asia-Pacific
program, which is based in London.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A checkpoint at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
SCOTT EELLS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); EXECUTIVES (73%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
TERRORISM (69%); ARRESTS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); WAR &
CONFLICT (68%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (65%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             101 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Dysfunctional Human Rights Council

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 346 words


The Bush administration -- which disdained the United Nations only slightly more
than it disdained the hard work of diplomacy -- chose to boycott the United
Nations' highly dysfunctional Human Rights Council. The Obama administration has
decided to run for a seat on it. That may be the best chance to shape up this
international embarrassment, but it won't be easy.

The council frequently and unsparingly condemns Israel, but when it comes to
Sudan's genocide in Darfur or the murderous crimes of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe,
it has cynically and shamefully pulled its punches. Last month, it endorsed an
ill-considered Pakistani resolution against defaming religions that could easily
be used to justify censorship and official persecution of unbelievers.

The council's weakness is part of a larger problem at the United Nations. Rather
than risk criticism of their own policies, members all too willingly enable each
other's excesses -- and call it respect for national sovereignty. And like too
many other United Nations bodies, the council apportions membership on the basis
of regional bloc politics, not merit or performance. As a result, countries like
Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Cuba -- all current members -- sit in judgment of
others' human rights performance, while routinely abusing the rights of their
own people.

Making the council credible will require countries that are genuinely committed
to human rights to stand up to the relatively small number of egregious
violators and the much larger group that gives them cover. That will not always
be easy for Washington since some chronic abusers -- Egypt and Pakistan come to
mind -- are allies or strategic partners of the United States.

Washington will surely be elected next month, since it will be running
uncontested for a seat assigned to the Western bloc. Membership will not be
enough. Successful diplomacy rests on forging compromises and building
consensus. But when quiet diplomacy fails, as it often will, the United States
must raise its own voice, unequivocally, on behalf of repression's voiceless
victims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CENSORSHIP (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); RELIGION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SUDAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); EGYPT (92%); ZIMBABWE
(79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 5, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sneaking In Where Thugs Rule

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: MYAWADDY, Myanmar


Before entering Myanmar from Thailand, you scrub your bags of any hint that you
might be engaged in some pernicious evil, such as espionage, journalism or
promotion of human rights.

Then you exit from the Thai town of Mae Sot and walk across the gleaming white
''friendship bridge'' to the Burmese immigration post on the other side.
Entering Myanmar (which traditionally has been known as Burma), you adjust your
watch: Myanmar is 30 minutes ahead  --  and 50 years behind.

Already Myanmar's government is one of the most brutal in the world, and in
recent months it has become even more repressive.

A blogger, Nay Phone Latt, was sentenced to 20 years in prison. A prominent
comedian, Zarganar, was sentenced to 59 years. A former student leader, Min Ko
Naing, a survivor of years of torture and solitary confinement, has received
terms of 65 years so far and faces additional sentences that may reach a total
of 150 years.

''Politically, things are definitely getting worse,'' said David Mathieson, an
expert on Myanmar for Human Rights Watch living on the Thai-Burmese border.
''They've just sent hundreds of people who should be agents of change to long
prison terms.''

A new American presidency is a useful moment to review policy toward Myanmar,
and the truth is that the West's approach has failed. The Burmese junta has
ruled despotically since 1988, ignoring democratic elections. Since then,
sanctions have had zero effect in moderating the regime.

I have vast respect for Aung San Suu Kyi, the extraordinary woman who won a
Nobel Peace Prize for standing up to the country's thugs. But the best use of
her courage right now would be to accept that the trade sanctions she advocated
have accomplished nothing more than further impoverishing her own people. As
with Cuba and North Korea, isolating a venal regime usually just hurts the
innocent and helps the thugs stay in power.

Instead, the best bet is financial sanctions that specifically target
individuals close to the regime  --  and, even more, a clampdown on Myanmar's
imports of arms.

''It would be very difficult to get an arms embargo through the Security
Council, but that's something that really goes to the heart of any military
regime,'' Mr. Mathieson said. ''You lock them out of the tools of their own
self-aggrandizement and repression.''

President George W. Bush tried to help Burmese dissidents, but he had zero
international capital. The Obama administration, in contrast, has a chance to
lead an international initiative to curb Burmese arms imports and bring the
regime to the negotiating table.

Myanmar's weapons have come from or through China, Russia, Ukraine, Israel and
Singapore, and Russia is even selling Myanmar's dictators a nuclear reactor, Mr.
Mathieson said.

In crossing from Thailand to Myanmar, you pass through a time warp. You leave
the bustle and dynamism of Thailand and encounter a stagnating backwater of
antique cars and shacks beside open sewers.

I found it difficult to interview people in Myanmar, because I was traveling as
a tourist with two of my kids (and my wife is sick of me getting our kids
arrested with me in dictatorships). But we dropped in on the Myawaddy hospital,
which was so understaffed that no one stopped us as we marched through wards of
neglected patients.

The most flourishing business we saw on the Burmese side belonged to a snake
charmer who set up temporary shop outside a temple. The moment a crowd gathered,
an armed soldier ran over in alarm  --  and then relaxed when he saw that the
only threat to public order was a cobra.

In Mae Sot, Thailand, I visited with former Burmese political prisoners, like
the courageous Bo Kyi. They are at risk of being killed by Burmese government
assassins, yet they are campaigning aggressively for change.

Equally inspiring are the Free Burma Rangers, who risk their lives to sneak deep
into the country for months at a time to provide medical care and document human
rights abuses.

One gutsy American working with the group, who asked that his name not be used
for security reasons, communicated with me by satellite phone from his hiding
place deep inside Myanmar. He knows that the Burmese government will kill him if
it catches him, yet he stays to gather photos and other evidence of how Burmese
soldiers are drafting ethnic Karen villagers for forced labor and are raping
women and girls. One recent case described by the Free Burma Rangers  involved a
7-year-old girl who was raped, and then killed.

The courage of these people seeking a new Myanmar is infectious and inspiring.
In this new administration, let's help them  --  and see if with new approaches
we can finally topple one of the most odious regimes in the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%);
PRISONS (88%); ARMS TRADE (85%); MILITARY RULE (78%); ESPIONAGE (78%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (78%); TORTURE (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (75%); CORRECTIONS (74%); IMMIGRATION (71%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS
(71%); ELECTIONS (70%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); ARMS EMBARGOES (69%); NOBEL PRIZES
(68%); IMPORT CONTROLS (65%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (61%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); AUNG SAN SUU KYI (58%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); THAILAND (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHINA (79%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); UKRAINE (72%)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

First on Cambodia's Docket: A Man Whose Jail Sent 14,000 to a Killing Field

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The first trial of a senior Khmer Rouge cadre opened Tuesday, 30 years after the
end of the brutal Communist regime that took the lives of as many as one-fourth
of Cambodia's population.

The first defendant is Kaing Guek Eav, 66, better known as Duch, the commandant
of the Tuol Sleng prison and torture house, which sent at least 14,000 people to
their deaths in a killing field.

The purpose of Tuesday's hearing is to address procedural issues before court
sessions begin next month.

Duch (pronounced DOIK) confessed to journalists before his arrest nine years ago
that he had committed atrocities, but said he had been acting under orders and
would himself have been killed if he had disobeyed. Known for his brutality, he
is charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes, and with murder and
torture in his prison, known as S-21.

Four senior Khmer Rouge officials who were in a position to give those orders
are also in custody, but court officials say their trials may not start until
next year.

They are Nuon Chea, 82, the movement's chief ideologue; Khieu Samphan, 76, who
was head of state; Ieng Sary, 82, the former foreign minister; and his wife,
Ieng Thirith, 75, a fellow member of the Khmer Rouge Central Committee.

The Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998. Many Cambodians say they fear
that some of the defendants may also die before they are brought to trial, and
the tribunal has been providing them the best medical care Cambodia has to
offer.

The trials are being held by a hybrid tribunal supported by the United Nations
that includes Cambodian and foreign judges and prosecutors in an awkward legal
compromise that has drawn criticism from human rights advocates and legal
scholars.

The chief concern is that the Cambodian members of the tribunal will not be
independent of their government's political agenda. Questions have already been
raised about the Cambodian co-prosecutor's reluctance to recommend further
indictments.

Foreign and Cambodian analysts say the government, fearing that a widening
circle of defendants could reach into its own ranks, wishes to limit the number
of those being tried, harming the tribunal's credibility.

''We wish to see this tribunal for at least these five, and this is the minimum
of the minimum,'' said Kek Galabru, a leading Cambodian human rights campaigner.
''A lot of people ask: 'Why only five? Why only five? Why only five?' ''

In addition, the United Nations has investigated allegations of corruption among
the Cambodian members of the tribunal. The trial is supported by donations from
other nations, and further payments are being delayed pending a resolution of
these questions of corruption.

David Chandler, the author of ''Voices From S-21: Terror and History in Pol
Pot's Secret Prison'' (University of California Press, 1999), said a flawed
trial would be better than no trial at all.

''These guys should have to finally face some of the people and some of the
evidence of what they did,'' he said. ''It doesn't seem right that they just die
in bed, tending to their chickens.''

In a fanatical attempt to create a pure peasant society, the Khmer Rouge turned
their country into a giant labor camp, evacuating cities, banning commerce and
religion, and trying to exterminate the country's educated class.

From 1975 to 1979 at least 1.7 million people were executed or died of overwork,
starvation, torture or untreated disease.

The Khmer Rouge left behind an eviscerated and traumatized society, and some
human rights advocates hope the trial can bring a measure of closure.

A survey of 1,000 Cambodians last year by the Human Rights Center, University of
California, Berkeley, found that even after three decades, the traumas and
hatreds persisted.

In face-to-face interviews, nearly half the respondents said they were
uncomfortable living close to former members of the Khmer Rouge. Two-thirds said
they wanted to see former cadres suffer in some way. Forty percent said they
would take revenge themselves if they had the opportunity.

Chum Mey, 77, who is among only a handful of people who survived Tuol Sleng,
said he still feared Duch and was unable to look him in the eye at a pretrial
hearing in November.

In the hearing room, he said, Duch behaved with the same air of confidence,
disdain and command that had characterized his tenure as prison chief.

''They tortured me for three months,'' Mr. Chum Mey said, recalling his time as
a prisoner. ''They beat me. They removed my toenails. They gave me electric
shocks in my ear -- kup-kup-kup-kup, it sounded like a machine in my head, and
my eyes were like burning with fire.''

He is on the witness list to testify against Duch. ''I want to stay alive to
give evidence,'' he said. ''Because I survived the Khmer Rouge, and if I die
before the trial, what was the point of surviving?''

In an innovation, dozens of victims have enrolled as civil parties to the case.
They have grouped themselves by ethnicity or by the nature of their complaints
and will be permitted to demand symbolic damages.

One of them is Sok Chear, 42, an office worker whose father died under the Khmer
Rouge. ''We want to ask their leaders: 'Who ordered this? Why did you kill
Cambodian people? For what?' '' she said.

But not all Cambodians want to relive their traumas, which psychiatrists here
say may be reactivated by the trial. One of them is Ms. Sok Chear's sister.

''She says the government is finding peace for the people,'' Ms. Sok Chear said.
'' 'Why do you want to make trouble again? They killed our father already. Now
let's just forget it.' ''

The trial, in a former military headquarters half an hour outside the city, is
taking place in a strange social vacuum.

This is a nation that has tried, in the words of Prime Minister Hun Sen, to
''dig a hole and bury the past.'' Its traumas lie beneath the surface of daily
life, and the opening of the trial has drawn only moderate attention here.

The Berkeley study found that 85 percent of respondents had little or no
knowledge of the tribunal.

It found that their main concerns were jobs, services to meet basic needs, and
food. When asked what the priorities of the government should be, only 2 percent
said justice.

For many in the younger generation, the Khmer Rouge atrocities are already
ancient history.

''Honestly, we don't pay attention to these things,'' said Ung Suchida, 24, a
waitress. ''They are already old. Some people, they are interested. But not
me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A tourist looking at cells on Monday in the Tuol Sleng prison,
now a museum, in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. The prison is linked to 14,000 deaths in
the 1970s.(PHOTOGRAPH BY RUNGROJ YONGRIT/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)
 Kaing Guek Eav, who ran the prison, is facing a trial.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID
LONGSTREATH/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); CORRUPTION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); POPULATION SIZE (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); TORTURE (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); INDICTMENTS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(76%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); ARRESTS (75%); JUDGES (73%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (66%); MURDER (58%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             106 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 14, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

U.N. Rights Official Fears War Crimes in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 465 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


Government forces and Tamil rebels may be committing war crimes against
civilians trapped in a conflict zone and should suspend their fighting to allow
them to escape, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights said
Friday.

The military, in what it says is a final assault in a 25-year separatist war,
has cornered the remnants of the insurgency on a sliver of land that is packed
with civilians -- as many as 180,000, according to the United Nations official,
Navi Pillay.

In a statement issued in Geneva, Ms. Pillay said the government had repeatedly
shelled the area, which it had designated a ''no fire'' zone for civilians. At
the same time, she said, the rebels, known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, or L.T.T.E., were using the civilians as human shields and had reportedly
shot some as they tried to flee.

''Certain actions being undertaken by the Sri Lankan military and by the
L.T.T.E. may constitute violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law,'' Ms. Pillay said.

''The world today is ever sensitive about such acts that could amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity,'' she added.

The government strongly denies that it has shelled civilian areas, and it puts
the number of people in the combat zone at 70,000, lower than most independent
estimates.

''We have very clearly stated that we have not at any time fired at the no fire
zone,'' said Mahinda Samarasinghe, the minister for disaster management and
human rights, speaking to The Associated Press.

Independent reporters and most humanitarian groups have been barred from the
battle zone, and reports from the area are difficult to verify.

In addition to barring civilians from leaving the area, the rebels are also
reported to be recruiting civilians, including children, as soldiers, Ms.
Pillay's office said in the statement.

''The brutal and inhuman treatment of civilians by the L.T.T.E. is utterly
reprehensible, and should be examined to see if it constitutes war crimes,'' she
said.

Citing ''a range of credible sources,'' Ms. Pillay said more than 2,800
civilians had been killed and more than 7,000 had been wounded, including
hundreds of children, since Jan. 20. She said 150,000 to 180,000 civilians
remained trapped by the fighting, which is in northeastern Sri Lanka.

The Tamil rebels have been fighting since 1983 for a separate homeland in
northern and eastern Sri Lanka. The Hindu Tamils are a minority in the mostly
Buddhist Sinhalese nation. Their insurgency has been particularly brutal, marked
by suicide bombings and attacks on civilians.

''The current level of civilian casualties is truly shocking,'' Ms. Pillay said,
''and there are legitimate fears that the loss of life may reach catastrophic
levels, if the fighting continues in this way.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); CHILD SOLDIERS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
RELIGION (60%)

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (54%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             109 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Military Says Its Actions in Gaza War Did Not Violate International Law

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The Israeli military on Wednesday presented the conclusions of several internal
investigations into its conduct during the war in Gaza and stated that it had
operated in accordance with international law,  countering widespread
international criticism over its actions and continuing accusations of possible
war crimes.

The military said in a statement that it had ''maintained a high professional
and moral level'' during the 22-day war, which  ended Jan. 18, though it faced
''an enemy that aimed to terrorize Israeli civilians whilst taking cover'' among
Palestinian civilians and ''using them as human shields.''

Israel mounted its attack on  Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls
Gaza, with the stated purpose of preventing rocket fire on southern Israel from
Gaza.  But the offensive set off international outrage and condemnation as the
Palestinian death toll grew, as United Nations facilities and medical teams came
under fire and as allegations emerged of improper use of white phosphorus
weapons.

This month, the United Nations Human Rights Council appointed an internationally
renowned judge, Richard J. Goldstone, to lead a high-level mission to
investigate allegations of war crimes during the Gaza war.

Though Mr. Goldstone, a former judge in South Africa  and a former United
Nations chief prosecutor for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, has
said he will investigate possible violations by both Israel and Hamas, officials
in Jerusalem have said it is  unlikely that Israel will cooperate with the
mission.

Gaza health officials said more than 1,300 Palestinians died during the  war,
but Israel disputes Palestinian claims that most of them were noncombatants. By
the Israeli military's count, 1,166 people were killed, of whom 295 were
noncombatants, 709 were what it called Hamas terrorist operatives and 162 were
men whose affiliations remain  unidentified.

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza put the number of dead at 1,417:
926  civilians, 236  combatants and 255  police officers. Israel says that about
400 Gazans die of natural causes every month, possibly accounting for the
discrepancy in numbers.

Thirteen Israelis were killed during the fighting, among them 10 soldiers and 3
civilians.

Maj. Gen. Dan Harel, the Israeli military's deputy chief of staff, told
reporters on Wednesday that the army ''discovered a small number of mistakes,
not many, among the dozens of incidents we investigated, and we have already
examined them and learned lessons from them.''

General Harel added that the army had ''not found a single case of an Israeli
soldier deliberately hurting innocent Palestinian civilians, whether from the
land, air or sea.'' If any such case was discovered, he said, it would be
treated with the full severity of the law.

Describing the mistakes as ''unfortunate'' and ascribing them to ''intelligence
or operational errors,'' the military said such incidents ''were unavoidable and
occur in all combat situations, in particular of the type which Hamas forced''
on the army ''by choosing to fight from within the civilian population.''

Three separate investigations whose conclusions were presented on Wednesday
dealt with specific events that were brought to the army's attention by the news
media or other means. Two others examined general subjects, namely the use of
weapons containing phosphorus and the destruction of infrastructure and
buildings by ground forces.

In one case,  where Israeli shells killed up to 40 Palestinians outside a United
Nations school in the Jabaliya refugee camp, north of Gaza City, on Jan. 6, the
soldiers were responding, according to the military, to mortar shells fired by
militants in the vicinity of the school. Israel says that 12 to 17 Palestinians
were killed, 5 of whom were militants.

Soon after the shelling, however, Palestinian hospital officials in the Jabaliya
area told a reporter for The New York Times that 40 people had been killed,
among them 10 children and 5 women. At a mass funeral in Jabaliya the next day,
the  reporter was unable to count the bodies in the press of the mourning crowd
but described seeing the bodies of the children laid out in a long row on the
ground. One of the mourners, Huda Deed, said she had lost nine members of her
extended family, ages 3 to 25.

Another case investigated by the military involved the Daia family, 21 of whom
were killed when their home, in the Zeitoun neighborhood of Gaza City, was hit
in an Israeli strike on Jan. 6. Expressing regret for the attack, a senior
military official said the army had intended to hit the house next door, which
was a weapons storage site; the Daia home was struck because of an ''operational
error.''

Israel has already come under heavy criticism for its use of white phosphorus in
heavily populated Gaza. White phosphorus is a standard, legal weapon in armies,
long used as a way to light up an area or to create a thick white smoke screen
to obscure troop movements. But it can cause horrific burns, so using it against
civilians, or in an area where many civilians are likely to be affected, can be
a violation of international law.

Last month, Human Rights Watch issued a report citing six cases of improper use
ofwhite phosphorus by Israel and calling them evidence of war crimes.

The military said it used two types of munitions containing white phosphorus,
incendiary shells for marking and range-finding, which it said were used in
limited quantities, and nonincendiary types of munitions used to create smoke
screens. But officials said that both types were used in open areas only, in
accordance with the limitations of international law.

The military noted that these investigations, conducted by officers with the
rank of colonel, were not a replacement for the central operational army
investigation of the entire campaign, which will be concluded by June.

The findings are not exhaustive. For example, the case of the Samouni family,
some 30 of whose members were killed when  the building in which they had sought
shelter in Zeitoun was hit on Jan. 5, remains unresolved. Maj. Avital Leibovich,
a military spokeswoman, said that the case was still being examined, and that it
was not yet clear if the Samounis were killed by Israeli fire.

Israeli and international human rights groups rejected the Israeli military's
internal investigations as inadequate. Human Rights Watch called Wednesday's
statement by the military ''an insult to the civilians in Gaza who needlessly
died.'' The army leadership, the group said, is ''apparently not interested,
willing, or able to monitor itself.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ali Mustafa al-Attar, 82, above, said that his home in Gaza was
destroyed during the recent war between Israel and Hamas.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES
SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HAMAS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMIES (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(75%); TERRORISM (74%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); FIRE
PREVENTION & SAFETY (69%); RELIGION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (83%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); RWANDA (79%);
SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             111 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt Prepares for Center Stage When Obama Addresses Arabs

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Samer al-Atrush contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MEMO FROM CAIRO; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1110 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


President Obama's decision to deliver a speech here next month has given
significant encouragement to a once powerful ally that has grown increasingly
frustrated over its waning regional influence and its inability to explain to
its citizens why it remains committed to a Middle East peace process that has
failed to produce a better life for Palestinians.

After eight years in which Egypt felt unappreciated and bullied by the Bush
administration, Egyptian officials were gleeful about Cairo's selection last
week for the president's address to the Muslim world. They said that it proved
Egypt remained the capital of the Arab world and that it eased concerns that
Washington might undermine its Arab allies in exchange for a grand deal with
their rivals in Iran.

''The aptest choice was Cairo,'' the Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Abul
Gheit, told the state-owned daily newspaper Rose Al-Yousef. ''It is the capital
of moderation in Islam and the capital of cultural sway in the Arab and Muslim
worlds.''

Still, President Obama's decision to address a deeply skeptical Arab audience
from Cairo is fraught with potential land mines, according to political
analysts, human rights advocates and government officials. He has selected an
authoritarian state where political and economic reform has stalled under
President Hosni Mubarak, 82, who has been in power for nearly 30 years.

Those factors will put some pressure on Mr. Obama to at least address the issue
of democracy and human rights. The Egyptian government bristles at outside
pressure, and the general population often sees hypocrisy when Western leaders
call for democracy, then partner with authoritarian leaders.

''America's standing alongside authoritarian regimes is what created terrorism
in the Arab world,'' said Ayman Nour, a  former presidential candidate who was
recently  freed after more than three years in prison here on what were widely
seen as politically inspired charges. ''It is what strengthened the thorn of
extremism in the Arab world.''

Even before the issue of human rights is raised, though, Egyptian leaders and
activists will be looking for Mr. Obama to address their first priority: the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. If Mr. Obama wants to improve United States
relations with the Muslim world, that is the first step, many here said.

There was a time when progress on process was enough, they argued. Not anymore.

People here want results, a challenge made all the more complicated for Mr.
Obama by recent regional developments: the splintering of the Palestinian
leadership; the empowerment of militant groups like Hezbollah and Hamas;
lingering anger over Israel's offensive in Gaza; and the aggressive foreign
policy of Iran.

Still, there will be an expectation that Mr. Obama drive real changes, initially
by having Israel freeze settlements, dismantle checkpoints and open the
crossings to Gaza, officials here said.

''For 18 years, the peace process has gone on?'' said a high-ranking Egyptian
diplomat speaking anonymously under diplomatic rules. ''Who in their right mind
would think it can go on for another 18 years?''

Egypt sees in the peace process the key to most regional problems, from its
diminished credibility to what it perceives  as the rising threat of Iran.
Israel's prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who met with Mr. Mubarak on Monday
in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheik, has tried to promote the idea that
Arabs, Israelis and Americans have a common enemy in Iran and should first unite
against that threat.

Egypt agrees, but only to a point.

Egypt maintains that to tame Iran -- with which it is in open conflict -- the
issue of a Palestinian state must first be resolved. As long as that conflict is
festering, Iran will be able to undermine Egypt by attacking its allegiance to
the peace treaty with Israel, officials here said. Egypt has struggled to
convince its people, and Arabs around the region, that its commitment to the
treaty is the best way to help the Palestinians and to preserve Egypt's own
national security.

''I affirmed the importance of resuming negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian National Authority for a clear political horizon that deals with all
final status issues and that establishes an independent Palestinian state to
live alongside Israel,'' Mr. Mubarak said after meeting with Mr. Netanyahu.

Egypt has already made clear that it cannot begin to give until it gets. That is
why Egypt -- along with the 21 other members of the Arab League -- last week
flatly rejected a proposal floated by Washington's emissaries in the region that
called on the Arab states to drop their demands for the right of return for
Palestinian refugees to Israel.

Concessions would only undermine Egypt with its adversaries, primarily Iran,
analysts here said. Ambassador Hesham Youssef, chief of staff to the Arab
League, said he was hopeful that President Obama would spell out a specific plan
when he spoke in Cairo.

''The question is not talking about the issues; the question is changes on the
ground,'' Mr. Youssef  said.

But even if Mr. Obama manages to satisfy on the Palestinian question, he will
have to step carefully around the issue of human rights and democracy. It is a
treacherous subject, almost a no-win situation for any outsider.

If he presses Cairo on freedom issues, he risks alienating a government he needs
for strategic reasons. He could also incite anger among average Egyptians who
almost instinctively recoil at outsiders' telling them what to do. And yet, if
he does not raise the issues, he could be taken to task for conveniently
overlooking a serious point.

''We have not seen any American commitments in supporting democracy and
respecting the wishes of Arab and Muslim people,'' said Essam el-Arian, a
spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood, a banned but tolerated organization that
is the only real opposition movement in the country and supports the application
of Islamic law. ''It can be summed by measuring American interests with American
values.''

There is, however, a way to navigate the issue of human rights, said Saad Eddin
Ibrahim, an Egyptian democracy advocate living in self-imposed exile because the
government has threatened to jail him. He said he recently spoke with Mr.
Obama's advisers and suggested that the speech address the ''infrastructure of
democracy, which to us is the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary,
free media, autonomous civil society and gender equality.''

''If those five things are emphasized without talking about democracy as such,
we democrats in nondemocratic countries would be more than happy,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gazans waiting in Rafah to cross into Egypt. Many expect
President Obama to push to open the crossings in Israel.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALIL
HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Israel's prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, left, met with President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt on Monday in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheik.(PHOTOGRAPH
BY BEN CURTIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); POLITICS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%);
PEACE PROCESS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); HAMAS (76%); HEZBOLLAH (75%);
PRIME MINISTERS (71%); RELIGION (70%); TERRORISM (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (66%); ECONOMIC POLICY (65%); ECONOMIC NEWS (65%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); HOSNI MUBARAK (59%); BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (56%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (94%)

STATE: RED SEA (79%); INDIAN OCEAN (59%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (95%);
UNITED STATES (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Holding On To Our Humanity

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 774 words


Overload is a real problem. There is a danger that even the most decent of
people can grow numb to the unending reports of atrocities occurring all around
the globe. Mass rape. Mass murder. Torture. The institutionalized oppression of
women.

There are other things in the world: a ballgame, your daughter's graduation, the
ballet. The tendency to draw an impenetrable psychic curtain across the worst
that the world has to offer is understandable. But it's a tendency, as Elie
Wiesel has cautioned, that must be fought.

We have an obligation to listen, for example, when a woman from a culture
foreign to our own recalls the moment when time stopped for her, when she was
among a group of women attacked by soldiers:

''They said to us: 'If you have a baby on your back, let us see it.' The
soldiers looked at the babies and if it was a boy, they killed it on the spot
[by shooting him]. If it was a girl, they dropped or threw it on the ground. If
the girl died, she died. If she didn't die, the mothers were allowed to pick it
up and keep it.''

The woman recalled that in that moment, the kind of throbbing moment when time
is not just stopped but lost, when it ceases to have any meaning, her
grandmother had a boy on her back. The grandmother refused to show the child to
the soldiers, so both she and the boy were shot.

A team of female researchers, three of them physicians, traveled to Chad last
fall to interview women who were refugees from the nightmare in Darfur. No one
has written more compellingly about that horror than my colleague on this page,
Nick Kristof. When I was alerted to the report that the team had compiled for
Physicians for Human Rights, my first thought was, ''What more is there to
say?''

And then I thought about Mr. Wiesel, who has warned us so eloquently about the
dangers inherent in indifference to the suffering of others. Stories of
atrocities on the scale of those coming out of Darfur cannot be told too often.

The conflict has gone on for more than six years, and while the murders and mass
rapes have diminished, this enormous human catastrophe is still very much with
us. For one thing, Sudan has expelled humanitarian aid groups from Darfur, a
move that Susan Rice, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, recently told
Mr. Kristof ''may well amount to genocide by other means.''

Hundreds of thousands of people have been killed in the conflict and the
systematic sexual attacks on Darfuri women have been widely reported. Millions
have been displaced and perhaps a quarter of a million Darfuris are living in
conditions of the barest subsistence in refugee camps along the Chad-Sudan
border.

The report by Physicians for Human Rights, to be released officially on Sunday
(available at darfuriwomen.org), focuses on several dozen women in the Farchana
refugee camp in Chad. The report pays special attention to the humanity of the
women.

''These are real people with children, with lives that may have been quite
simple, but were really rich before they were displaced,'' said Susannah Sirkin,
a deputy director of Physicians for Human Rights.

The conditions in the refugee camps are grim, made worse by the traumas that
still grip the women, many of whom were witnesses -- or the victims  --  of the
most extreme violence.

''I don't think I was prepared for the level of just palpable suffering that
they are continuing to endure,'' said Dr. Sondra Crosby, one of the four
interviewers. ''Women were telling me they were starving. They're eating sorghum
and oil and salt and sugar.''

Dr. Crosby and her colleagues had a few crackers or cookies on hand for the
women during the interviews. ''I don't think I saw even one woman eat the
crackers, even though they were hungry,'' she said. ''They all would hide them
in their dresses so they could take them back to their children.''

The women also live with the ongoing fear of sexual assault. According to the
report, rape is a pervasive problem around the refugee camps, with the women
especially vulnerable when they are foraging for firewood or food.

''It is so much easier to look away from victims,'' said Mr. Wiesel, in a speech
at the White House in 1999. ''It is so much easier to avoid such rude
interruptions to our work, our dreams, our hopes.''

But indifference to the suffering of others ''is what makes the human being
inhuman,'' he said, adding: ''The political prisoner in his cell, the hungry
children, the homeless refugees  --  not to respond to their plight, not to
relieve their solitude by offering them a spark of hope is to exile them from
human memory. And in denying their humanity, we betray our own.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (74%); LIVING CONDITIONS (73%); SEX OFFENSES (72%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (70%); REFUGEES (70%); INTERVIEWS (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(69%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (63%); GENOCIDE (62%)

PERSON: SUSAN RICE (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (93%); CHAD (78%); UNITED STATES (76%)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             113 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detained Asylum-Seekers Find It Harder to Win Release

BYLINE: By JENNY MANRIQUE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 966 words


As a human rights advocate in West Africa, Jean-Pierre was jailed four times,
repeatedly tortured and forced to pay a $15,000 ransom to his captors in
exchange for his freedom. He faked his own death and even staged a funeral to
escape his native Guinea, and in 2007 sought asylum in the United States.

But instead of refuge, he found a new form of captivity: He was handcuffed at
Kennedy International Airport and locked up for five months in an immigration
jail in Elizabeth, N.J.

''I had a genuine reason for coming here and ask for protection, but I was
detained,'' said Jean-Pierre, 29, who insisted that his last name be withheld to
preserve his privacy in his current work on AIDS prevention. ''They handcuffed
me like a criminal and gave me a uniform. That was devastating and stressful. It
was like reliving my jail in Guinea.''

For more than a decade, arriving asylum-seekers have faced the possibility that
they will be detained while immigration authorities oppose their admission,
under stricter laws passed in 1996. But a new study by the international
advocacy group Human Rights First, shows that it has become harder for them to
win release while their cases are considered.

Since 2003, when the Department of Homeland Security took over immigration
enforcement, the number of beds in prisonlike detention centers has risen by at
least 62 percent, the study found. At the same time, the percentage of asylum
seekers released on bond or parole dropped by 42 percent for those the
authorities found to have a ''credible fear'' of persecution. In 2007, more than
3,000 asylum seekers were detained soon after arrival in the United States.

In jail, they often face inadequate medical and mental health care, and a lack
of legal representation that can keep them locked up for years, according to the
researchers, who visited detention centers in New York, New Jersey and other
states.

On Tuesday, the group planned a briefing in New York for Congressional staff
members and others, calling for remedies that include improved conditions and
alternatives to detention.

''The U.S. detention system needs to be reviewed from top to bottom,'' said
Eleanor Acer, the director of the group's refugee protection program.

In response, Dora Schriro, recently appointed as the immigration agency's
special adviser, wrote the group a letter saying she had already begun a
thorough review of detention policies and practices. The report, she wrote,
''identifies areas for improvement we can address immediately.''

Jean-Pierre said that during his months in the Elizabeth Detention Center, which
is run for the federal government by the Corrections Corporation of America, he
thought of suicide whenever he heard that another detainee had been deported. He
had nightmares in which a soldier tried to kill him.

''In jail, doctors just gave me sleep medication, but I did not want to sleep,
to have more nightmares,'' he recalled.

But Jean-Pierre was one of the lucky ones.   He was released in April 2008 and
was granted asylum three weeks later. Now he is active in a Christian
congregation in Manhattan and is trying to bring his wife over from Africa.

Other asylum seekers have grown sicker. This report and others have traced the
damage that detention can work on the physical and mental health of refugees,
many of whom have endured torture and trauma in their native countries.

A 2003 study of 70 detained asylum seekers by Physicians for Human Rights and
the Bellevue/N.Y.U. Program for Survivors of Torture found that 86 percent
suffered significant depression, and half suffered from post-traumatic stress
disorder.  Dr. Allen Keller, the program's director, said people in detention
could easily be retraumatized. ''The longer the detention the higher the
psychological distress.''

The report cited the case of a Brazilian woman who had come to the United States
to escape domestic violence, but could not cope with the stress of eight months
in jail. She withdrew her application and returned to her home country, even
though she faced grave danger there.

''At one hearing, when she heard that the case was to be continued again --
meaning she would be detained longer -- she had a panic attack,'' her pro-bono
lawyer, Kelleen Corrigan, recalled. ''An external psychological evaluation
stated that she needed ongoing therapeutic treatment, but despite my repeated
requests to ICE, the client was never seen by a mental-health specialist while
detained.''

Immigration and Customs Enforcement would not answer questions about mental
health services in detention. It said it could discuss specific cases if the
individuals agreed to disclose their medical records, but the asylum seekers'
lawyers advised against that.

Though detention in America holds few of the horrors many asylum seekers
experienced in their home countries, it has its own torments; detainees can be
placed in solitary confinement, and are often prevented from communicating with
relatives by lack of access to phones or by the high costs of jail phone
service.

''I left behind a pregnant wife, and I did not know about her for months,''
explained Kelsang, 23, a Tibetan who spent almost a year in the Elizabeth
Detention Center before he was granted asylum in May 2008. He said he had seen
his 2-year-old son only in photos.

''I barely slept, no more than two hours, and I was always nervous and afraid
for my family back in Tibet,'' said Kelsang, who asked that his last name not be
published because he feared the family would be harmed.

A Buddhist who supported the Dalai Lama, Kelsang said that during 13 months in
Chinese custody he had been ''tortured and beaten with an electric prod and a
club.'' The New Jersey jail, he said, was not as bad. ''At least I could
practice my religion.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jean-Pierre, a human rights advocate, fled his native Guinea and
was held for five months at a New Jersey immigration detention center. ''That
was devastating and stressful,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HIROKO MASUIKE FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL ASYLUM (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); PRISONS (78%); REFUGEES
(78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); PAROLE (75%); DEPORTATION (75%); AIDS
& HIV POLICY (74%); BAIL (73%); AIRPORTS (71%); AIDS & HIV (70%); PREVENTION &
WELLNESS (69%); MENTAL HEALTH (62%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%)

COMPANY: CORRECTIONS CORP OF AMERICA (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (54%)

TICKER: CXW (NYSE) (60%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS561210 FACILITIES SUPPORT SERVICES (60%); NAICS487110 SCENIC &
SIGHTSEEING TRANSPORTATION, LAND (60%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); GUINEA (93%); AFRICA (92%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             114 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2009 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Judge Is Latest Victim of Caucasus Violence

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


The body count among officials in Russia's volatile North Caucasus region keeps
rising. A high-ranking judge was the latest to die, killed Wednesday when a
group of men sprayed machine-gun fire on the van she was riding in, a day after
President Dmitri A. Medvedev visited the region to condemn the violence.

The killing underscored Russia's failure to contain the violence of separatists
and Islamic militants. Despite Russian officials' occasional rosy pronouncements
of successes, these forces remain a potent source of instability in a region
that has known little peace in recent decades.

Officials said it was likely that the judge, Aza Gazgireeva, had been gunned
down because of her professional activities. A deputy chief justice in the
Supreme Court of Ingushetia, a Muslim republic that borders Chechnya, she often
oversaw cases involving crimes carried out by violent Islamic separatist groups
active in the region, said Kaloi S. Akhilgov, a spokesman for Ingushetia's
president.

While interclan violence, blood feuds or just gangland criminality are
responsible for some of the bloodshed, Islamic militants carry out much of the
violence in the North Caucasus, said Tanya Lokshina, a Caucasus expert with
Human Rights Watch. ''They have declared that all members of law enforcement and
state officials are traitors to Islam and enemies that should be exterminated.''

Thirteen police officers have been killed this year in Ingushetia alone, said
Madina Khadzieva, a spokeswoman for the Ingushetia police. ''From 2008 through
2009 there have been many of these types of crimes, not against judges, but
generally members of law enforcement agencies, police, soldiers, etc.,'' she
said

The situation appears little different in other areas of the North Caucasus.
Last month, a suicide bomber killed two police officers in Grozny, Chechnya's
capital. And last week, Adilgerei Magomedtagirov, the interior minister of the
republic of Dagestan, was fatally shot along with one of his deputies at a
wedding for a colleague's daughter. As Dagestan's top law enforcement official,
Mr. Magomedtagirov led the fight against Islamic radicals there.

In a sign of the Kremlin's concern, President Medvedev flew Tuesday to Dagestan,
where he described what he called a ''difficult and lamentable'' situation. So
far in 2009, he said, 75 people in law enforcement and 48 civilians have been
killed in terrorist attacks in the region. Meanwhile, he said, 112 militants
have been killed.

Mr. Medvedev blamed foreign extremists for the violence, referring to them as
''freaks who come to our country for the sole purpose of causing damage to it.''
But he also blamed the extreme poverty of the region and lashed out at regional
officials for the corruption that he said had crippled local governments in
their efforts to fight the militants.

Military forces and the police also help swell the ranks of the militants by
using heavy-handed measures in so-called counterterrorist operations, human
rights groups say.

''We have noted the increasing use of kidnapping as well as numerous cases of
unambiguous persecution by law enforcement agencies in Ingushetia,'' said
Grigory S. Shvedov, the editor of Caucasian Knot, a Web-based news service.
''This has caused a new eruption of violence.''

In Chechnya, the scene of two wars responsible for tens of thousands of deaths,
Ramzan A. Kadyrov, the republic's Kremlin-backed president, has overseen a
counterinsurgency campaign that has steadily ground down the rebel movement --
with the help, human rights groups say, of unrestrained brutality, including
torture and kidnapping.

Many rebel leaders have been killed, and hundreds of fighters have been granted
amnesty in return for loyalty. In April, the Kremlin declared an end to a
decadelong military operation in Chechnya, underscoring the fragile gains.

But whatever successes have been achieved in Chechnya -- where there is still
regular bloodshed -- have been coupled with spikes in violence in Ingushetia and
other regions of the North Caucasus, where militants can operate more freely,
said Ms. Lokshina of Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); CORRUPTION (73%);
SUPREME COURTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (71%); ARMED FORCES (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: DMITRY MEDVEDEV (79%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (78%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CAUCASIAN STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             116 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 14, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Truth About Dasht-i-Leili

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 445 words


Add this to the Bush administration's sordid legacy: a refusal to investigate
charges that forces commanded by a notorious Afghan warlord -- and American ally
-- massacred hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Taliban prisoners of war in late
2001.

According to survivors and witnesses, over a three-day period, fighters under
the command of Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum stuffed surrendering Taliban prisoners
into metal shipping containers without food or water. Many suffocated. Guards
shot others to death. The victims are believed to be buried in a grave in the
desert of Dasht-i-Leili in northern Afghanistan.

Although the deaths were previously reported, The Times's James Risenhas now
detailed repeated efforts by the Bush administration to discourage any
investigation of the massacre -- even after officials from the F.B.I. and the
State Department, along with the Red Cross and human rights groups, tried to
press the matter. Physicians for Human Rights, which discovered the mass grave
in 2002, says the site has since been tampered with. Satellite photos seem to
bear this out.

General Dostum, unfortunately, had far too many powerful friends looking out for
him. He was on the C.I.A. payroll and his militia worked closely with United
States Special Forces in the early days of the war. President Hamid Karzai made
him his military chief of staff. General Dostum was suspended last year after
allegedly threatening a rival at gunpoint. Mr. Karzai recently reappointed him.

There can be no justification for the horrors or for the willingness of the
United States and Afghanistan to look the other way.

President Obama has told aides to study the matter, and the administration is
pressing Mr. Karzai not to return General Dostum to power. Mr. Obama needs to
order a full investigation into the massacre. The site must be guarded and
witnesses protected.

Some current American officials say there are no grounds for the United States
to investigate because only foreigners were involved and the alleged events
occurred in another country. But human rights activists say the Uniform Code of
Military Justice and the Geneva Conventions provide ample basis. They say
American forces accepted the surrender of prisoners jointly with General Dostum.
A NATO base was near the grave site.

There is more at stake than just the history books. Out of desperation or fear,
many Afghans have again thrown their lot in with the Taliban. There is no chance
of getting them to switch sides if they fear being massacred. If there is any
hope of salvaging the war, American forces must persuade all Afghans that they
and the Afghan government are truly committed to justice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); POWS & MIAS
(77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); CEMETERIES (70%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (69%); ARMED FORCES (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (58%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%);
PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); HAMAD KARZAI (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (96%)

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudi Arabia: Assault On Rights Alleged

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 139 words


The human rights group Amnesty International accused Saudi Arabia on Wednesday
of using its campaign against terrorism as a facade for ''a sustained assault on
human rights'' and said the rest of the world had failed to hold Saudi
authorities to account for ''gross violations.'' Its 69-page report said
thousands of people had been arrested and detained in virtual secrecy ''while
others have been killed in uncertain circumstances.'' It accused the Saudi
authorities of using torture to extract confessions and of using their
''powerful international clout to get away with it.'' Abdulrahman Alhadlaq, a
Saudi Interior Ministry official, told The Associated Press, ''Our policies on
human rights are very clear and the orders given are for prisoners to be treated
with respect and according to international human rights principles.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (88%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (88%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             120 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 9, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karzai In His Labyrinth

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH RUBIN.

Elizabeth Rubin, a contributing writer and Edward R. Murrow fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations, has reported extensively on Afghanistan for the
magazine, most recently from the Korengal Valley in ''Battle Company Is Out
There.''

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 9509 words


On a sunny June morning in Kabul, I sat among hundreds of turbaned men from
Afghanistan's Helmand and Kandahar provinces in a chandeliered wedding hall
where they had gathered for a campaign rally to re-elect President Hamid Karzai.
War was raging in Helmand and Kandahar. And yet there was an atmosphere of
burlesque about the place. Waiters hammed up their service, skidding across the
floor balancing mounds of rice, bananas and chicken, whirling shopping carts of
Coke and Fanta. The organizer of the event and master of ceremonies was none
other than Sher Muhammad Akhundzada, the five-foot-tall ex-governor of Helmand
and probably the country's most infamous drug trafficker. From a velvet couch he
barked out to the speakers: ''Not so many poems! Keep your speeches short!'' --
but no one was listening.

At my table, an elderly Helmandi engineer described how awful things were in his
region -- families killed in coalition airstrikes, villages overrun by the
Taliban. So why more Karzai? ''If we choose someone else, it will only get
worse,'' he said through an interpreter. Another man said that at least Karzai
had brought education and unity. ''They are all lying,'' a third said in
English. He was the son of a prominent Kandahari elder who, a year before, was
assassinated outside the family's house. He'd also lost his uncle, brother and
45 other members of his extended family, he told me. He blamed the government.
He was shaking his head at the spectacle in the wedding hall. ''I told the men
at my table, 'You just came to show your faces on camera so if Karzai wins he
will give you privileges.' '' He laughed and said, ''They told me they just came
for lunch.'' I asked what he thought would happen during the election in
Kandahar. ''Fraud,'' he said. He himself claimed to have made 8,000 fake
voter-registration cards. They were selling for $20.

After lunch, in a downstairs room filled with mannequins in pink and green
wedding gowns, I had a chat with Akhundzada, the ex-governor. He is campaigning
in the south for Karzai. First he wanted to explain that the nine tons of drugs
found in his compound in 2005 were planted there by the British to frame him.
Then he changed tack: ''If people think I was a smuggler, O.K. But at least I
spent the money on government and soldiers! Now the money goes to the Taliban
and kills British and Americans and Afghan soldiers.'' This is the same logic
that Karzai used to try to get Akhundzada reinstalled as governor of Helmand.
The British would not accept it. This seemed distinctly unfair to Akhundzada,
given the other characters on the political stage: ''They don't take Fahim out
of elections? Dostum is not criminal? Mohaqiq is not criminal? Just me?''

It was a comical and sinister and telling performance -- a prominent Karzai
backer damning key members of the president's re-election team (locally dubbed
''the warlord ticket''). The ethnic-Tajik Muhammad Fahim is running as Karzai's
first vice president (having previously served in the same post and as defense
minister); the ethnic-Uzbek warlord Abdul Rashid Dostum is returning from Turkey
to deliver Uzbek votes to Karzai; and the ethnic-Hazara politician Muhammad
Mohaqiq is a key Karzai ally to whom Karzai pledged five ministerial posts.

''I swear,'' Akhundzada went on, eyes agog, ''I have not killed a cat in all my
life.'' With that he took off with his rifle-toting guards and disappeared into
his armored S.U.V.

Karzai applauds himself for his big-tent, forgive-and-forget approach. But his
opponents are thrashing him for it. ''If the goal is to consolidate a group of
drug dealers as the government of Afghanistan so that you have relative peace,
then what is the vision?'' asked Ashraf Ghani when we met at his gracious villa
on the southwestern edge of Kabul in February, a few months before he decided to
run for president himself. ''Is that what the 20-year-old girl who wants to
become a computer engineer or doctor has in mind? Or the 22-year-old Afghan who
won two gold medals in computers? Can they become stakeholders in an Afghanistan
run by Sher Muhammad Akhundzada?''

The presidential campaign has put Karzai's style of politics on trial. There are
41 candidates running in Afghanistan's second-ever presidential elections, which
take place on Aug. 20. Karzai's main competitors are two of his former ministers
-- Ghani, who was finance minister from 2002 to 2004 and an adviser to the World
Bank for 10 years; and Abdullah Abdullah, an ophthalmologist who became a close
adviser to the legendary mujahedin commander Ahmed Shah Massoud (assassinated by
Al Qaeda just before the 9/11 attacks) and served as foreign minister under
Karzai until 2006. When I asked Abdullah what he'd do to stop drug smuggling, he
said, ''I wouldn't let my brother touch it.'' He was referring to Ahmed Wali
Karzai, the president's half-brother, who is accused of running Kandahar like a
mafia don and overseeing one of the local drug cartels. ''Seriously, you lose
your legitimacy if the perception is that your brother is doing it and
benefiting from millions of dollars.''

Ghani, on his Web site, has branded the Karzais a mafia family, ''Karzai
Incorporated.'' ''The largest threat to Afghanistan now is this government,'' he
told me recently. ''Just take one figure: last fiscal year from March 2007 to
2008, the Ministry of Finance collected 40 billion Afghanis, which is equivalent
to around $800 million. The same ministry declares that the real revenue should
have been 120 billion Afghanis. They are acknowledging that, due to corruption,
80 billion is being lost.'' That, he said, worked out to $1.6 billion. ''We go
beg the entire world: 'Please give us budget support; we need to pay our poor
teachers and civil servants.' If the revenue was collected we wouldn't have
needed a cent from the international community for the budget.''

Does Karzai care? Is this what he wants? ''I don't think so,'' Ghani said. ''But
I don't judge a president by his desires. I judge a president by his record and
his company. We ranked 117 on Transparency International in 2005. Now we rank
176, the fifth-most-corrupt country on earth. It happened under his watch. And
then he wants to run for office for another five years? Based on what? And the
team he put together: isn't it a declaration of war against the people of
Afghanistan?''

Over the winter I spent several days in the presidential palace, the Arg, with
Karzai and his entourage. I was hoping to find out who Karzai really is. Does he
condone the venality of his friends and family? Is he unable to stop it? Is this
just what life is in a country long torn by war? Did the West misjudge his
character -- or did it make it impossible for him to rule? Is he just in love
with power and pomp? And why, with all the accusations of criminality, the
unfulfilled promises, his plummeting popularity, would Hamid Karzai even want to
run again?

I put this last question to him on a gloomy afternoon over tea at the Arg
palace, where he lives and works and is confined much of the year. The question
appeared to stump him. He said he had tried and failed to find a suitable
replacement. Then he said, in his practiced English: ''I don't know what
happened. I decided to run.'' Then he said: ''Look, I will tell you. But then
I'll leave it up to you whether you want to print it or not.'' I was expecting
some shocking revelation. But instead he fumbled about and said, ''When needed,
my extreme toughness with our allies is an asset I want the Afghan people to
have if they choose so.'' And, ''The second reason, I don't know how to put
this. . . . I feel for the Afghan people, and they know that.'' It all sounded
so cryptic. As his train of thought neared its destination, he suddenly said:
''I'm a very, very, very simple person. I have no property. I have no money. I
have no love for luxury. If I find someone tomorrow that will combine all these
three. . . . '' He sighed and took a deep breath. ''I'm an exhausted person.
I've not begun this seven years ago. I've begun this when I was 22. I've not had
a private life since then. I deserve one. I long for one.'' He lingered on the O
of his longing. ''The moment I get this choice, I would leave.''

It was clear that Karzai believes in the image he has fashioned of himself as
protector and father of the Afghan nation. Or does he? Karzai is a theatrical
man -- a ham, even -- funny and charming. He flourished in the adulation of his
early years as head of state, when the fashion designer Tom Ford dubbed him the
chicest man on the planet. His theatrical qualities have carried him along for
some time. But what he actually believes is often hard to pin down. And lately
the wear and tear of performance is beginning to show, like the creases in a
fading diva. His friends told me he has health problems. He's skin and bones. He
always has a cold or a cough and takes effervescent vitamin-C tablets
compulsively, which he did as we spoke. ''He is stressed, short of patience,
short of temper,'' a friend said. He snaps easily. Promotes flatterers. Kills
the messenger. Hugs his enemies. Abuses his friends. And his twitching eye -- a
nervous tic, they say -- is unusually active.

Still, Karzai seems to feel he has a mission. Friends say he knows how bad his
reputation is and wants to redeem his legacy. When I asked who his role model
is, he said without hesitation, ''Gandhi.'' Ever since his days as a university
student in India he has been fascinated by the man's life and his ideas of
nonviolent liberation. Karzai clearly abhors violence. Tears came to his eyes
whenever we spoke about civilian casualties. He once had an aide, in the middle
of the night, go buy back a child bride whose parents had given her away to
repay a debt. Karzai and his aristocratic Pashtun family revere Ghaffar Khan,
the nonviolent Pashtun leader who lived from 1890 to 1988. Through his charisma
and belief in education, Ghaffar Khan mobilized a pacific movement known as the
Red Shirts, first against the British and then against Pakistan. It was a
remarkable feat, given the warrior nature of the Pashtun tribesmen. Khan became
known as the ''frontier Gandhi.''

Gandhi is also a model for Karzai, he told me, in terms of tolerance. ''You
can't imagine how much I've tolerated,'' he said, glaring from under his brow
and leaning into his desk where he keeps two photographs, one of his 2-year-old
son, Mirwais, and the other of the late King Zahir Shah. ''I was like a person
carrying a very delicate jar, a vase, in my hands, a very precious, delicate one
that is so valuable that you don't want it to drop, and you are walking through
storms, through rains, through wind, through excesses of all kinds,'' he said,
elongating his vowels and carrying himself away in the drama of his metaphor.
''You fall but you keep the vase, delicately holding it so it doesn't break.
That's how Afghanistan was,'' he said. ''Carrying it for so long you have to be
very accommodating. That weakens you.''

What accommodations? The warlords? The foreigners?

''Everything,'' he said. ''Everything, everything, everything! I had to balance
the U.S. and Iran in Afghanistan. I had to balance other countries in here. I
had to balance Europe. I had to balance the Muslim world. I had to make
Afghanistan a country where all work together for it. And that I have managed.
Fortunately. But, you know, at great personal stress and cost.''

The cost? Loneliness. A man painted into a corner. Every day he wakes to another
round of punches from the world's diplomats and news media. He studies the press
clippings, CNN, the BBC, the local news channels, ravenously and angrily. They
blame him and his brothers and his ministers for the country's corruption, for
the insurgency eating away at the nation, for running a narco-state (in Hillary
Clinton's phrase) and even for the food shortages facing eight million Afghans.
In January, when Karzai lashed out at one of his vice presidents in a cabinet
meeting, accusing him of conspiring with foreigners, then threatened to go to
the mountains to fight the invaders himself, word went around that Karzai was on
the verge of a nervous breakdown.

It wasn't hard to see why. ''No one is on his side,'' a foreign observer told me
with mild pity. ''He's trapped in the palace, trapped by his family.'' When a
bomb went off at the German Embassy in January, all the windows of his house
were blown out. ''And little Mirwais,'' he said, ''was running around the house
going bam-bam-bang-bang! Nobody had told Karzai. He was in his office. He got
home and they were mending the windows.''

The president's residence sits within the Arg palace grounds along a tree-lined
path behind the Gul Khanna (the House of Flowers), where Karzai has his office.
At the end of the workday, the president takes a brisk 10-minute walk. When I
followed after him one cold evening, 10 men or more covered him as he walked
along. His cellphone rang. He slipped aside. The men tried to stay near.
Assassins have repeatedly tried to kill Karzai. A bullet just missed him in
Kandahar in 2002. In 2007, he was rocketed during a speech in Ghazni, between
Kabul and Kandahar -- but he stayed onstage. He insisted on holding an
Independence Day parade last year despite security warnings. And sure enough, a
well-trained hit squad fired on the parade, killing several officials and
narrowly missing the president. For the last two years security has been so
tight, friends say, that the president is getting what they call the Arg
syndrome. Sometimes at night he has been known to slip out of the palace with a
bodyguard in a beat-up car just to drive around Kabul and see what's going on.
He will express surprise, delight, even, at the new buildings and sights.

I recently asked an old friend of Karzai's why Karzai would choose as his
running mate Muhammad Fahim, a controversial figure who has been accused of
multiple human rights abuses over many years. ''Karzai believes that his two
greatest mistakes as president were the removals of Sher Muhammad Akhundzada and
Marshal Fahim,'' he said. Both happened under intense Western pressure. The
reason he regretted their removal was not that he thought they were honest
statesmen but that he found they were more trouble out of office. Fahim's
removal lost him mujahedin support, and Akhundzada's removal triggered the fall
of Helmand Province to the Taliban.

To understand why everyone was so shocked that Karzai chose Fahim as his running
mate, you need to know a little of the personal history between the two men. It
shows how warlordism does and doesn't work -- and, in a sense, what Karzai will
forgive to stay in power. Back in 1994, the mujahedin factions who fought off
the Soviets were supposed to be cooperating in a coalition government. Instead
they were deep in a civil war, rocketing one another and Kabul to smithereens.

One of these factions belonged to Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, today an outlawed
insurgent but then prime minister and head of a large, mostly ethnic-Pashtun
political party. Another belonged to the man who was then Afghanistan's
president, Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of a largely Tajik party. In this
government, Karzai was deputy foreign minister and trying, as is his wont, to
play conciliator between the factions. But Rabbani and his men began to suspect
that Karzai was plotting something with Hekmatyar. Rabbani's head of
intelligence was none other than Muhammad Fahim. Karzai was hauled into an
interrogation center in Kabul from which few returned alive. But just as the
interrogation got under way, a rocket slammed into the roof of the building.
Karzai fled to Pakistan.

In 1996, after the Taliban captured Kabul and threw out the mujahedin factions,
Karzai briefly considered becoming an ambassador for the Taliban government.
After all, the Taliban were mostly, like Karzai, Kandahari Pashtuns; he knew
many of them. But the position went to someone else. From that time until 2001,
he joined a broad coalition of friends and enemies seeking a grand loya jirga,
or tribal council, to bring peace to Afghanistan.

With the overthrow of the Taliban, the ethnic Tajiks who made up the bulk of the
Northern Alliance considered themselves the victors. At the Bonn Conference held
in Germany in December 2001 to create the future Afghan government, the Northern
Alliance Tajiks demanded and got the most important ministries. Given
Afghanistan's demographics, everyone knew they needed an ethnic Pashtun as
president, and Abdullah Abdullah, who was then with the Northern Alliance,
pressed the case for Karzai. He seemed the perfect choice at the time, Abdullah
recently told me: a Pashtun from a landed family in Kandahar, known to the
Northern Alliance through years of jihad and then various peace processes.
''After fighting all those years against the Taliban, who were a southern
Pashtun movement,'' Abdullah told me recently, ''for the north to push for
someone from the south was breaking the ice and a milestone that we could build
a future on.''

Karzai's personal tale didn't hurt. Two weeks after 9/11, he hopped on the back
of a friend's motorcycle in Quetta, Pakistan, and journeyed into the
Taliban-infested Afghan mountains to persuade the tribes to revolt. He had no
gunmen with him. Just a satellite phone from the C.I.A. and faith in his powers
of persuasion. He and the men he gathered were chased by the Taliban but fought
them off. ''They called for help to the C.I.A.,'' recalls Jason Amerine, who was
a Special Forces captain assigned to make contact with Karzai. Navy Seals
landed, pulled Karzai and tribal leaders out and flew them to a base in
Pakistan. Even then, Karzai understood that appearances mean everything in a
part of the world where conspiracy is taken as truth. He was willing to fudge
the facts to seal the legend of his heroism. Live on the BBC, he insisted he was
somewhere in Afghanistan. In fact, he was with Amerine in Pakistan. Nevertheless
he did persuade the very reluctant Americans to help him return to Taliban land.
''Karzai was such a dark horse in all this that there was no real reason for
anyone to risk it,'' Amerine said. ''He had no guys in the south. His plan was
very idealistic: 'If we show up, the south will rise.' '' In the end, Afghans
did rise against the Taliban, including in the south. Karzai was right. And his
legend stuck.

So it was that on a cold December evening in 2001, Hamid Karzai flew from
Kandahar to Kabul to become the interim leader of the new Afghanistan. He had
just a few men with him, including his uncle Aziz and his younger half-brother,
Shawali, when he stepped onto the tarmac. There to greet him was Fahim, brow
furrowed, as it always is, along with more than a hundred of his
soldier-bodyguards.

''Where are all your men?'' he asked Karzai.

''You are my men,'' Karzai said to Fahim and his band of Northern Alliance
fighters. ''All of you who are Afghans are my men.''

Fahim was stunned. No tribesmen? No bodyguards? No soldiers? A civilian leader
all alone? A southern Pashtun aristocrat putting himself in the hands of the
Tajik northerners? Karzai entrusting his life to his former tormentor? It was a
gesture of infinite faith.

From that day onward, Fahim became a thorn in Karzai's side, always reminding
Karzai that his life depended on him. After Karzai's Pashtun vice president,
Haji Qadir, was assassinated in July 2002, Karzai so distrusted Fahim's
bodyguards (Fahim was then in charge of the army) that he accepted protection
from U.S. forces. Cabinet meetings featured regular clashes between the
so-called warlords on one hand and the technocrats -- or dogwashers, as the
educated Afghan returnees were known -- on the other. In particular, men like
Fahim and Ashraf Ghani (then minister of finance) were at each other's throats.
And Karzai was once again in the middle.

Zia Mojadedi, an old friend of Karzai's and now the ambassador to Poland, put
much of the blame for the dysfunctional cabinet on the international community.
''Most of the NATO members have a gentleman in the cabinet,'' he told me. ''Each
one defends his own man. And those who make donations are the ones deciding. So
he was confused.'' One famous example is Dostum, the Uzbek warlord from the
north. After he beat up and detained a political rival, he drank himself into a
wild state and, in King Kong fashion, took up a position on the roof of his
garish mansion in Kabul, baiting the police and vowing that they'd never take
him alive. Karzai wanted to arrest him. But the Turks, who are major donors and
are ethnically related to the Uzbeks, vehemently opposed the move. Finally a
deal was worked out for Dostum to go for some rest and rehab in Turkey.

For years everyone was telling Karzai to get rid of Zarar Ahmad Muqbil, his
minister of the interior, whom senior U.N. officials accused of taking kickbacks
from organized-crime rings within the ministry. But the Americans loved him on
account of the glowing reports submitted by his American mentor. The
internationals referred to her as ''Rosa Klebb,'' after the infamous Russian
counterintelligence agent in the Ian Fleming novel ''From Russia With Love,''
who sported a venom-laden dart in her shoe. Even Karzai used to tease Muqbil,
saying to him, ''How is your godmother?''

''In a microcosm, the problem with the whole of Afghanistan was Muqbil,'' says
Jawed Ludin, Karzai's former chief of staff, who watched the whole fiasco with
Zarar Muqbil unfold firsthand. ''To what extent do you blame Karzai? On the one
hand, the British ambassador and friends would tell him Zarar was incompetent
and should be removed. On the other, the American would praise him and say he's
doing a fine job. And the Americans were the largest donor to police reform.''

Karzai told me, ''I was a president without any resources directly in my
control.'' It was a defensive response, but it was also true. According to one
palace official: ''Early as 2003, in discussions with Donald Rumsfeld, Karzai
would say: 'Look, we cannot live with this situation, when you think I am the
president, but I am not. We cannot leave Dostum in the north, Shirzai in
Kandahar, Ismail Khan in Herat.' And you know what Rumsfeld said? 'Look, Mr.
President, they are our friends, and we do not want a green-on-green situation.'
I didn't know this phrase then.'' Green on green: friendly soldier against
friendly soldier.

Later that year, Karzai threatened to resign if the warlords who were hogging
all the customs revenue didn't turn their dividends over to the central
government. A compromise was reached: the first of many. Karzai began to make
peace, accommodating jihadis, Communists, technocrats, dogwashers, war
criminals, democrats. All had a place in Karzai's big tent. The next two years
could be called Karzai's honeymoon period. Two pillars were essential to his
stability -- Lakhdar Brahimi, the wise old Algerian resistance leader and
diplomat who headed up the U.N. mission, and Zalmay Khalilzad, an
Afghan-American steeped in the traditions both of Afghan tribal horse-trading
and American bureaucracy. They could help Karzai make tough decisions and back
them up with American muscle.

Then, in 2004, he won the first presidential elections ever held in Afghanistan.
Brahimi and Khalilzad left -- and by 2005, most of the reformers around Karzai
either walked away or were not invited back into his cabinet. Among those who
left was Ashraf Ghani. ''In 2005, Karzai could have taken the country in any
direction he wished,'' Ghani told me. ''His legitimacy knew no bounds.'' What
happened? ''He failed to lead,'' Ghani said.

Or maybe he led the only way he knew how. At heart, Karzai is a Pashtun tribal
leader, just like his father was. What are the responsibilities of the tribal
leader? To protect his property (livestock and women), his land and his people.
If one of your people is put in jail, whether he lays mines, steals or murders,
you're obliged to get him out and let the tribe deal with him. If the law helps
your case, great. If not, tradition will do. That tradition is evident all over
the campaign trail, where Karzai has even released criminals from prison so they
can campaign for him.

When Karzai's father was killed in Pakistan in 1999, his family and tribesmen
decided that, because his older brothers were living in America, Hamid would
take over as a leader of the tribe and, in keeping with tradition, they placed
the turban on his head. When he assumed the presidency, he took what he knew
from tribal leadership and applied it to his method of rule. He sees himself as
the tribal leader of all Afghans. As such he's the last resort for those seeking
to rectify injustice. ''In his dream he is a king,'' one friend says.

Other close friends of Karzai describe his leadership style as a kind of
three-card monte where you never know which card will appear. One card is
tribal. ''His father was head of the tribe, and in tribal culture you depend on
loyalty of individuals rather than institutions,'' said Ali Jalali, his former
interior minister and a friend from refugee days in Pakistan. ''You always try
to be a patron to people close and loyal to you.'' The second is the factional
politics of resistance in Peshawar, where mujahedin leaders organized their
resistance to the Soviet occupation. ''Jihadi politics is mostly wheeling,
dealing, no strategy, all tactical,'' Jalali continued. ''Please people here.
Break promises there.'' And the third is democracy. He cherishes the values of
democracy but has no faith in its institutions. ''How he reconciles these
competing demands creates his style of leadership,'' Jalali said. In reality,
said another friend, ''he sees human rights, freedom of the press, the law, the
constitution as chains around his hands and legs.''

He is in his element playing Solomon, hosting elders for lunch in the palatial
dining hall. They request a dam or a road or the release from custody of a
tribesman accused of terrorism or kidnapping. If they are important politically
-- and, in the case of a prisoner, can vouch for his future behavior -- Karzai
often agrees, in kingly fashion.

He resists looking deeply into the consequences of his decisions. Last year,
Karzai's wife, Zeenat, a gynecologist, saw a report on television about the rape
of a very young girl and her family's futile quest for justice. Karzai was
horrified. He had the police and prosecutor fired. He put the fight against rape
on the national agenda.

Not long after, the other Karzai, the political animal, meddled in an obscure
case in which a woman named Sara was raped by three men who were brothers. The
evidence was overwhelming, and the brothers' conviction was upheld to the
highest court. But Karzai issued a decree releasing them. Sara went mad, and her
husband was murdered.

I asked Karzai in February: ''Why did you do that?''

''The story turned out to be different,'' he said. He couldn't remember the
details and asked an aide to look into it.

In fact, the brothers reported to a local strongman, Mawlawi Islam, who was a
member of Parliament and an important ally of Karzai's. Islam's son, who works
in the Arg palace, told me that he had asked the palace staff to examine the
case. The palace's administrative office then developed another story -- told to
Karzai, and later to me -- claiming Sara's rape never took place and adding that
her son had raped the wife of one of the convicted brothers. It became so
convoluted that Karzai probably didn't know the details. Still, he signed a
decree releasing the brothers in the name of Islamic mercy for their mother.

''We have a saying, When you come to power your eyes go blind, your ears go deaf
and you don't know anything anymore,'' an old Kandahari friend of the
president's told me.

Hence, perhaps, Karzai's willful blindness about what his own brothers are up
to. In explaining Karzai's relationship to his brothers, Karzai's family and
friends allude to his outcast childhood -- of the seven sons, he was not one of
his father's favorites, they say. ''The mad one,'' that's how his father called
him. The pet name stuck. A quiet boy, a dreamer, an odd one who could scare the
other boys with his strange faces and moods, who loved to jump on his horse in
jeans and cowboy boots and ride around as if in an American movie.

Amin Arsala, an avuncular former diplomat and adviser to Karzai who considered
running for president, often warned Karzai about his brothers ruining his
reputation. But either he cannot or will not stand up to them. There's a
revolving door of diplomats, politicians and tribal leaders who all see Karzai,
complain about his brothers and then leave, knowing he'll do nothing.

Qayum, an older brother, has spent most of his life in America running Afghan
restaurants and, during the days of jihad, he introduced Karzai to U.S.
government officials. He is a political guru for Karzai, though he complains
Karzai doesn't listen to him. He resigned as a member of Parliament for Kandahar
and spends much of his time in Saudi Arabia, trying to bring the Taliban in from
the cold. Mahmoud is the hotblooded business mogul, vice chairman of the
Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce. He says he wants to promote free-market
capitalism and complained to me one morning at his home in Kabul that his
brother doesn't understand economics and can't run the government. ''It's
mujahedin,'' he told me, ''it's personal relationships, cash basis, no
institutions.''

Many Afghans consider Mahmoud a bully who has muscled his way into the biggest
business projects. He has 50 percent of Afghanistan's Toyota distributions by
way of Jack Kemp, who introduced Mahmoud to Toyota executives. Karzai was
unhappy about his family's involvement in such dealings, recalled Zalmay
Khalilzad, who was the American ambassador at the time, adding, ''He had the
Japanese ambassador summoned to the palace to tell him, 'Don't give the
dealership to my brother Mahmoud.' '' But the Japanese listened to Kemp, not
Karzai. Mahmoud is a major shareholder in Kabul Bank and, according to The New
York Times, purchased the shares with a loan issued by the bank's founder. And
he persuaded the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a U.S. government
agency, to offer him loans for a real estate development in Kandahar that
everyone considers at once lovely and dodgy. Nice homes, grounds, guards,
school. But it was government land purchased by the Karzais at $250 a jereb and
sold at $28,000 a jereb.

Karzai's response? ''My brother is an American businessman,'' he told me.
''Business has got nothing to do with me. I don't know if he has shares in the
Kabul Bank, but if he has, what can I do?'' This habit of saying ''What can I
do?'' is precisely what has undermined Karzai among many Afghans.

The brother who really gives the president heartburn is Ahmed Wali, his younger
half-brother. A possibly apocryphal story that Afghans and diplomats love to
repeat involves the president asking Ahmed Wali: ''Are you engaged with the drug
networks? Are you aiding x, y and z?'' In the story, Ahmed Wali storms out of
the meeting saying: ''Well, Hamid, at least I'm only ruining Kandahar. You're
ruining the whole country.''

To me, Karzai claimed that after an article about his brother and drugs appeared
in The New York Times: ''I called the U.S. government and intelligence here to
ask them, and they said: 'Totally wrong. We are sorry for that article.' '' (A
State Department spokesman would not comment on whether this conversation even
took place.)

Then he added, ''So I've done my job on that.''

Yet on every trip I've made to Kandahar, I have heard another story about Ahmed
Wali and drugs. Some of the people who have recounted the incidents are now
dead. Like Malim Akbar Khakrezwal, an elder of the Alakozai tribe. In 2006, he
took me around the fertile lands of his district, which are now infiltrated by
Taliban. He told me that when he was provincial-intelligence chief, he captured
1,400 kilograms of opium belonging to Jan Muhammad, then governor of Uruzgan and
a very close friend of the president. Jan Muhammad told Akbar to release the
opium, and he refused. ''My brother called me and said, 'We are not able to
fight these big people,' '' Akbar told me. '' 'We are weak. Release them.' So I
went to Ahmed Wali and said: 'You are my commander; what should I do with this
opium? Should I give it back to Jan Muhammad?' 'Yes. Give it back,' he said.
Twenty days later I was released from my position.'' Last year he was
assassinated.

A Western intelligence official who has spent much of the last seven years in
Kandahar and, for obvious reasons, wanted to remain anonymous, told me: ''The
Karzai family has opium and blood on their hands. They systematically install
low-level officials up to provincial governors to make sure that, from the farm
gate, in bulk, the opium is moved unfettered. When history analyzes this period
and looks at this family, it will uncover a litany of extensive corruption that
was tolerated because the West tolerated this family.''

Perhaps. Or not. As many Afghans have pointed out, U.S. history is full of
robber barons and of families who made their fortunes during Prohibition, and in
the words of Ashraf Ghani ''turned very decent as families.''

''Karzai should see this as 'Godfather II,' '' a U.N. official says. ''You got
to get out of the business and go legit.''

This winter, as the stakes became higher and the new Obama administration
appeared to snub Karzai, his theatrics began to take a more menacing turn. He
was becoming less decisive and more distrustful of his advisers. He saw plots in
every corner, interpreting the moves of Afghans, Americans and especially the
British as proof that ''they'' were trying to unseat him. And in fact they were
and maybe still are. The new U.S. ambassador, Karl Eikenberry, barely a month
into his term, made a point of showing up at news conferences with other
presidential candidates, including Ghani and Abdullah. Karzai threw a kind of
presidential tantrum at his own press conference and accused the foreigners of
intervening in Afghanistan's national sovereignty (which, as financiers,
administrators and protectors, they do every day). ''That is of immense
sensitivity to the people of Afghanistan and to myself, and that is something
that we will fight tooth and nail,'' Karzai said.

The American tactic seemingly worked. Afghans began talking overnight about how
the Americans had adopted a new candidate -- either Ghani or Abdullah. And while
few Afghans knew much about either rival, thanks to Karzai's anger at
Eikenberry, the names of Ghani and Abdullah were mentioned over and over in the
news.

Paranoid people usually do, of course, have enemies. Diplomats smile over meals
with Karzai, bring him gifts from abroad and then send reports home saying he's
unsteady. One diplomat seasoned in the Middle East and Asia told me, ''He's the
most conspiratorial leader I've ever met.'' Perhaps. But you have to see his
presidency from Karzai's point of view.

If there was a clear turning point, a moment when the Karzai government began to
lose its grip, it was in the spring of 2006. On a sunny morning at the end of
that May, on the northern outskirts of Kabul, an American soldier in a convoy
lost control of his truck and careered into rush-hour traffic. Five people were
killed. Many more were wounded. Afghans began pelting the American vehicles with
stones. The Americans fired in the air. By the time word spread across Kabul,
the story had ballooned into a massacre of civilians by drunken American
soldiers. Waves of young Afghan men set buildings ablaze, attacking anyone and
anything associated with foreigners and the government. They shouted, ''Down
with America,'' and ''Down with Karzai,'' as they burned a billboard-size
portrait of the president. Even medical students joined the mob. The police were
nowhere to be seen; or if they were, it was as ordinary rioters who'd thrown off
their uniforms.

The mob raged on for six hours. A dozen people were killed and a hundred
wounded. The defense minister finally deployed troops onto the streets. Karzai
ordered a curfew and went on TV to reassure the population.

Inside the Arg palace, no one was reassured, least of all Karzai. ''He was
shocked at how vulnerable we all were,'' Jawed Ludin, then Karzai's chief of
staff, told me not long ago. ''And he was angry with the Afghan police and
international security forces.'' This wasn't the Taliban. This wasn't Pakistan.
It was a public revolt. And there were no government institutions that could
stop it.

Karzai began to suspect a plot to unseat him. ''He knew that Marshal Fahim was
unhappy with him ever since he was removed as vice president and minister of
defense,'' one palace official recalls. Karzai was desperate to find out whether
the riots were spontaneous or whether Fahim orchestrated them. For hours on end,
he sat in a room behind his office watching footage collected from various
sources. Much of it showed the mob arriving at Parliament. Why, Karzai wondered,
did Yunous Qanooni, the speaker of the Parliament, send out a delegation to
negotiate with the rioters as if they were a legitimate group and not a bunch of
hooligans? Qanooni and Fahim (both Tajiks from the Northern Alliance) must have
been up to something. But what?

''Every Pashtun was convinced it was a Tajik plot led by the Northern
Alliance,'' Ronald Neumann, the U.S. ambassador at the time, told me. Most
Kabulis agreed. Some medical students, who happily participated in the mayhem,
told me that Northern Alliance commanders were ''among us.'' A British adviser
to the government told me: ''I was with Rabbani's son in his hotel while he
claimed to be organizing the riots from his mobile phone and boasting about it.
It was completely bizarre.'' Whether or not it was organized, the students and
young men happily joined in the fray to let off four years of pent-up
frustration. They were fed up with the arrogance of American soldiers. They were
fed up with hearing about the billions of aid dollars that came to Afghanistan
and went into the pockets of American contractors and their Afghan partners. And
they were terrified by the return of the Taliban, not just in the south but
sneaking around various neighborhoods of Kabul.

Karzai couldn't get a straight answer from anyone. And when he didn't get to the
bottom of it, he suspected his own intelligence apparatus. Amrullah Saleh, his
head of intelligence, had been Fahim's translator back in the anti-Soviet days
of jihad. Saleh was America's man, not Karzai's choice. Frustrated and rash,
Karzai questioned Saleh's loyalty in front of other officials. Saleh submitted
his resignation (which was not accepted). It wasn't the first and certainly
wouldn't be the last time Saleh tried to resign.

And what about the Americans? The C.I.A.'s station chief in Kabul at the time
was a friend of Karzai's from their days together in the Uruzgan mountains
fighting the Taliban. Karzai met with him and Ambassador Neumann. Karzai was
livid and unnerved. If the riots were spontaneous, Karzai told them, he should
resign. It means they don't want you here and they don't want me, and I don't
want to remain the president. I want to leave.

The station chief was firm, according to a source who was present. No, Mr.
President, you are not leaving.

''I felt really bad for him,'' Jawed Ludin recalled. Karzai was so alone. He
continued to watch the riot footage in his back room, trying to glean the plot.
''I realized that, at that time, he had no dependable instrument of power,''
Ludin said. ''He didn't have the money, the police, the intelligence. He had
nothing.''

It was Karzai's Nixon moment. People inside and outside the palace spoke of life
''before the 8th of Jowza'' (the date of the riots) and ''after the 8th of
Jowza.'' That is, before May 29, 2006, and after.

Whom could he trust? All he could do was begin recasting the play, substituting
Pashtun jihadi commanders for non-Pashtun ones. He began to surround himself
with the former loyalists of his old friend Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. This was the
same commander whom the Americans named, in 2003, as a ''specially designated
global terrorist.'' This was the man who had recently declared himself an open
ally of Al Qaeda. But while Karzai's new cohort might still have had loyalties
to Hekmatyar, they could at least be organized, disciplined and trusted to a
certain extent.

The riots woke Karzai up to the fact that, in choosing not to have a political
party, he had completely isolated himself. He had no constituency. He had
thought he could be a symbol of unity for all Afghans, but even a Mandela or a
Gandhi needed a party or a grass-roots movement. Karzai had little more than his
own family and weekly video conferences with President George Bush. So the
Pashtun jihadis gradually became his constituency and insurance policy.

The riots coincided with the resurgence of the Taliban, the American withdrawal
from the south and the slow arrival of disjointed NATO forces. Every NATO
country came with its own mandate and its own rules of engagement. And most of
them thought they were deploying to a peacekeeping mission. Meanwhile, elements
in the Pakistani military-intelligence agency were sending in suicide bombers
and Taliban foot soldiers to take over Kandahar, Helmand, Uruzgan, Zabul. Such a
chaotic scene needed a firm, decisive and confident hand.

In 2005 Sima Simar, the chairwoman of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, who knew Karzai from exile days in Pakistan, along with Louise
Arbour, the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, presented Karzai with a
survey titled ''A Call for Justice.'' The findings were astounding. Seventy
percent of Afghans said they had suffered direct losses, injuries and violations
over two decades of war. They wanted war criminals brought to justice and barred
from public office. Karzai told Arbour at the time: ''Madam High Commissioner, I
know justice is very important. Human beings are prisoners of their memories. If
you don't deal with them properly you cannot get rid of them.''

''He spoke like Mandela, Martin Luther King,'' recalled Nader Nadery, a member
of the commission that had been fighting to get Karzai to support dealing with
the crimes of the past. Karzai appointed a special committee to create an action
plan for transitional justice -- including ministers and judicial advisers who
would work alongside the U.N. By late 2006, they had arrived at a compromise
plan. There would be a vetting process, truth commissions and even the
possibility of tribunals.

On Dec. 10, 2006, Karzai attended the international Human Rights Day event at
the national television and radio hall in Kabul. Nadery showed a documentary in
the middle of the event -- a collection of harrowing tales by survivors of war
crimes from the last two decades. The film silenced the hall. Karzai then got up
and set aside his prepared speech.

He spoke about the courage of a girl in the film who jumped from the fifth floor
to save her honor because warlords wanted to rape her. He spoke of the mass
graves and massacres and announced that he was launching the long-awaited action
plan for peace, reconciliation and justice. And from now on, this day would be
reserved to give dignity to the victims.

Karzai then moved from the sufferings of the past to the present. Not only did
he have no power to stop the warlords, he said, ''we can't prevent the
terrorists from coming from Pakistan. And we can't prevent the coalition from
bombing the civilians. And our children are dying because of this.'' He told the
story of a 2-year-old girl from Kandahar who'd just been brought to the palace.
A NATO airstrike killed her entire family and left her paralyzed. The toll of
the year, his helplessness, the dying children -- it was all too much. The
president's voice broke, his lips trembled and he began to cry. He took a
handkerchief from under his glass to dry his eyes. ''Cruelty at the highest
level,'' he quivered. ''The cruelty is too much.''

The president, too, was suffering. Everyone in the hall was weeping.

A few days later, Human Rights Watch released a report documenting 22 years of
war crimes by the communists, the mujahedin and the Taliban. The list included
current and former government officials like Rabbani, Fahim, Dostum.

The warlords smelled a plot. Using their parliamentary power, they drafted
legislation to give themselves amnesty for all past crimes. They bused their
supporters in from all over the country. Ten thousand people gathered in Ghazi
Stadium, the site of the Taliban's notorious public executions. They waved
placards, ''Long Live Dostum,'' ''Death to America,'' ''Death to Human Rights,''
''Death to Dogwashers.'' Most of the leaders of the civil-war factions showed up
for the fun.

''After that, Karzai became afraid,'' Nadery said. Though he never rejected the
amnesty law, he also never signed it. It was another turning point in Karzai's
presidency. Rangin Spanta, who was part of the transitional-justice action
committee and is now foreign minister, told me he tried to resign: ''Karzai
rejected my resignation. 'You must be quiet,' he said. 'Let us look forward,
because the balance of power is not in our interest.' '' Maybe. But there are
more Afghans who were victims of the warlords than who supported them. And most
of those warlords -- Sayyaf, Dostum, Fahim, Khalili, Mohaqiq -- went on to join
Karzai's presidential re-election campaign.

When I asked Karzai about the return of warlords to power, he said: ''It's a
great thing to talk about the kind of justice that is ideal and that we all
should have. But do we have the means? Do we have the luxury of that?''

By late 2007, Karzai's turn toward accommodation with warlords, tribalism and
semiretired jihadis -- and away from the international community -- seems to
have been completed. The palace had become like a Shakespearean stage, its
officials, like so many Iagos, filling Karzai's mind with plots and treachery.
The British and the Americans, worried that Afghanistan was sinking beyond
repair, conceived the position of a civilian czar who could coordinate the U.N.
mission and the NATO mission and possibly bring some order into the chaos of the
Arg palace. The man they chose was the British diplomat Paddy Ashdown, who had
been the international community's high representative to Bosnia until 2006.
Karzai was at first intrigued by the idea and even accepted it. But the Iagos in
the palace feared they would lose their gatekeeping status and the money they
earned from it. They persuaded Karzai that the choice of Ashdown, who was born
in British India to a colonial family and who had served as a British spy, was
evidence of a British conspiracy.

Karzai has a complicated relationship with the British. He favors English shoes.
He was a fan of ''Last of the Summer Wine,'' a three-decades-long BBC sitcom
about the madcap adventures of elderly friends in the Yorkshire countryside. He
has a romantic fascination with British royalty and rearranged his schedule to
attend the Prince of Wales's 60th birthday. Most of the other attendees were
real royalty. ''He thinks the Prince of Wales is a sensitive man, who
understands him and Islam and the region,'' one diplomat explained. On another
occasion he visited the prince's house in Scotland, seizing the chance to break
out of his palace prison and stride across the moors for hours. Perhaps it
reminded him of his days at college in Simla, where he used to walk for miles
across the Indian hills.

''Maybe he just pretends to be a great lover of English culture,'' the diplomat
told me. ''He thinks they're in league with the Pakistanis and that they are
two-faced and tricky and if they wanted to they could defeat the Taliban but
they don't because they want to keep their troops there.''

Karzai believes that evidence for a British conspiracy can be found in the story
of Musa Qala, a collection of villages in the deserts of Helmand and a
crossroads in the drug-transport routes. The tale has become a ''Rashomon''-like
parable. For Karzai it is a story of British duplicity. For the British it is a
story of Karzai's treachery and American bullying. And for the Americans it's a
story of European appeasement and Karzai's madness.

In October 2006, after months of fighting between the British and Taliban that
had left everyone exhausted and bloodied, all sides agreed on a truce. The
British and the Taliban pulled back. The elders promised to keep the Taliban
out. But almost immediately there were problems. The Taliban began creeping in.
The town fell again. The Americans accused the British of wimping out of a
fight. They pressured Karzai to distance himself from the whole scenario.

Gen. David Richards, the British officer in charge of NATO forces in
Afghanistan, was caught in the middle of it all. Karzai liked and trusted
Richards and appreciated his style. ''He'd sometimes get me over three or four
times a day to talk about all sorts of things, not just military,'' Richards
recalled. Karzai gave Richards and Helmand's governor, Muhammad Daud, who helped
organize the truce, his blessing. ''The U.S. military and, I suspect, the C.I.A.
were pretty hostile to it from the outset,'' Richards told me. Gen. Dan McNeill
of the U.S. Army made no secret of his feelings. Later, when he replaced
Richards, he vowed that there'd be no ''Musa Qalas'' on his watch. And to drive
the point home, McNeill began bombing targets around the district as soon as he
took over from Richards.

Karzai was, of course, caught in the middle between the British and the
Americans. The Americans had more money, more troops, more power. To make
matters worse, on the heels of Musa Qala, General Richards flew to Islamabad to
see Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf. ''I delivered Musharraf a
pretty sharp message that we expected him to do more to help, but I think Karzai
believed that I was getting too close to Musharraf,'' Richards told me. Richards
began passing notes between the two hostile presidents, trying to get them to
work with each other.

The palace advisers seized on those visits as proof that the British were going
to sell out Afghanistan. They told Karzai that Richards and Musharraf didn't
talk about Afghanistan at all. They talked about London and terrorism. Look at
Helmand, they'd say. It used to be so peaceful. Until the British forced you to
remove Sher Muhammad Akhundzada. Whom did they replace him with? Muhammad Daud,
plucked from the National Security Council. Who constructed the National
Security Council? The British. Who paid for it? The British. Who has advisers
there? The British.

The advisers pushed Karzai closer to the edge. Look around you, closer to home,
they said. Is that not a coup in the works? Jawed Ludin, the chief of staff, and
Hanif Atmar, minister of education, had both studied in Britain. They have
nightly dinners and meetings with the minister of defense, the minister of
foreign affairs. . . .

One day in front of several people inside the palace, Karzai turned accusingly
on Ludin and Atmar: There's news the British are conspiring against us, against
me personally. There's news that you are meeting very frequently. What is
happening? Why are you meeting?

They replied that they were just getting together socially.

Karzai said he didn't believe them, according to an Afghan official present at
the incident.

The next day Karzai regretted his words, as he often does. He apologized. It was
too late. Both men submitted their resignations. Ludin became ambassador to
Norway. Atmar stayed on as minister for education, but he and the president
hardly spoke for months until Karzai appointed him as the new minister of the
interior. These rifts have since healed and Karzai's men have rallied for the
presidential campaign.

''Every conceivable lie is told to the president to alienate him from his
friends,'' Ashraf Ghani told me. ''He accused me in front of Secretary Rice and
the British secretary of joining Ashdown in a conspiracy to unseat him. I had a
family illness in Dubai around the clock. I met with Paddy Ashdown once in my
life. Yet the Afghan government for a week was concentrating on an alleged
conspiracy.''

By the end of 2007, Karzai's worst fears seemed to come to fruition. The new
governor of Helmand, an old friend of Karzai's father, claimed to have uncovered
a plot by the British for a Taliban training camp. The allegations were so
far-fetched that the entire diplomatic community began to think Karzai had gone
mad. In reality, Michael Semple, then the European Union's political adviser,
had come up with a plan for a Taliban re-education camp in Helmand, and several
of Karzai's advisers had agreed to it. Yet, in front of his security team,
Karzai accused the British of total treachery.

According to one diplomat, the British responded that they had been trying to
pursue reconciliation and had documents approving the project signed by
Afghanistan's ministry of the interior and by its intelligence service. Karzai's
advisers squirmed and said nothing. Apparently no one had dared to tell Karzai
about the camp.

The damage was done. Enraged, Karzai had Michael Semple and Mervyn Patterson,
two of the foreigners most knowledgeable about Afghanistan, thrown out of the
country and an Afghan general imprisoned.

I asked Karzai if he really believes, as so many Afghans do, that the British
and Americans don't want the Taliban defeated. ''I don't know,'' he said. ''But
I wonder. After all, I am also an Afghan. So I have to believe in what the
majority of the Afghan people believe in.'' And that the British want the
Taliban to take over Helmand and Kandahar? ''The Taliban are already in
Helmand,'' he said with a knowing look.

''In my experience of working in 21 countries, one thing I've learned,'' the
American election guru James Carville told me over the phone in his Southern
drawl, ''unpopular incumbents do not do well in anything approaching a fair
election.'' Carville has taken on the job of consulting for Ashraf Ghani's
campaign. It's not for the money, he told me. It's more for sentimental reasons.
''I really want to help,'' he said. ''This is an instance where you know in your
heart the difference in Afghanistan in five years under Ashraf or under Karzai
will be really profound for the average person's life.''

The consensus in Afghanistan is that if the Aug. 20 elections are somehow fair
-- which is impossible to guarantee -- there will most likely be a runoff in a
second round. That is what the opposition is counting on. Despite the belief
across the country that the Americans or someone else will decide who becomes
president, I found people in remote corners campaigning for Abdullah, Ghani,
Karzai and others.

Karzai remains well ahead. What happens if he wins? ''What will you do then?'' I
asked an American working for the Obama administration.

''The first step is to shift away from the weekly pat on the back he got from
Bush but not be as removed as Obama was,'' he said. ''Then if we can reduce his
paranoia and if he has a renewed mandate and if we get the good Karzai, the
charming Karzai. . . .  '' It was a lot of ifs.

As for Karzai, he has patched up his relations with his ministers, his staff,
his enemies and various opponents, promising more positions than he can possibly
fill. What is most disturbing to Afghans, however, is the criminal personalities
he has brought into his campaign. They dominate both politics and the economy:
the glitzy new Kabul neighborhood of Sherpur, with its ''narcotecture'' palaces,
has become their home and the symbol of their power. In Sherpur's shadow, as I
sloshed through the streets of the other Kabul, past refugees in muddy tents and
a woman left like detritus on the road, quivering, I wondered how Afghanistan's
warlords, steeped in the jihadi tradition of intimidation, could ever bring
peace, or economic hope, to the Afghan people. ''With enough resources,'' the
American official said, ''a lot of these guys can clean up their act.''

That is not the belief of Dr. Azam Dadfar, the minister of higher education and
one of the few psychiatrists in the country trained in psychoanalysis. In the
1980s he ran a trauma clinic in the Peshawar refugee camps. Today, he said, out
of these decades of war, a new Afghan character type has emerged -- a borderline
personality characteristic of jihadis. ''Multiple-personality disorder is a
coping mechanism,'' he said, speaking about the whole generation of men who grew
up in jihad. ''A young man who lost his father, his home, he looks to become the
cleverest, the most criminal, the lion. In the jungle, there are no values but
self-preservation. There's no law. And this character learns to lie even to
himself.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: ISOLATION: President Hamid Karzai and advisers at the Arg
presidential palace, which Karzai rarely leaves. (pg.MM26)
LOYALISTS: Karzai has become heavily dependent on his inner circle. (pg.MM29)
THE CANDIDATES: Posters in Kabul for presidential candidates in the Aug. 20
elections in Afghanistan. (pg.MM30)
ABDULLAH FOR PRESIDENT: Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, a leading candidate, campaigning
in the Panjshir Valley. (pg.MM32)
GHANI FOR PRESIDENT: Ashraf Ghani, a former Afghan finance minister and adviser
to the World Bank, campaigning in Herat. (pg.MM33)
 FAMILY AFFAIRS: Elders beneath a painting of President Karzai's father, waiting
to meet the president's brother, head of the provincial council in Kandahar.
(pg.MM35) (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LYNSEY ADDARIO/VII NETWORK, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ELECTION FRAUD (77%); SMUGGLING (74%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (74%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (74%); VOTERS & VOTING (72%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (92%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             121 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 19, 2009 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Adrian DeWind, Tax Expert and Human Rights Watch Founder, Dies at 95

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Obituary; Pg.

LENGTH: 658 words


Adrian W. DeWind, an adviser to presidents and governors on tax law and an
influential advocate in the human rights and nuclear nonproliferation movements,
died on Aug. 7 at his home in Manhattan. He was 95.

His death was confirmed by his daughter Penny DeWind.

For more than 35 years, starting in 1948, Mr. DeWind was a partner and head of
the tax law department at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, a New York
law firm. But it was his federal government service that first brought him
distinction in the field of tax law.

In 1951 and 1952, Mr. DeWind was chief counsel to a House Ways and Means
subcommittee that found corruption in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, now the
Internal Revenue Service. The investigation, which was headline news for months,
led to the resignation or dismissal of high-level officials and to a major
overhaul of the bureau.

Mr. DeWind went into government service in 1942 at the behest of Randolph E.
Paul, then the general counsel to the Treasury Department, and helped draft
legislation for the financing of the war effort. In 1948, Mr. DeWind followed
his mentor to what was then known as Paul, Weiss, Wharton & Garrison. (He was
counsel to the House subcommittee while a partner at the firm.)

Over the next 40 years, Mr. DeWind served on tax policy commissions set up by
Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson and Govs. Hugh L. Carey and
Mario M. Cuomo of New York. In 1976, while Mr. DeWind was president of the
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, he headed a task force on
taxation for the Municipal Assistance Corporation, set up to steer New York City
out of the financial crisis of the 1970s. The task force created a stir when it
issued a report saying that the city's tax structure was ''counterproductive,
fostering an exodus of business, industry and individuals.''

But Mr. DeWind's interests extended far beyond tax codes to an extensive list of
civic activities. He was chairman of the National Resource Defense Council, a
nonprofit group that focuses on environmental issues and arms control, from 1980
to 1992. As chairman of the council, Mr. DeWind signed an agreement in 1986 with
the Soviet Academy of Sciences under which American and Soviet scientists
established on-site monitoring of nuclear underground testing in both countries.

''It showed that the U.S. and Soviet governments could work together on nuclear
verification,'' John H. Adams, the council's founding director, said in a
telephone interview on Monday, ''and as a direct result of this work, in 1994,
Clinton signed a comprehensive test ban treaty with the Soviet Union.''

Mr. DeWind was also a founder of Human Rights Watch. Kenneth Roth, the
organization's executive director, said Mr. DeWind traveled the world to monitor
abuses.

''He reported on the treatment of dissidents from the Soviet Union to South
Korea,'' Mr. Roth said. ''In the late '80s, he went to the highlands of
Guatemala in the midst of a brutal government crackdown and reported on the fate
of the indigenous population; the government was massacring Mayan villagers.''

Mr. DeWind also served on the boards of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational
Fund, the National Coalition Against Censorship and the Lawyers Alliance for
Nuclear Arms Control. He taught at the New York University School of Law from
1947 to 1955.

Adrian William DeWind was born in Chicago on Dec. 1, 1913, one of two sons of
Norman and Ethel DeWind. His father was a mechanical engineer. Mr. DeWind
graduated from Grinnell College, in Iowa, in 1934, and from Harvard Law School
in 1937.

Besides his daughter Penny, he is survived by his brother, Norman; another
daughter, Susan DeWind; two sons, John and Josh; seven grandchildren; and his
companion, Judith Gutman. His wife, the former Joan Mosenthal, a psychiatric
social worker who was a founder of an organization devoted to the protection of
butterflies and other invertebrates, died in 1997.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TAXES & TAXATION (96%); TAX LAW (93%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); TAX
AUTHORITIES (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS
(90%); TAX CONSULTING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (89%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
COMPREHENSIVE TEST BAN TREATY (78%); LAWYERS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%);
EXECUTIVES (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGAL SERVICES (78%);
PUBLIC POLICY (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (75%); INTERVIEWS
(75%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(73%); DISMISSALS (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%)

COMPANY: PAUL WEISS RIFKIND WHARTON & GARRISON LLP (92%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (92%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (92%)

PERSON: JOHN F KENNEDY (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 9, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Arrests Key Aides To Top Foes Of President

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


The Iranian authorities on Monday and Tuesday raided offices connected to two
senior opposition leaders in Tehran, arresting their top aides and seizing
documents, Iranian news agencies and the leaders' Web sites reported.

The two opposition leaders, Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hussein Moussavi, ran against
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in the June 12 election, which they say was rigged
by the government.

Mr. Karroubi, a former speaker of Parliament, has further charged that men and
women detained in the crackdown after the election were tortured and raped while
in custody.

Late Tuesday night, security forces arrested Alireza Hosseini-Beheshti, Mr.
Moussavi's top aide, according to mowjcamp.com, a Web site linked to Mr.
Moussavi.

Earlier on Tuesday, as Mr. Karroubi watched, the authorities sealed his office,
which had led the effort to document the prison abuses, the semiofficial ILNA
news agency reported. Mohammad Davari, the editor of Mr. Karroubi's Web site,
was arrested during the raid, the BBC's Persian-language Web site reported, and
another aide, Morteza Alviri, was arrested at his home.

Also on Tuesday, security forces emptied and sealed the office of the
Association for the Defense of Prisoners' Rights, opposition Web sites reported.
The office was founded by a reformist journalist, Emadedin Baghi.

On Monday, the authorities raided an office run by a Moussavi aide that recently
said it had confirmed the deaths of 72 protesters. The government has maintained
that only 30 people were killed, while some human rights organizations say
hundreds may have died.

The disputed election and subsequent protests opened a breach in the
government's leadership that has only widened over the summer. On Sunday,
Mohammad Khatami, the former reformist president, gave a speech in which he
criticized the government's ''fascist and totalitarian methods'' and urged his
supporters to expand their protests.

In light of Mr. Khatami's speech, many in the opposition detected a broader
purpose to the new raids than merely cutting off the prison-abuse
investigations. They are widely seen as a possible prelude to the arrests of Mr.
Karroubi and Mr. Moussavi -- a provocative step that hard-line clerics and
military commanders have been calling for lately.

''In a more immediate sense, they are shutting sources of information about
prison abuse,'' said Payam Akhavan, a professor of international law at McGill
University in Montreal, who is a former United Nations war crimes prosecutor and
a founder of the Iran Human Rights Documentation Center. ''But it is also a sign
that they want to move to the next stage to solidify their power by arresting
opposition leaders.''

The government may also be concerned about a fresh outburst of protests, with
the opening of the country's universities on Sept. 23 the next potential flash
point. A senior commander of the Revolutionary Guards said recently that the
security forces were preparing to deal with possible protests, the ISNA news
agency reported Tuesday.

''We will have a meeting with university officials next week to coordinate how
to confront possible incidents,'' the commander, Ali Fazli, was quoted as
saying.

The Revolutionary Guards are banned from entering university campuses, but not
so the Basij paramilitaries, who have frequently attacked students.

According to government figures, about 140 political activists, journalists and
former government officials who were rounded up after the protests exploded are
still in jail. But an independent human rights group, the International Campaign
for Human Rights in Iran, said in a statement on Tuesday that the actual number
was closer to 400.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (91%); PRISONS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); JOURNALISM (78%); IRANIAN ELECTION PROTESTS
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); TORTURE (75%);
WRITERS (68%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (60%)

PERSON: MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (79%); MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (57%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (90%); MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (79%)

STATE: QUEBEC, CANADA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); IRAN (90%); CANADA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             124 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 16, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. INQUIRY SEES GAZA WAR CRIMES; ISRAEL CHASTISED

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from
Jerusalem, and Taghreed El-Khodary from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


A United Nations fact-finding mission investigating the three-week war in Gaza
last winter issued a highly critical report on Tuesday detailing what it called
extensive evidence that both Israel and Palestinian militant groups took actions
amounting to war crimes, and possibly crimes against humanity.

While the long-anticipated, 575-page report condemned rocket attacks by
Palestinian armed groups against Israeli civilians, it reserved its harshest
language for Israel's treatment of the civilian Palestinian population in the
Gaza Strip, both during the war and through the longer-term blockade of the
territory.

The report called Israel's military assault on Gaza ''a deliberately
disproportionate attack designed to punish, humiliate and terrorize a civilian
population, radically diminish its local economic capacity both to work and to
provide for itself, and to force upon it an ever increasing sense of dependency
and vulnerability.''

The mission -- led by Richard Goldstone, a respected South African judge and
once the lead war crimes prosecutor for former Yugoslavia and Rwanda -- did not
attempt an exhaustive look at the war, instead focusing on 36 cases that it said
constituted a representative sample. In 11 of these episodes, it said the
Israeli military carried out direct attacks against civilians, including some in
which civilians were shot ''while they were trying to leave their homes to walk
to a safer place, waving white flags.''

In all but one of these civilian attacks, the report said, ''the facts indicate
no justifiable military objective'' for them.

The report cited other possible crimes by the Israelis, including ''wantonly''
destroying food production, water and sewerage facilities; striking areas, in an
effort to kill a small number of combatants,  where significant numbers of
civilians were gathered; using Palestinians as human shields; and detaining men,
women and children in sand pits. It also called Israel's use of weapons like
white phosphorus ''systematically reckless,'' and called for banning it in urban
areas.

On the Palestinian side, the report said that firing rockets that either
deliberately were aimed at Israeli civilians or were so inaccurate as to risk
hitting civilians caused widespread trauma and constituted a war crime. It also
singled out Palestinian actions within Gaza, including killings and other abuse
of members of the rival Fatah political movement as a ''serious violation of
human rights.''

The four members of the fact-finding mission called on both the Israeli
government and the Palestinian Authority to carry out serious, independent
investigations. If that did not occur within the next six months, the mission
said, the United Nations Security Council should refer the matter to the
International Criminal Court.

The Israeli government said it was studying the report, but Gabriela Shalev, the
Israeli ambassador to the United Nations, quickly rejected it, saying  it failed
to take into account that the operation was in ''self-defense.''

In a statement, the Foreign Ministry said it had refused to co-operate with the
mission, calling it biased from the start.

In Gaza, a spokesman for Hamas said it fired the rockets at Israel to try to
defend itself. ''We did not intentionally target civilians,'' said Ahmed Yousef,
a Hamas adviser. ''We were targeting military bases, but the primitive weapons
make mistakes.''

Palestinian armed groups have launched about 8,000 rockets and mortars into
southern Israel since 2001. During the conflict, the report said, they killed 3
Israeli civilians and a soldier, and injured over 900 people.

But the report did not take a position on the number of Palestinian casualties,
noting that they ranged from the Israeli government figure of 1,166 to the Hamas
number of 1,444, without saying how many were civilians.

Israel had tried to discredit the mission from the start, saying that the United
Nations Human Rights Council has a long record of bashing Israel. The report was
released Tuesday to give members of the council time to study it before the
panel formally presents it on Sept. 29, said Doune Porter, a spokeswoman for the
fact-finding mission, calling it a standard procedure.

The United States recently joined the council. Ian Kelly, a State Department
spokesman, said officials were reviewing the report.

Judge Goldstone said the panel heard extensive testimony, conducting 188
interviews and reviewing 10,000 pages of documents and 1,200 photographs. After
Israel refused to allow the investigators into the country, the Human Rights
Council paid for Israeli witnesses, including the mayor of Ashkelon and Israeli
victims, to give testimony in Geneva.

The panel rejected the Israeli version of events surrounding several of the most
contentious episodes of the war.

Israel's mortar shelling near a United Nations-run school in the Jabaliya
refugee camp, which was sheltering some 1,300 people, killed 35 and wounded up
to 40 people, the report said.

The investigation did not exclude the possibility that Israeli forces were
responding to fire from an armed Palestinian group, as Israel claimed, but said
that this and similar attacks ''cannot meet the test of what a reasonable
commander would have determined to be an acceptable loss of civilian life for
the military advantage sought.''

Israel repeatedly accused Hamas of using mosques to shelter armed men or
munitions, and a  report by Israel said an attack against the Maqadmah mosque in
Jabaliya had killed six known militants.

But the Human Rights Council report said the attack came during evening prayers,
when some 300 men and women were in the mosque, and killed 15 people. There were
no secondary explosions to indicate the presence of an arms cache.

If Israel wanted to destroy a mosque suspected as an arms cache, it should have
done so in the middle of the night, Mr. Goldstone said.

The report also noted that some 10 Israeli shells, including white phosphorus,
hit the main Gaza City compound of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
while up to 700 civilians were sheltered there. The compound contained a huge
fuel depot, but the shells kept coming, it said, though United Nations officials
spoke to their Israeli military liaison repeatedly.

In another episode, the report said the destruction of a  house in which nearly
two dozen relatives died, appeared to be ''the result of deliberate demolition
and not of combat.''

Asked about accusations that he was anti-Israel, Judge Goldstone acknowledged he
was Jewish and said,  ''It is grossly wrong to label a mission or to label a
report critical of Israel as being anti-Israel.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Three of those who died in an Israeli attack on a Gaza house,
in a Gaza City morgue on Jan. 18. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

 An Israeli woman in a bomb shelter in Sderot, Israel, during a rocket attack
launched from Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); AL
FATAH (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%);
SEWERAGE SYSTEMS (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%);
JUDGES (67%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (99%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Inquiry Is Sought

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 83 words


Human rights groups urged the United NationsGeneral Assembly on Monday to
appoint a special envoy to investigate abuses in Iran, including allegations
that detainees had been raped and tortured in the aftermath of the disputed
presidential election in June.

The groups, Human Rights Watch and the International Campaign for Human Rights
in Iran, said about 400 people remained in custody for their suspected
involvement in postelection protests.

Iran has denied that detainees have been mistreated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ELECTIONS (86%); CAMPAIGNS
& ELECTIONS (86%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 30, 2009 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

U.N. Investigator Presents Report on Gaza War

BYLINE: By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


The lead investigator in  a recent United Nationsinquiry into the Gaza conflict
warned on Tuesday that the lack of accountability for war crimes in he Middle
East has ''reached a crisis point'' and is undermining any hope of peace.

The investigator, Richard Goldstone, made his comments here as he presented the
Human Rights Council with his final report on violations of human rights and
international law in the three-week war in Gaza last winter, which accuses both
Israel and Palestinian groups of committing atrocities.

''A culture of impunity in the region has existed far too long,'' Mr. Goldstone
said. ''The lack of accountability for war crimes and possible crimes against
humanity has reached a crisis point; the ongoing lack of justice is undermining
any hope for a successful peace process and reinforcing an environment that
fosters violence.''

Mr. Goldstone said that the mission is ''highly critical of the pusillanimous
efforts by Israel to investigate alleged violations of international law and the
complete failure of the Gaza authorities to do so.''

The 575-page report looked at 36 specific attacks in Gaza and a number on the
West Bank and in Israel, concluding that both the Israeli Defense Forces and
Palestinian armed groups committed war crimes and possible crimes against
humanity. Israel, which refused to cooperate with the mission, said that the
report  ignored Israel's right of self-defense and ignored the militants' use of
civilians as human shields.

Mr. Goldstone, a former South African judge, urged the 47-member Human Rights
Council to adopt the report, which recommends that the Secretary Council require
Israel to report within six months on the results of its own investigations into
the reports' findings.  If no good faith investigations take place within that
time, the report calls on the  Security Council to refer the issue to the
International Criminal Court.

Mr. Goldstone rejected accusations of bias and expressed regret that ''the
response to date of the Government of Israel avoids dealing with the substance
of the report.''

Michael Posner, the assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and
labor,  released a statement saying the United States  took the mission's
allegations seriously and encouraged Israel to use  ''meaningful'' efforts to
investigate ''credible allegations.'' However, he also described the report as
''deeply flawed,'' and said it failed to deal adequately with the asymmetrical
nature of the conflict.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); JUDGES (64%); PEACE PROCESS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             127 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinians Halt Push on War Report

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from
Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


In a startling shift, the Palestinian delegation to the United Nations Human
Rights Council dropped its efforts to forward a report accusing Israel of
possible war crimes to the Security Council, under pressure from the United
States, diplomats said Thursday.

The Americans argued that pushing the report now would derail the Middle East
peace process that they are trying to revive, diplomats said.

''We don't want to create an obstacle for them,'' Ibrahim Khraishi, the
Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, said by telephone from
Geneva, where the Human Rights Council is based. ''We want to get a strong
resolution to deal with the report in a good manner to get a benefit from it.''

The report -- produced by a panel of investigators led by an internationally
respected jurist, Richard Goldstone -- found extensive evidence that both Israel
and Palestinian militant groups took actions amounting to war crimes during the
Gaza war last winter. Israel says that it acted only to halt missile fire from
Gaza that terrorized Israeli civilians.

The position of the United States since the Goldstone report was released in
early September has been that the Human Rights Council alone should deal with
it. But in a compromise, the body is expected to pass a resolution Friday
presented by the bloc of Arab and Muslim states that any action will be delayed
until the next meeting in March.

The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, warned the Palestinians and
international powers earlier Thursday that any action to advance the report
would be a denial of Israel's ''right to self-defense'' and would kill any
chance of peace talks.

Mr. Netanyahu, speaking during a cabinet meeting in Jerusalem, said that any
international endorsement of the report would ''strike a severe blow to the war
against terrorism.''

But most immediately, he said, it would ''strike a fatal blow to the peace
process, because Israel will no longer be able to take additional steps and take
risks for peace if its right to self-defense is denied.''

Diplomats said that the Americans took their position that the report would
delay the peace process before Mr. Netanyahu made his remarks. Michael Posner,
the new assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor,
would not comment Thursday about the negotiations.

In a speech to the council this week, however, Mr. Posner called the report
''deeply flawed'' and criticized the council for what he called a fixation with
Israel. But he concluded by saying that fair reviews on both sides would build
confidence.

Israel says that it has a serious inquiry under way, with 100 complaints from
Gaza already examined and 23 cases still pending court action. It says that
about a third of the 36 incidents in the Goldstone report are already under
investigation by the military, while others have been referred for
investigation.

The Israeli government mounted a concerted diplomatic effort over the past few
days against the resolution to forward the report. But there has been a growing
debate within Israel itself, with some human rights organizations and academics
calling for an independent, nonmilitary review of the Gaza conflict.

Mr. Khraishi, the Palestinian ambassador, said that if a resolution were passed
now insisting that the General Assembly or the Security Council deal with the
matter, as the report itself recommends, it would most likely face an  American
veto. A delay gives the Israelis and Palestinians time to take up another
recommendation in the report:  that both sides set up independent investigation
panels to look into possible war crimes.

''I don't think that the Americans or the Israelis or anybody can escape from
the realities that Goldstone collected -- not Hamas either,'' Mr. Khraishi said,
referring to the Islamist group that controls Gaza. He said that he had the
support of at least 33 members of the 47-member council -- but not that of the
United States, European Union members or Japan.

''There was a tremendous amount of pressure on all members by the Americans,''
said an Arab diplomat, who requested anonymity according to diplomatic protocol.
''The Americans wanted something to finish it; the compromise is to defer it,
which means it is still alive.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: At an Israeli cabinet meeting, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu, center, spoke about the United Nations report on Gaza.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
POOL PHOTO BY DAN BALILTY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (86%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (69%); TERRORISM (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%)

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (89%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             128 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Furor Sends Palestinians Into Shift on U.N. Report

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Isabel Kershner reported from
Jerusalem, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Faced with a torrent of criticism at home and abroad, the Palestinian leadership
abruptly reversed course on Wednesday by endorsing a Security Council debate on
a United Nations report accusing Israel of possible war crimes in Gaza.

The report, produced by a panel of investigators led by an internationally
respected jurist, Richard Goldstone, found extensive evidence that both Israel
and Palestinian militant groups took actions amounting to war crimes during last
winter's Gaza war.

But after pushing for the United Nations Human Rights Council to endorse the
report and forward it to the Security Council, the Palestinians relented to
American pressure last week and agreed to drop the issue for six months. Both
the United States and Israel had warned that pursuing the accusations would
abort attempts to revive the peace process.

Now the Palestinians are grappling with a domestic and regional uproar, with
angry street protests at home and condemnation pouring in from Doha to Damascus.

''The level of public protest is unprecedented,'' said Ghassan Khatib, director
of the Palestinian Authority's media center. ''I do not remember any situation
before when the leadership was so unpopular,'' he said, speaking by telephone
from Ramallah in the West Bank.

Mr. Khatib said there was a feeling among Palestinian leaders that ''they have
to reconsider'' their approach. With the Human Rights Council out of the picture
for the time being, he said, they are seeking other avenues to advance the
Goldstone report.

Yasir Abed Rabbo, a close adviser of Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president,
said Wednesday that the leadership had erred.

''We have the courage to admit there was a mistake,'' Mr. Abed Rabbo, the
secretary general of the Palestine Liberation Organization, told the official
Voice of Palestine radio. In an attempt at damage control, he added that the
mistake could be ''repaired.''

Mr. Abed Rabbo was the first senior Palestinian official to speak out publicly
against the deferral of the vote on the report. There was no immediate comment
from Mr. Abbas, who was in Rome on Wednesday.

At the United Nations, the Palestinian Observer Mission immediately endorsed a
move by the Libyan delegation to hold a Security Council discussion on the issue
and the Palestinian foreign minister, Riyad al-Maliki, was due in New York late
Wednesday to press the matter.

''Accountability is the first order of business for all of us, including the
Americans,'' said Riyad Mansour, the Palestinian ambassador, when asked about
the Palestinian leaders' reversal. ''That is what is impeding the peace
process.''

The Security Council agreed Wednesday to move up its monthly debate on the
Middle East to Oct. 14 from Oct. 20, and the report will be the focus of that
discussion although not officially listed on the agenda. Several Arab
ambassadors said they recognized the futility of trying to pass any kind of
resolution because the United States would veto it immediately.

The American position is that the report should be handled by the Human Rights
Council in Geneva, a consistent opinion among Security Council members.

The Libyan ambassador, Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgam, said that the judicial
aspects of the report could start in Geneva, but that Libya, a current Security
Council member, wanted an open debate to give the issue momentum. That could
help spur peace, he said, because the decision to delay in Geneva had deepened
the already acrid split between the main Palestinian factions, Fatah and Hamas.

''The atmosphere on the ground is not helpful,'' Ambassador Shalgam said.

Palestinian officials defended their earlier support for a deferral of the vote,
saying Israel's allies would have vetoed moves to advance the report, while a
delay gave the Palestinian leadership time to raise international support.

But the Abbas administration clearly had not anticipated such a furor.

In Gaza, posters appeared on walls on Wednesday calling Mr. Abbas a traitor and
saying he should be consigned to ''the trash heap of history.'' Gaza is
controlled by Hamas, the militant Islamic group that is the Palestinian
Authority's main rival.

A Hamas official, Salah Bardawil, said in a statement that his group would join
Egyptian-mediated reconciliation talks with Mr. Abbas's Fatah movement, to take
place in Cairo this month, only if Mr. Abbas apologized to the Palestinian
people for the so-called debacle around the United Nations report.

Hundreds of Palestinians demonstrated in Ramallah on Tuesday against the
leadership's conduct and called on Mr. Abbas and other officials to resign.

Even Mr. Abbas's own government has been critical. In a statement released by
the Palestinian cabinet on Monday, the ministers reaffirmed their position of
late September, which called for the Human Rights Council to adopt the Goldstone
report, and said it was ''unacceptable'' for such efforts to be undermined.

Apparently distancing himself from the events at the Human Rights Council, Mr.
Abbas ordered the establishment of a committee over the weekend to investigate
how the deferral of the vote came about, but that failed to quell the storm.

Mr. Abbas finds himself squeezed on several fronts. The Obama administration is
pressing the Israelis and the Palestinians to resume peace negotiations, but has
not managed to persuade the Israelis to freeze settlement construction in the
West Bank. The Abbas administration had made a building freeze a condition for
renewed talks.

Last weekend, Hamas took credit for a release of Palestinian prisoners from
Israeli prisons. Israel freed 20 female security prisoners in exchange for a
videotape of an Israeli soldier who has been held captive since being seized in
a raid by Hamas and other groups in June 2006.

In another sign of Palestinian restiveness, there has been simmering violence in
the past few days in East Jerusalem. The Palestinian Authority, Hamas and the
Islamic Movement of Israel all accuse Israel of provocations at a site holy to
both Jews and Muslims, and Israel is accusing the Palestinians of fanning the
flames.

All this underlines the challenges facing George J. Mitchell, the Obama
administration's special Middle East envoy, who was expected to arrive in the
region late Wednesday to continue efforts to restart Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Protesters in Gaza threw shoes at a poster of Mahmoud Abbas on
Wednesday, part of an outcry against his administration.(PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM
MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); PEACE PROCESS (75%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (78%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES
(93%); LIBYA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             133 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Critic of Chechen President Is Killed in Exile in Vienna

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 649 words


A Chechen who had formally accused the president of Chechnya of participating in
kidnappings and torture sessions was fatally shot Tuesday as he walked out of a
grocery store in Vienna, according to his lawyer and family friends.

The shooting appeared to be another politically motivated killing of a Russian
citizen who had criticized government conduct.

The slain man, Umar S. Israilov, 27, had been detained as a separatist rebel,
then was given amnesty, and briefly became a bodyguard to President Ramzan A.
Kadyrov of Chechnya. He ultimately fled Chechnya for Europe.

In late 2006, Mr. Israilov filed a complaint against Russia in the European
Court of Human Rights that detailed his claims of the systematic use of
abductions and torture by Mr. Kadyrov, and indigenous security forces under Mr.
Kadyrov's command, to punish suspected insurgents and their families.

The complaint covered events from 2003 through 2005, when Mr. Kadyrov led a
state-sponsored militia and became the republic's deputy prime minister. It
included Mr. Israilov's experiences as one of Mr. Kadyrov's victims and later as
a witness to what he said were Mr. Kadyrov's crimes against others.

In an interview with The New York Times last fall, Mr. Israilov described
several of the allegations, including the beating and kicking of detainees by
Mr. Kadyrov and his fighters, the rape of a detainee by one of Mr. Kadyrov's
subordinates, and Mr. Kadyrov's use of a device that delivered electric shocks
to prisoners.

Mr. Israilov said Mr. Kadyrov had used the electrical device on him, turning a
hand-crank to deliver an excruciating charge. ''It feels as if all of your
muscles are going to explode,'' he said. ''It was as if you were being torn
apart.''

After Mr. Israilov fled Russia, his father was abducted, tortured by Mr. Kadyrov
and held illegally for more than 10 months, in an effort to force the son to
return home, according to both victims and a human rights worker who
investigated the case.

Mr. Israilov's father, who has received asylum in another European country,
planned to travel to Vienna this week to arrange his son's funeral, a friend of
the family's said by telephone.

The news of Mr. Israilov's killing became public late Tuesday night in Russia.
Mr. Kadyrov's spokesmen could not be reached.

Mr. Kadyrov has long been accused of human rights abuses and of ruling Chechnya
through patterns of organized sadism and fear. He has always vehemently denied
the accusations.

As the allegations have mounted over the years, his rise to power has been
nurtured by the Kremlin. He has remained closely associated with Prime Minister
Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who in 2004, as president, awarded him the Hero of
Russia medal, the nation's highest honor.

Mr. Israilov's complaint presented one of the first formal challenges in Europe
to Mr. Kadyrov's official stature in Russia and raised implicit questions about
his privileged place in Mr. Putin's circle.

Mr. Israilov had been granted asylum by Austria, but his life there had been
filled with worries about his safety. In the interview last fall, he said he
limited his movements and contacts with strangers after an emissary from Mr.
Kadyrov visited Austria and tried to dupe him into returning home.

''Ramzan is a very powerful man,'' Mr. Israilov said, ''and he can have anyone
killed.''

Nadja Lorenz, his lawyer in Vienna, said by telephone that she had recently
sought protection for Mr. Israilov from the Austrian authorities, but that the
request had been denied.

A family friend of Mr. Israilov's gave this account of his killing:

He was ambushed at lunchtime on Tuesday near his apartment as he left a grocery
store where he had stopped to buy yogurt. At least four men in two cars were
waiting for him. Mr. Israilov tried to run away but was quickly overtaken and
shot.

The family friend, out of fear for his own safety, asked that his name be
withheld.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Umar S. Israilov (PHOTOGRAPH BY C. J. CHIVERS/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); LAWYERS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
AMNESTY (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (71%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (57%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); EUROPE (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             134 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt Cites Progress Toward Truce as Gaza Toll Exceeds 1,000

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER; Sabrina Tavernise contributed reporting from
Jerusalem, Souad Mekhennet from Frankfurt, and Michael Slackman from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


As the Gaza death toll passed an estimated 1,000 people and concerns about the
humanitarian situation inside Gaza grew, Egypt announced on Wednesday that it
was making progress toward an interim cease-fire, with some officials predicting
that one could be five to six days away.

The Israeli military operation continued apace in southern Gaza with the
military reporting that its warplanes carried out three dozen bombing raids.
Still, with the cease-fire talks edging forward and Israeli leaders concerned
about sending their troops into the heart of Gaza City, Israel held off on
expanding its war to the next phase.

Hamas's militants fired more than a dozen rockets into Israel, including four
longer-range ones that landed near the cities of Beersheba and Ashdod, sending a
message of menace but causing no injuries. Three rockets were also fired from
Lebanon into northern Israel, and Israel returned fire to the source.

Also on Wednesday, nine Israeli human rights groups called for an investigation
into whether Israeli officials had committed war crimes in Gaza. The groups say
that tens of thousands of civilians in Gaza have nowhere to flee, the Gaza
health system has collapsed, many people are without electricity and running
water, and some are beyond the reach of rescue teams.

''This kind of fighting constitutes a blatant violation of the laws of warfare
and raises the suspicion, which we ask be investigated, of the commission of war
crimes,'' the groups said in a news conference on the 19th day of the war.

The president of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Jakob
Kellenberger, who spent Tuesday in Gaza City, agreed that the situation with
civilians was dire but said that the principal hospital was making do with
medical supplies, and that doctors, working around the clock, were mostly coping
with the flow of the wounded.

''In general, they did not complain about the lack of equipment or material,''
he said at  a news conference in Jerusalem.

Hamas's leaders met with Egyptian officials in Cairo and agreed in principle to
a monitoring force in Gaza composed of Europeans to prevent  weapons smuggling,
said a senior Egyptian official. A senior Israeli official is expected to travel
to Cairo on Thursday to discuss the plan.

Israel's defense minister, Ehud Barak, and his generals favor a temporary
cease-fire of several days to a week, partly so that when President-elect Barack
Obama is inaugurated next week it would be during a lull rather than in the
middle of a battle, and his administration could offer its views on the next
step, Israeli officials said.

The short-term cease-fire would, if successful, be followed by a negotiated
yearlong truce, something that Egypt says Hamas favors if it includes an opening
of commercial traffic into Gaza. But splits in Hamas exist between its leaders
based in Syria and those in Gaza. The Gazans are more open to a weeklong break,
while the leaders in Syria want something from Israel in return for holding
fire.

Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations arrived in Cairo early in
the day as part of a regional tour to press all parties to carry out a Security
Council resolution calling for a cease-fire. He met with President Hosni Mubarak
and then issued a plea for peace.

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria also called for a cease-fire, saying in an
interview with the BBC that the effects of war could be more dangerous than war
itself, ''sowing seeds of extremism and terror around the region.''

Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda, in a taped audio message, called on
Muslims everywhere to fight Israel in a holy war.

The Israeli human rights groups that called for an investigation said that while
they believed that it was legitimate for Israel to bomb military installations,
it was a violation of international law to hit civilian sites and government
buildings that contained no weapons.

The groups included the Israel section of Amnesty International, B'Tselem, Gisha
and Physicians for Human Rights-Israel. Israeli Jews are firmly behind the
government's conduct of the war, with the human rights groups representing a
small minority.

Mr. Kellenberger of the Red Cross said that Israel had facilitated his trip to
Gaza and added that he had seen no evidence of the use of white phosphorus, an
obscurant used in military conflicts that can be dangerous for civilians under
certain circumstances. Palestinians say Israel is using it in Gaza.

Last week, the Red Cross issued an unusually harsh condemnation of Israel for
refusing to allow its personnel into Gaza to rescue people trapped in battle. On
Wednesday, Mr. Kellenberger said that although the situation remained critical,
rescue missions had not been entirely shut down. The organization rescued 100
people trapped in Jabaliya, north of Gaza City, on Tuesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Palestinians inspected a section of Gaza City on Wednesday
after an Israeli attack. Also on Wednesday, Hamas fired more than a dozen
rockets into Israel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 The mother of two boys, ages 6 and 11, prepared for their burial Wednesday in
the Jabaliya refugee camp in northern Gaza. The brothers and another relative
were killed in an Israeli airstrike. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN
PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HAMAS (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%);
LAW OF WAR (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (72%);
ILLEGAL WEAPONS (67%); POWER FAILURES (66%); SMUGGLING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

PERSON: EHUD BARAK (56%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (88%); CAIRO, EGYPT (88%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); EGYPT (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
EUROPE (79%); SYRIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             136 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

On the Trail of War Criminals, NBC News Stirs Up Criticism

BYLINE: By BRIAN STELTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1090 words


NBC News, which teamed up with local police officers to trap sex offenders for
its successful but scandalous ''To Catch a Predator'' series, is now using
similar tactics to hunt bigger game: war criminals.

But one of the first efforts, an investigation of a Maryland college professor
on genocide charges, is already attracting criticism from federal officials
months before the program would be broadcast.

For more than a year, NBC has been investigating the possible perpetrators of
human rights abuses in several countries, but the case of Leopold Munyakazi, a
visiting professor of French at Goucher College in Towson, Md., is the only one
that has become public.

In December, an NBC crew and a Rwandan prosecutor confronted Mr. Munyakazi with
charges that he had participated in that country's genocide in 1994.

Reached by telephone on Tuesday evening, Mr. Munyakazi vigorously denied the
allegations.

''I have never participated in genocide. I saved a number of people,'' said Mr.
Munyakazi.

The Department of Homeland Security said it had significant concerns ''that a
program of this kind could negatively impact law enforcement's ability to
investigate and bring cases against the perpetrators of these horrible crimes.''
The Justice Department had no comment about the professor's case.

Mr. Munyakazi is one of at least four subjects that NBC News producers focused
on in apparent cooperation with the Rwandan government. Some human rights
advocates are objecting to NBC's investigation, alleging that the evidence of
war crimes is insufficient and the collaboration with a foreign government
prosecutor is suspect ethically.

Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, said in an interview
on Tuesday that he had called the general counsel of NBC Universal to raise
concerns about the project.

''I was worried that a journalist was making false accusations, due to some
extent to his close collaboration with the Rwandan government,'' Mr. Roth said.

NBC News characterized its investigation of ''alleged war criminals and
terrorists living in the United States and elsewhere'' as an independent one.

''Any contact with foreign governments has been consistent with acceptable
journalistic practices,'' NBC News the news division said in a statement.
''Beyond that, it is our policy not to comment on our news gathering.'' NBC said
the programs are months away from a broadcast date.

Mr. Munyakazi was suspended in December as the college investigated the claims
and was arrested last week for overstaying his visa. He will face a deportation
hearing in April.

On Dec. 9, an NBC film crew began shooting on the Goucher campus and set up an
interview with the college's president, Sanford J. Ungar, for the next day. At
that meeting, Mr. Ungar said he ''listened in disbelief'' as a Rwandan official
shared the details of an indictment calling for Mr. Munyakazi's arrest.

That same day, the NBC producers showed Kate Pipkin, the director of
communications for the college, a short video clip of a person making claims
about Mr. Munyakazi's alleged crimes.

''I think they wanted it to be an ambush, to be frank,'' Ms. Pipkin said.

Later that day, the producers approached Mr. Munyakazi in his classroom after
students had left. Confronted with cameras and microphones, he rejected the
requests for an on-camera interview. ''They were hostile toward me,'' he said.

The apparent cooperation between NBC and the Rwandan official, Jean Bosco
Mutangana, puts the network at odds with many journalism practitioners,
including Mr. Ungar, who is a former host of National Public Radio's ''All
Things Considered,'' who argue that journalists should work independently of any
governmental entity.

Mr. Ungar said in an interview that the Rwandan prosecutor's presence was
unusual when the camera crew visited the campus in December. ''If the prosecutor
has evidence or has concerns he wants to present, why is he doing it in the
company of NBC News?'' he asked.

He added later, ''I don't think it was the prosecutor's idea. I don't think he
sat in Kigali and said, 'Hmm, what would be the best way for me to achieve
justice? I think I'll call NBC and ask them.' ''

Mr. Munyakazi arrived in the United States in 2004 on a visitor's visa to attend
a conference in Atlanta. Since then, he has been applying for asylum.

With the help of the Scholar Rescue Fund, which supports professors at risk in
their home countries, Mr. Munyakazi worked as a visiting scholar at Montclair
State University in New Jersey before moving to Goucher last fall. His contract
with Goucher expires in June.

While at Montclair State, Mr. Munyakazi disputed the Rwandan government's
position about the 1994 genocide in a speech. A month later, the government
prepared an indictment against him. ''They are hunting everybody who disagrees
with their politics,'' he said.

Mr. Ungar said Goucher was unaware of the indictment until NBC News arrived on
the campus in December. He then contacted Alison Des Forges, a senior adviser at
Human Rights Watch, who said she was skeptical about the evidence against Mr.
Munyakazi.

''It seemed to me really highly unusual for a national prosecutor in one country
to enter another country without official clearance and to accompany a TV crew
in order to basically catch people unaware,'' she said.

NBC is likely to bristle at any comparisons between the current investigation
and the series of sex predator stings that it conducted in the last few years.
But the ''To Catch a Predator'' series was also predicated on confrontations and
the element of surprise.

The episodes attracted big audiences for the ''Dateline NBC'' newsmagazine as
they worked with the police to expose people who had set up visits on the
Internet with what they believed to be children. Kelly McBride, the ethics group
leader for the Poynter Institute, a nonprofit journalism foundation, said
''Predator'' ignored traditional journalistic standards about independence.

''It's a classic case where a news organization teamed up with a special
interest that had an agenda,'' she said. For ''Predator'' stings, NBC worked
with local law enforcement and a group called Perverted Justice. By
collaborating with prosecutors for the war criminal reports, the network may be
returning to the same ethical minefield.

''As journalists, we struggle to keep an arm's length from all sorts of
officials, whether they're cops or prosecutors or diplomats,'' Ms. McBride said.
''Because it's really important that our audience view us as independent -- not
carrying water for someone else.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Leopold Munyakazi, a professor of French from Rwanda at Goucher
College in Maryland, has been accused of genocide. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROB
CARR/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); ETHICS (78%);
SEX OFFENSES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
EXECUTIVES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); UNIVERSITY
ADMINISTRATION (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); LAWYERS (74%); ARRESTS (73%);
DEPORTATION (72%); TERRORISM (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); NEWS REPORTING
(67%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (66%); WRITERS (62%)

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (98%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
(55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (98%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (98%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             138 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Efforts to Limit Khmer Rouge Trials Decried

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


At first glance it seems to be simply a numbers game: whether to try 5, 10 or
more defendants for the deaths of an estimated 1.7 million people at the hands
of the Khmer Rouge three decades ago.

But as a United Nations-backed tribunal prepares to hold its first trial hearing
this month, the wrangle over numbers is reinforcing longstanding concerns about
the tribunal's fairness and independence.

The Cambodian government, critics say, is trying to limit the scope of the
trials for its own political reasons, a limit that the critics say would
compromise justice and could discredit the entire process.

''To me, it's the credibility of the tribunal which is at stake, its integrity
and therefore its credibility,'' said Christophe Peschoux, who runs the Cambodia
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The first defendant is the man with perhaps the most horrifying past: Kaing Guek
Eav, known as Duch (pronounced DOIK), the commander of the Tuol Sleng torture
house in Phnom Penh, where at least 14,000 people were sent to their deaths. His
trial is to open with a procedural hearing, set for Feb. 17, during which more
substantive sessions, involving witnesses and evidence, are expected to be
scheduled.

Four other defendants, all of whom were members of the Khmer Rouge Central
Committee, are also in custody, waiting their turns to face charges on crimes
that occurred while they were at the top of the chain of command from 1975 to
1979. As much as one-fourth of the population in Cambodia died from disease,
hunger or overwork, or were executed under the Khmer Rouge's brutal Communist
rule.

Those five defendants are enough, Cambodian officials say.

But foreign legal experts counter that within reasonable limits, the judicial
process should not be arbitrarily limited.

After a decade of difficult and not always friendly negotiations between the
United Nations and the Cambodians, a hybrid tribunal is in place, with Cambodian
and foreign co-prosecutors and co-judges in an awkward political and legal
balancing act.

Now, even before Duch's trial gets under way, that balance is being tested.

Last month the foreign co-prosecutor, a Canadian named Robert Petit, submitted
six more names to the court for investigation, saying that he had gathered
enough evidence to support possible charges. Mr. Petit's Cambodian counterpart,
Chea Leang, objected -- not on legal grounds, but for reasons that appear to
reflect the government's position on the trials.

Additional indictments, the Cambodian prosecutor said, could be destabilizing.
She said they would cost too much, take too long and violate the spirit of the
tribunal, which she said envisioned ''only a small number of trials.''

Prime Minister Hun Sen, who bargained hard with the United Nations over the
shape and scope of the tribunal, has said that trying ''four or five people''
would be enough, although there is no formal limit on the number.

Indeed, Peter Maguire, author of ''Facing Death in Cambodia,'' suggests that Mr.
Hun Sen's plan might be to try only Duch -- ''a garden-variety war criminal'' --
and hope the other defendants die before they can be tried.

The additional names submitted by Mr. Petit have not been made public. But
people close to the court say that none of them hold a significant position in
Cambodia's current government.

Mr. Hun Sen and several senior members of his government were Khmer Rouge
cadres, but experts say they do not fall under the scope of the tribunal and are
not at risk of prosecution.

The mandate of the court is to try the top leadership of the Khmer Rouge and
''those most responsible'' for the crimes -- that is, people like Duch, who is
accused of overseeing the torture and killing of thousands.

In Cambodia, though, courts do not head off in their own directions without
tight control from Mr. Hun Sen or the people around him. Some advocates of the
tribunal, called the Extraordinary Chambers of the Courts of Cambodia or
E.C.C.C., see it as challenging this top-down control by offering Cambodia a
model for a more independent judiciary.

''Some in Phnom Penh are apparently frightened that the E.C.C.C. might actually
succeed, that it might serve as an example of accountability that could be
applied more widely,'' said James A. Goldston, executive director of the Open
Society Justice Initiative, a New York-based organization that pursues legal
reform.

''With the Feb. 17 start of the first trial fast approaching, now is the moment
to show that the court is not a tool of the Cambodian government,'' he said.

Most Cambodians are eager to see Khmer Rouge leaders on trial, according to a
survey published last week by the Human Rights Center at the University of
California, Berkeley.

But the poll found that about one-third of people answering the survey had
doubts about the tribunal's neutrality and independence, perhaps because of
their experience with their own corrupt and coerced judiciary.

Confidence in the tribunal has also been eroded by allegations of kickbacks that
are familiar in the Cambodian court system. The United Nations has investigated
the allegations but has not released its findings.

Now, with the dispute between the two co-prosecutors in the open, the checks and
balances of the hybrid court will meet their first major test.

The dispute must now go to a panel known as the pretrial chamber, whose makeup
reflects the supermajority structure of the tribunal -- three Cambodian judges
and two foreign judges.

There is nothing so far to suggest that this process will not work as it should,
said David J. Scheffer, a human rights law professor at Northwestern University
School of Law who took part in talks to create the tribunal.

The real test, Mr. Scheffer said in a recent article in The Phnom Penh Post,
will be whether the judges in the pretrial chamber ''step up to the plate and do
their duty with the highest degree of judicial integrity.''

''We can all assess that when their decision is rendered,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Chan Kimsrun and her child in a photo taken by interrogators at
the brutal Tuol Sleng prison in Phnom Penh. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOCUMENTATION CENTER
OF CAMBODIA, VIA EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); TORTURE (73%);
INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); PRIME
MINISTERS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (56%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             139 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Some Sri Lankan Ears, Dissonant Undertones in an Acclaimed Rapper's Music

BYLINE: By THOMAS FULLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


To many Americans, Maya Arulpragasam, known as M.I.A., is the very pregnant
rapper who gyrated across the stage at Sunday's Grammy Awards.

Yet in Sri Lanka, where she spent her childhood years, M.I.A. remains virtually
unknown. And some who do know her work say she is an apologist for the
separatist Tamil Tiger rebels fighting in the country's long-running civil war.

M.I.A. -- who has been nominated for an Oscar for the song she co-wrote for the
hit film ''Slumdog Millionaire'' -- has branded herself through music videos and
interviews as the voice of the country's Tamil minority. In the video for her
song ''Bird Flu,'' for instance, children dance in front of what looks like the
rebels' logo: a roaring tiger.

''Being the only Tamil in the Western media, I have a really great opportunity
to sort of bring forward what's going on in Sri Lanka,'' she said in an
interview on the PBS program ''Tavis Smiley''  last month. ''There's a genocide
going on.''

But her political views rankle some people at a time when most Sri Lankans are
clutching to the hope that the rebels, branded by the United States and European
nations as a terrorist group, are on the verge of military defeat by government
troops.

''Frankly, she's very lucky to get away with supporting, even indirectly,
perhaps the most ruthless terrorist outfit in the world,'' said Suresh
Jayawickrama, a songwriter based in Colombo.

Mr. Jayawickrama is from the country's majority Sinhalese ethnic group, and his
reaction is similar to that of many Sri Lankans who know M.I.A.'s music. But he
also said that M.I.A. deserved credit for her artistry and the fame she had
achieved. ''She really should have a little more recognition in this country,''
he said.

Despite decades of conflict, music has remained largely free of political
messages or overtones in Sri Lanka, perhaps because audiences are seeking
entertainment and escape from the daily reminders of civil war.

''Compared to other countries, people don't write many songs here about what is
going on politically,'' said Dillain Joseph, a singer who is of mixed Sinhalese
and Tamil parentage.

Meanwhile, M.I.A.'s claims that the government is carrying out a genocide
against Tamils place her on the outer fringe of opinion about the conflict.

Although the government has brutalized and killed Tamil civilians over the past
25 years, human rights organizations spread the blame around, estimating that
70,000 people on both sides have been killed in the fighting.

''This is a conflict in which both sides have terrible human rights records,''
said Yolanda Foster, a specialist on Sri Lanka with Amnesty International in
London. ''The Tamil Tigers have a long history of child recruitment, hostage
taking, forcing civilians to the front lines. It's complicated to assign
blame.''

M.I.A. was born in Britain but moved to Sri Lanka when she was  6 months old so
that her father, an engineer and a leader in the Tamil separatist movement,
could help fight for an independent Tamil homeland. Her childhood took her
across northern Sri Lanka, wracked by insurgency, to India and back to Britain,
where her mother and siblings settled into a public housing project outside
London. Her father remained in Sri Lanka. She now calls New York home.

Sri Lankans who have seen her videos say they interpret some parts as showing
support for the Tigers, or at the very least glorifying their cause. But for
those not familiar with the conflict, they might come across as generic
third-world scenes.

''I kind of want to leave it ambiguous for my fans,'' she said in the PBS
interview, referring to the lyrics of her song ''Paper Planes,'' which was
nominated for record of the year at the Grammys but did not win.

''Paper Planes,'' which compares international drug dealing  with  selling
records, drew a reaction from DeLon, a Sinhalese rapper based in Los Angeles,
who made a video remix in which he interspersed images of people being blown up
by Tamil Tiger bombs and subtitles about M.I.A. being a terrorist.

M.I.A. responded that she did  not support terrorism.

Despite those tensions, which played out largely on the Internet and abroad,
musicians in Sri Lanka say the music scene has remained ethnically diverse, with
members of the country's numerous ethnic groups and religions often forming
bands together.

''There's a lot of mixing and matching going on,'' said Rienzie Pereira, a
guitar player. ''It's basically like sports. No matter what ethnic group you are
from, people can play cricket together.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Maya Arulpragasam, known as M.I.A., at the Grammy Awards on
Sunday. The rapper spent her childhood years in Sri Lanka. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK
J. TERRILL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSIC (91%); HIP HOP CULTURE (90%); RAP MUSIC (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); SONG WRITING (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%);
ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (78%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (77%); MUSIC INDUSTRY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (72%); TERRORISM (69%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (69%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%); ARMED FORCES (64%); WILD CATS (58%);
ETHNICITY (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (57%)

PERSON: M I A (93%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             142 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

In Closely Watched Case, Britain's Highest Court Favors Deporting Militant
Cleric

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: LONDON


A Palestinian-born cleric described by British security officials as ''a
significant international terrorist'' lost the latest round in a seven-year
battle to remain in Britain as a refugee on Wednesday when Britain's highest
court ruled that he could be deported to Jordan.

The preacher, known as Abu Qatada, was convicted in absentia by Jordanian courts
in a terrorist bombing and a bomb plot in the 1990s. His lawyers argue that he
should not be sent there because he might be tortured. But the British
government considers him a security risk because he has called on British
Muslims to become martyrs and because of his suspected links to Al Qaeda.

After a five-judge panel of the Law Lords unanimously approved the cleric's
deportation, the home secretary, Jacqui Smith, immediately signed a deportation
order. But the cleric's lawyers said they would appeal the decision to the
European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France.

The 48-year-old cleric, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, is
being held in a special unit for Islamic militants at the Long Lartin jail about
100 miles west of London.

Ms. Smith called the Lords' decision a major victory for the government, which
has been under pressure for years from opposition parties and others over what
critics have described as its failure to effectively control immigration and to
deport Islamic militants. She described Mr. Othman as ''a truly dangerous man''
and added, ''My priority is the safety of the country, and I want him removed as
soon as possible.''

The legal battle over Mr. Othman has been a keenly watched test case. A heavyset
figure over six feet tall, Mr. Othman has been a frequent target of opprobrium
in tabloid newspapers since 2002, when he began a revolving-door cycle of
imprisonment and release from British prisons.

After holding Mr. Othman in detention for long periods without charges, the
government has more than once been ordered by a court to release him. Mr. Othman
settled in Britain in 1993, when he successfully claimed asylum; he has a wife
and more than a dozen dependents who are living off welfare payments in a large
London home provided through the welfare system.

Newspapers that have characterized him as a poster boy for failings in the
immigration system frequently refer to him as ''Osama bin Laden's right-hand man
in Europe,'' using an epithet picked up from a Spanish judge who was ruling in a
terrorism case to which Mr. Othman was linked. Part of the British government's
case against Mr. Othman has been that 18 videotapes of his sermons urging young
Muslims to take up jihad, or holy war, were found in a Hamburg apartment used by
3 of the 19 hijackers who carried out the Sept. 11 attacks.

For the government and for rights groups, Mr. Othman's battle to remain in
Britain has become a bellwether for other cases involving Islamic militants
caught up in terrorism investigations.

The government is seeking to deport the militants because of doubts it can win
convictions against them in Britain, either because it does not have enough
evidence to satisfy the courts or, it says, because it cannot present what
evidence it has because of the risk of compromising intelligence sources.

The central issue in these cases, as in Mr. Othman's, has been the contention of
the men's lawyers and the rights groups that the evidence against them was
obtained from foreign governments under torture or that the men risk being
tortured once they are deported. To meet court challenges on the issue, Britain
has negotiated agreements with several governments, including Jordan and
Algeria, that they will not physically abuse terrorist suspects deported from
Britain.

Those agreements failed to persuade judges at earlier stages of the case against
Mr. Othman; last year, the Court of Appeal ruled in his favor.

But spokesmen for rights groups said after the ruling on Mr. Othman that they
were hopeful it would be overturned at the European court. Tim Porteous, the
London director of Human Rights Watch, told the BBC that the court in Strasbourg
had shown in previous rulings that it did not believe that ''diplomatic
assurances'' against torture were credible.

Mr. Porteous said that the Law Lords -- judges in the House of Lords who sit as
Britain's highest appeals court -- had sent ''a misguided message'' to the
government, ''that they can send people back to their countries on flimsy and
unenforceable assurances that they will not be tortured.''

The Law Lords said that the fact that another country might  have used torture
-- in Mr. Othman's case, Jordan, in its investigation of the charges against him
-- was not cause enough for Britain to give sanctuary to a fugitive who might
pose a possible security threat.

Lord Phillips, the lord chief justice, said in his judgment that governments
were obliged to ''stand firm'' against torture, but that the obligation in Mr.
Othman's case applied to Jordan, as the country seeking evidence in terrorist
cases against Mr. Othman, not Britain. ''It does not require this state, the
United Kingdom, to retain in this country, to the detriment of national
security, a terrorist suspect,'' he said.

Mr. Othman was given two 15-year sentences in Jordan: one for helping to plot a
hotel bombing in 1998 and the other for planning an attack in 1999 on a
Christian pilgrimage site that the Jordanian government says it foiled. Under
Jordanian law, he is entitled to new trials in both cases if he returns to
Jordan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 23, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Thursday about a cleric known as Abu Qatada who lost
his latest court appeal to remain as a refugee in Britain, which considers him a
security threat, misstated the given name of the London director of Human Rights
Watch, who criticized the ruling. He is Tom Porteous, not Tim.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, in 2005.(PHOTOGRAPH BY AL ARABIYA,
VIA REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); RELIGION
(90%); REFUGEES (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
APPEALS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%);
JUDGES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); PRISONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); LAWYERS (77%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (77%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (77%); APPROVALS (73%); HIJACKING (73%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS
(70%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (56%)

PERSON: JACQUI SMITH (67%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); JORDAN (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (75%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             144 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 24, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Tamil Rebels Offer Conditional Truce

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


With their guerrilla fighters pinned down by Sri Lankan troops in a small patch
of jungle, ethnic Tamil separatists announced Monday that they were willing to
accept an internationally brokered cease-fire, although they said they would not
surrender their weapons as part of any truce.

The government quickly rejected the offer.

The entreaty was made in a letter sent to the United Nations, the European
Commission and several world leaders by Balasingham Nadesan, the political chief
of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. The message was posted on a pro-rebel
Web site, www.tamilnet.com.

''The L.T.T.E. is ready to accept the calls for a cease-fire issued by the
international community with the good intention of ending the human suffering,''
the letter said, adding that the group wanted ''this effort for a cease-fire to
grow further into peace talks to seek a political solution to the ethnic
conflict.''

Mr. Nadesan rejected calls for his forces to disarm, saying the Tamils of
northern Sri Lanka were facing ''the worst genocide of the 21st century'' at the
hands of the government.

''It is painful to see the world maintaining silence on this immense human
suffering, as if it is amused by what is going on,'' Mr. Nadesan said.

Keheliya Rambukwella, a cabinet minister and defense spokesman, dismissed the
rebels'  offer. ''They have given guarantees and pledges for the past 30
years,'' he told Reuters in an interview Monday. ''If they are really concerned,
then let them lay down their arms.''

President Mahinda Rajapaksa and his brother, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the defense
minister,   have  rejected previous truce offers.

In January 2008, the government pulled out of a cease-fire agreement that had
been brokered by Norway in 2002, saying the rebels had used the period of the
truce to rearm and regroup. Government leaders vowed to crush the rebels within
the year.

Government troops have cornered the principal group of rebel fighters in a small
strip of land on the country's northeastern coast. The government says the Tamil
Tigers, fighting from their last remaining enclave, now control less than  about
33 square miles.

Earlier this month, the United States, the European Union, Japan and Norway
called on the Tamil Tigers to consider surrendering. They urged the rebels to
disarm, accept a governmental amnesty and reformulate themselves as a political
party.

Trapped along with the fighters are an estimated 250,000 civilians who have been
caught in the cross-fire. Human rights groups, the U.N. and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have called on both sides  --  to little effect  --
to allow the civilians to  escape the war zone.

A report last week by Human Rights Watch said 2,000 civilians have been killed
and 5,000 injured in the past six weeks. In criticizing the government and the
rebels alike, Human Rights Watch said both sides ''appear to be engaged in a
perverse competition to demonstrate the greatest disregard for the civilian
population.''

On Friday night, two Tamil Tiger aircraft were shot down while apparently trying
to suicide-bomb the capital, Colombo. Two people were killed and more than 50
injured   when one of the planes crashed into a government building.

The attack seemed to be an indication that the Tamil Tigers were far from
finished as a fighting force. The government had announced weeks ago that the
last rebel air bases had been destroyed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (78%);
AMNESTY (77%); DISARMAMENT (77%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (77%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); POLITICS
(76%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%); EUROPEAN COMMISSION (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (93%); EUROPE (93%); NORWAY (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (88%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 2, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Trial, Peru's Fujimori Says He's Innocent

BYLINE: By ALEXEI BARRIONUEVO; Andrea Zarate contributed reporting from Lima,
Peru.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO


-- Former President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru defiantly defended himself in
court on Wednesday against accusations of human rights abuses, saying that he
was innocent of murder and kidnapping charges related to his government's
counterinsurgency tactics during a bloody period of guerrilla attacks in the
early 1990s.

Mr. Fujimori took the stand in his own defense at his trial in Lima, Peru, now
in its 15th month. He was seeking to convince a three-judge panel that he should
not be held responsible for a dirty war that prosecutors said led to the deaths
of 25 people by two military death squads, as well as the kidnappings of a
businessman and a journalist.

In nationally televised testimony, Mr. Fujimori read from a prepared statement,
describing the campaign against guerrillas during his presidency from 1990 to
2000 as a ''policy of pacification.''

''I did nothing wrong,'' he said indignantly. ''The Peru that I inherited was a
disaster. It was a Peru that had to be rescued.'' He added that the  campaign
against terrorism was intended to ''eliminate the disorder and anarchy that had
taken hold of Peru.''

Mr. Fujimori is believed to be the world's first democratically elected former
president to be tried for human rights violations in his own country.

Dressed in a dark gray suit and blue tie, he showed few signs of the various
medical conditions, including hypertension, that have caused frequent delays in
the trial.

Shaking his right hand at times to emphasize a point, Mr. Fujimori, 70, spoke
for nearly two hours. He is scheduled to conclude his defense on Friday. He
faces 30 years in prison if convicted.

None of the 80 witnesses and nearly two dozen outside experts who testified
during the trial have directly linked Mr. Fujimori to two deadly operations by
the Colina group, a special military unit. Rather, prosecutors have argued that
as commander in chief and leader, he did nothing to try to stop the killings of
guerrilla suspects and their supporters. He is charged with failing to stop the
Colina group from massacring 15 people, including an 8-year-old boy, in 1991 at
a barbecue in Lima, Peru's capital.

He is also charged with human rights violations related to a raid at La Cantuta
University in 1992 that left nine students and a professor dead. Their
incinerated bodies were found a year later.

Mr. Fujimori described the early years of his presidency as a time of persistent
guerrilla attacks in Lima that demanded bold action. His government ultimately
subdued the insurgencies, capturing the leader of the Maoist-inspired Shining
Path in 1992 and defeating the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement in 1997.

On the stand Wednesday, Mr. Fujimori acknowledged that he had sent the military
into towns, but he insisted that soldiers were armed only with ''picks and
shovels'' to develop very poor areas.

Supporters  lined the road leading to the police complex where the trial is
being held.

''I think it's very unjust that they want to put him away for giving us
security,'' said  Fernando Navarro Quispe, who works in a pharmacy in Lima. ''We
were living hidden in our homes because we were afraid to leave.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Former President Alberto Fujimori of Peru testified Wednesday on
his own behalf in Lima in his trial on human rights abuses.(PHOTOGRAPH BY PILAR
OLIVARES/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); RESCUE OPERATIONS
(89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); EXPERT WITNESSES (74%); ARMED FORCES (74%);
JAIL SENTENCING (73%); JUDGES (73%); TERRORISM (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%);
STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (65%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); MURDER
(58%); HYPERTENSION (50%)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%)

COUNTRY: PERU (97%); BRAZIL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             149 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru's Ex-President Is Convicted and Given 25 Years for Killings and Other
Abuses

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Andrea Zarate and Lucy Conger contributed reporting
from Lima, Peru.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela


A three-judge panel of Peru's Supreme Court on Tuesday convicted former
President Alberto K. Fujimori of human rights abuses and sentenced him to 25
years in prison. The abuses included the killing of 25 people by a military
death squad created by Mr. Fujimori in the early 1990s as the country was locked
in a bloody conflict with Maoist rebels.

The case has stirred old tensions in Peru, where Mr. Fujimori, 70, remains a
popular figure after subduing  two rebel groups during his years in power, from
1990 to 2000. Almost 70,000 people were killed in the war with the Maoist
guerrillas, known as the Shining Path, and the smaller Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
Movement.

''We feel completely satisfied,'' said Gisela Ortiz, 36, whose brother, a
student, was one of the death squad's victims in 1992. ''The criminal apparatus
that was used to commit these crimes has been exposed.''

Specialists in international human rights law closely followed the case because
of its implications for other former or current heads of state who might face
charges of war crimes and other abuses. Mr. Fujimori was convicted of murder,
aggravated kidnapping and battery, as well as crimes against humanity.

The verdict, which he said he would appeal, follows a long  saga. Mr. Fujimori
fled to Japan in 2000 and arrived in Chile in 2005 with a plan to return to
power in Peru, only to be extradited by Chile in 2007 to stand trial.

''The charges have been proved beyond all reasonable doubt,'' Cesar San Martin,
the chief judge of the panel, said Tuesday  in the courtroom at a base for
special forces on the outskirts of Lima.

In a previous case, Mr. Fujimori had already been sentenced to six years in
prison for ordering an illegal search, while his government was collapsing in
2000, of the residence of the wife of Vladimiro Montesinos, his former
intelligence chief. With that sentence to run concurrently with the 25-year
sentence handed down on Tuesday, less the time Mr. Fujimori has served since his
extradition two years ago, he could remain in prison until 2032.

The verdict came after a trial that lasted more than a year and was broadcast on
television in Peru. Among other things, the judges found Mr. Fujimori guilty of
the murder of 15 people, including an 8-year-old boy, at a barbecue in the
Barrios Altos area of Lima, and of 10 people who were abducted in 1992; their
burned bodies were found a year later outside Lima.

The killings were carried out by a shadowy squad of military intelligence
officers, known as the Colina Group. In testimony last week, Mr. Fujimori said
he had not authorized the murders or kidnappings.

''I had to govern from hell,'' he said. ''That is why I am being judged.''

The panel of judges also found him guilty of overseeing the kidnappings of
Gustavo Gorriti, a prominent journalist, and Samuel Dyer, a businessman, in
1992. Both men were later freed.

Mr. Fujimori still faces two additional trials on corruption charges. The
Supreme Court could take four to six months to rule on his appeal of the
conviction on Tuesday, Peruvian legal experts said.

As the verdict was read, Mr. Fujimori, wearing a dark suit and a black necktie,
sat alone and silent in the courtroom, writing on a notepad.

Outside the building, hundreds of his supporters faced off in shouting matches
with people who had turned out to demonstrate against Mr. Fujimori, who is known
in Peru as Chino, although his ancestry is Japanese. Riot police officers tried
to separate the two groups, but some clashes took place.

Some of Mr. Fujimori's followers brandished signs reading ''Fuerza 2011,'' or
''Force 2011,'' a reference to Peru's presidential election in two years; his
daughter, Keiko Fujimori, 34, a congresswoman, is a candidate for president. Ms.
Fujimori has said that if she is elected, she will pardon her father.

''My indignation is immense to listen to this judgment full of hate and
vengeance,'' Ms. Fujimori said of the verdict, in televised comments.

Others disagreed with that assessment, pointing to detailed testimony during the
trial, the report of Peru's Truth and Reconciliation Commission and documents
declassified by the United States government.

A State Department cable on Aug. 23, 1990, for example, described information
from a Peruvian intelligence source, a former naval officer, who said that the
plan to carry out extra-judicial assassinations of suspected terrorists had
''the tacit approval of President Fujimori.'' Ernesto de la Jara, director of
the Legal Defense Institute, a human rights organization in Lima, described the
judges' verdict as ''an impeccable sentence.''

''It is so well made that it would be difficult to dismantle it,'' he said.

On Lima's streets, reactions ranged from redemption to dismay. ''Injustice has
been committed,'' said Jorge Garcia, 42, a motorcycle mechanic who admires Mr.
Fujimori. ''Now we must take to the streets to make ourselves heard,
peacefully.''

Others had a more simple analysis. ''If he is guilty,'' said Tomasa Sanchez, 35,
a cellphone saleswoman, ''then he should pay.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Alberto K. Fujimori
 Opponents of Alberto K. Fujimori, president of Peru from 1990 to 2000,
celebrated the verdict that was announced Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAREL
NAVARRO/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); SENTENCING (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); JUDGES (89%); VERDICTS (89%);
SUPREME COURTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
MURDER (73%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (73%); BURN INJURIES (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%)

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (57%)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (88%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (59%)

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); CHILE (92%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%);
VENEZUELA (59%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 15, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Islamic Law Now Official For a Valley In Pakistan

BYLINE: By SABRINA TAVERNISE; Salman Masood contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan has signed a measure that would impose
Islamic law in the northwestern valley of Swat, in a move that was largely seen
as a capitulation to Taliban militants.

Mr. Zardari's approval came late Monday, after  Parliament voted overwhelmingly
for the measure, which would allow militants to administer justice through
courts whose judges have Islamic training.

The local government in Swat agreed in February to allow the militants to impose
Islamic law in exchange for a cease-fire. The deal came after months of
fighting, during which the Pakistani Army was unable to subdue the militants.

Mr. Zardari had delayed giving the agreement a national stamp of approval,
saying that the militants should first demonstrate that they would abide by the
cease-fire. He signed the measure under pressure from conservatives, even though
little in the valley has changed.

The deal has raised concerns in the Obama administration, which is pressing
Pakistan to work harder to counter militants as the United States steps up its
campaign in neighboring Afghanistan.

''We're disappointed that the Parliament didn't take into account the legitimate
concerns around civil and human rights,'' the White House spokesman, Robert
Gibbs, said Tuesday.

Residents of the Swat Valley, once one of Pakistan's most popular vacation
spots, have been terrorized by militants from the Taliban, who human rights
activists say are using Islam as an excuse to extend their own power. In the
past week the Taliban made inroads into Buner, a district only 60 miles from the
capital and likely to be the next district to fall under their control.

''The conflict is political, not religious,'' said Ibn-e-Abduh Rehman, head of
the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. ''They don't want Parliament, they
don't want elections, they don't want judges.''

A former interior minister, Aftab Ahmad Sherpao, said the government had no
choice but to back the deal because its military campaign in the area had failed
and civilian casualties had been mounting.

''This agreement was reached not from a position of strength but from a position
of weakness,'' he said.

The government now needs to press the militants by monitoring whether they hold
up their end of the bargain to lay down their arms, Mr. Sherpao said.

Critics of the deal worry that it could simply provide the militants with a new
haven from which they can carry out attacks. But Mr. Sherpao said the signing
meant the militants had no excuse to use violence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (94%); RELIGION (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%);
CONSERVATISM (78%); APPROVALS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ARMIES (71%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); DISARMAMENT (70%)

PERSON: ASIF ALI ZARDARI (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             154 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Spanish Prosecutors Formalize Objections to Torture Indictments

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Victoria Burnett contributed reporting from Madrid.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Spanish prosecutors  formally recommended throwing out a criminal complaint on
Friday against six former Bush administration officials who were accused of
violating international law by giving  legal cover for the use of torture of
detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

In Spain, a prosecutors' review is customary but not binding before starting a
case. This one reflected the strong political pressure building to get rid of a
lawsuit that appeared unusually ambitious in scope and could complicate
relations with the United States, legal experts said.

But the decision on whether to begin a criminal investigation of  the six
officials will be made by an investigating judge. In this case, that is likely
to be  Baltasar Garzon, who has ignored opinions of politicians and law
enforcement officials before.  Spain's best-known judge, he gained international
fame by achieving the arrest of the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in
London in 1998.

Lawyers at the court said they now expected a tug of war within the court and
between judges and politicians.

Madrid's National Court  is somewhat set apart from the country's regular court
system. As the top criminal court, it deals with cases that are international in
scope, including terrorism, corruption, drug trafficking and human rights
violations. The suit against the six Americans was filed at this court by a
group of human rights lawyers in March,  and until this week it appeared to be
moving ahead unhindered.

Last week, the prosecutors gave the green light for legal action, according to
lawyers who saw a draft of their review. The draft said that Spain had
jurisdiction under international law, including under the United Nations
Convention Against Torture, and that there was enough evidence of wrongdoing for
a criminal investigation to proceed, those who saw the legal opinion said. In
addition, five former Guantanamo inmates, three of them Spanish citizens and two
Spanish residents, have said that they were tortured.

But that green light turned red on Thursday, when Spain's attorney general,
Caandido Conde-Pumpido,  told journalists that he was opposed to an
investigation.

He argued that  the proper forum for any criminal actions would be American
courts. And, citing what he called flaws in the complaint, he insisted  that the
focus of investigation should be on the interrogators who actually mistreated
detainees.

That appeared to put him at odds with President Obama,  who the same day sought
to reassure C.I.A.  operatives that they would not be prosecuted for using
brutal interrogation methods if they had acted on official legal advice.

Mr.   Obama left open the possibility that others could still face criminal
penalties. He did not address whether lawyers   who had authorized the
interrogation methods should face any penalty.

Besides Alberto Gonzalez, the former attorney general, the complaint named John
C. Yoo, the former Justice Department lawyer who wrote secret opinions saying
the president had the authority to circumvent the Geneva Conventions; Douglas J.
Feith, the former under secretary of defense for policy; William J. Haynes II,
former general counsel for the Department of Defense; Jay S. Bybee, Mr. Yoo's
former boss at the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel; and David S.
Addington, the chief of staff and legal adviser to Vice President Dick Cheney.

Secret memorandums by Mr. Yoo and other top administration lawyers helped clear
the way for aggressive policies like waterboarding and other harsh interrogation
techniques, which the C.I.A. director, the attorney general and other American
officials have said amount to torture.

Spain's attorney general said that going after lawyers or legal advisers without
going after their bosses,  that is,  President Bush and other top officials, was
a ''legal artifice'' that would pose  problems.

Gonzalo Boye, the lawyer for the human rights group that filed the complaint
against the officials  in March, dismissed the attorney general's arguments as
''legal nonsense.'' He said that in Spain as in most countries, legal advisers
can be held accountable for bending or breaking the law.

In their review issued Friday, prosecutors also said the complaint against the
American lawyers should be assigned to a different judge who was already
investigating whether secret C.I.A. flights to or from Guantanamo had landed at
Spanish airports. They said that that judge should then close the case.

Judge Garzon quickly challenged that. In a statement on Friday,  he said
transferring the case would  not be appropriate because the judge in question
was not investigating torture or mistreatment.

Lawyers in Madrid said that a new complaint was being prepared on behalf of five
former Guantanamo detainees who are either citizens or residents of Spain, a
move that  would likely provide a new twist in the proceedings.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); POLITICS (89%); TORTURE
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(89%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
CORRUPTION (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
PRISONS (77%); JURISDICTION (76%); JUDGES (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(76%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (63%); WRITERS (61%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (60%); TERRORISM
(51%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (51%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SPAIN (94%); CUBA (91%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             155 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Women March, America Turns Away

BYLINE: By NADER NADERY and HASEEB HUMAYOON.

Nader Nadery is a member of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
Haseeb Humayoon, a student at Middlebury College, has worked as a consultant to
nongovernmental groups in Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1089 words


LAST November, extremists on motorbikes opposed to education for women sprayed
acid on a group of students from the Mirwais School for Girls in Kandahar,
Afghanistan. Several young women were severely burned. Yet it did not take more
than a few weeks for even the most cruelly disfigured girls to return to school.
Like the crowds of women in Kabul this week who protested a new law that
restricts their rights, the Mirwais students demonstrate unbending courage and
resolve for progress. They don't fear much -- except that the world might
abandon them.

That is why President Obama's Afghanistan-Pakistan policy speech last month and
his administration's related white paper are worrisome: both avoided any
reference to democracy in Afghanistan, while pointedly pushing democratic
reforms in Pakistan. The new policy represents critical shifts -- such as a new
emphasis on civilian work, and recognizing the regional nature of the problem
and the inadequacy and abuse of resources. But a faltering commitment to the
democratization of Afghanistan and ambiguous statements from Washington on an
exit strategy have left us Afghans scratching our heads.

The Obama administration's bold declaration of what is to be defeated (Al Qaeda)
and absence of equal zest for what is to be built (democracy) inspires a sense
of deja vu. The last time the United States was seriously involved in
Afghanistan, its goal was the defeat of the Soviet Union. But after that
''success,'' extremist militias greedy for power brought our society to its
knees. In the absence of the rule of law and legitimate and democratic
institutions, the militias' atrocities allowed the Taliban to rise to power and
harbor those behind the 9/11 attacks.

To defeat the forces of oppression, Washington must promote and protect the
ideals of democracy and human rights. It is true that Afghanistan has miles to
go before it will be a real democracy. But why won't the new administration
state a commitment to helping us get there?

First, with the economic crisis and other domestic priorities, there is a sense
in Washington that helping Afghanistan democratize is either a luxury American
taxpayers cannot afford or a charitable cause they can delay. This shows a
misunderstanding of both what is needed to help Afghans build a real democracy
and the lasting interest of the United States.

Second, there is a temptation among some in Washington to believe that if the
zeal for democratic reform or women's and minority rights in Afghanistan were
relaxed, Taliban insurgents would find ''reconciliation'' more attractive and
the war would end more quickly.

This belief is encouraged by the radically conservative forces that have
increased their influence since 2005 over the Kabul government, which has been
backtracking on its commitment to rights like freedom of the press and equality
under the law. This was exemplified by two events last month: the upholding  of
a 20-year jail sentence given to a young journalist for printing a controversial
article from the Internet that was critical of the role traditionally assigned
to women in Islam; and President Hamid Karzai's signing of a law affecting the
country's Shiite minority that places restrictions on when a woman can leave her
house and states the circumstances in which she is obliged to have sex with her
husband. That law prompted the protests this week in Kabul.

It would seem that the escalating violence the country has suffered since 2005
would be a pretty convincing demonstration that giving up ground on democracy
and human rights is not helping end this war. Rather, the Taliban has
interpreted it as a sign of the weakness of the Afghan government and its
international allies. The Afghan public, even as it faces an unpopular and
brutal insurgency, is no longer sure if a government that is reluctant to stand
up for human rights deserves support. Afghans are also aware that if their
government does not honestly commit to judicial and legislative reforms, it will
lose American and European public support.

Third, and perhaps most important, many Westerners still cling to incorrect
assumptions about Afghans, which they use as excuses for abandoning
democratization. One such belief is that Afghans are a ''tribal people'' who
probably do not want a say in choosing their leaders. Others claim that because
Afghanistan is a traditional Islamic society, any promotion of democracy and
women's rights will be resented as an imposition of Western values. Another
much-heard statement is that Afghans are ''fierce independent fighters'' who
mercilessly defy external influence, so the United States better not get bogged
down in this ''graveyard of empires.''

These assumptions are wrong. In our first democratic elections, in October 2004,
11 million Afghans -- 41 percent of them women -- registered to vote. In a 2008
survey by the Asia Foundation, 76 percent of Afghans responded that democracy
was the best form of government. An estimated 10 million people, one-third of
the population, live in cities. Almost 65 percent of Afghans are under the age
of 25. This dominant generation came of age not under the old tribal structures
but in an Afghanistan whose traditional fabrics were torn apart by Soviet tanks
and our long civil war.

As for women's rights, the troubles that brewed in Afghanistan during the 1990s
-- civil war, followed by the Taliban's totalitarianism and harboring of Al
Qaeda -- were in great part the result of the female half of our population
being deprived of social and political participation. Like everyone else,
Afghans crave security, justice, accountability, educational and employment
opportunities, and a promise of a future.

Democracy and progress are not products to be packaged and exported to
Afghanistan. Afghans have to fight for them. Last month, the two of us helped
organize ''Afghanistan: Ensuring Success,'' a conference led by Zalmay
Khalilzad, the Afghan-born former United States ambassador to the United
Nations. Speakers included Afghans from all walks of life  and there was broad
agreement that, in the words of President Obama, it was time to ''pick ourselves
up, dust ourselves off'' and strive for genuine democratic progress and
self-reliance.

But as we approach Afghanistan's second democratic elections, in August, we
cannot afford to have our allies falter -- through rhetoric or policy -- in
supporting our nascent democratic forces. Those brave and burned young women of
Kandahar did not give up. How could we?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY LOREN CAPELLI)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (91%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); TALIBAN
(89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); BURN INJURIES (77%); DISCRIMINATION LAW
(76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (71%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (66%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (63%); CHARITIES
(50%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (88%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             156 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 22, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Won't Bar Inquiry, or Penalty, on Interrogations

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Peter Baker contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Obama left the door open Tuesday to creating a bipartisan commission
that would investigate the Bush administration's use of harsh interrogation
techniques on terrorism suspects, and did not rule out action by the Justice
Department against those who fashioned the legal rationale for those techniques.

The remarks, in response to questions from reporters in the Oval Office,
amounted to a shift for the White House. The president had repeatedly said that
the nation should look forward rather than focusing on the past, and his chief
of staff, Rahm Emanuel, said Sunday in a television interview that Mr. Obama
believed that ''those who devised policy'' should not be prosecuted.

But under intense pressure from Democrats on Capitol Hill and human rights
organizations to investigate, the president suggested Tuesday that he would not
stand in the way of a full inquiry into what he has called ''a dark and painful
chapter'' in the nation's history.

Mr. Obama said he was ''not suggesting'' that a commission be established. But
he also sketched out the parameters for a panel that would look much like the
one that investigated the Sept. 11 attacks, saying that ''if and when there
needs to be a further accounting,'' he hoped Congress would examine ways for it
to be conducted in a bipartisan fashion. Some Democrats are pushing similar
proposals on Capitol Hill.

The president restated his opposition to prosecuting C.I.A. operatives who
followed the Bush administration's legal guidelines in conducting
interrogations. But as for lawyers or others who drew up the policies allowing
techniques he has banned, Mr. Obama said it would be up to his attorney general,
Eric H. Holder Jr., to decide what to do.

''I don't want to prejudge that,'' Mr. Obama said.

The comments knocked the ordinarily smooth White House press operation back on
its heels. Mr. Obama's press secretary, Robert Gibbs, spent much of his daily
briefing on Tuesday being peppered with questions about precisely what Mr. Obama
had meant, declaring at one point, ''To clear up any confusion on anything that
might have been said, I would point you to what the president said.''

The White House's shifting comments in recent days provide a glimpse into its
struggle to deal with one of the thorniest issues Mr. Obama has faced since
taking office. That issue has turned all the more prickly for him since his
decision to release previously secret memorandums detailing the harsh tactics
used by the C.I.A. under President George W. Bush -- memos revealing that, for
instance, two captured operatives of Al Qaeda were subjected a total of 266
times to a form of near drowning known as waterboarding.

In an indication of the crosscurrents the president has faced in dealing with
the issue, his own national intelligence director said in an internal memo last
week that the now-banned interrogation methods had produced valuable
information, contrary to the White House view that they had not been effective.

''High-value information came from interrogations in which those methods were
used and provided a deeper understanding of the Al Qaeda organization that was
attacking this country,'' Dennis C. Blair, the intelligence director, wrote to
his staff last Thursday as the previously secret memos were  released.

A condensed version of the Blair memo was distributed to news organizations that
day without that sentence. The original memo was provided to The New York Times
on Tuesday by a critic of Mr. Obama's policy. Wendy Morigi, a spokeswoman for
Mr. Blair, said Tuesday that the sentence had been dropped in a routine process
of shortening an internal memo into a statement for the news media.

Responding to a query about the fuller memo, Mr. Blair issued a statement
Tuesday evening underscoring his support for the president's release of the
previously secret documents and for Mr. Obama's decision to ban the ''enhanced
interrogation techniques'' at issue.

''We do not need these techniques to keep America safe,'' said Mr. Blair, who
added: ''The information gained from these techniques was valuable in some
instances, but there is no way of knowing whether the same information could
have been obtained through other means. The bottom line is these techniques have
hurt our image around the world, the damage they have done to our interests far
outweighed whatever benefit they gave us, and they are not essential to our
national security.''

Bush administration veterans, starting with former Vice President Dick Cheney,
have argued that the harsh methods helped prevent terrorist attacks. In an
interview Monday on Fox News, Mr. Cheney called for the Obama White House to
release additional memos that he said showed that the techniques were useful.

''There are reports that show specifically what we gained as a result of this
activity,'' he said. ''They have not been declassified.''

Some human-rights advocates interpreted Mr. Obama's remarks on Monday as an
invitation for them to step up pressure on the White House for the president to
create a 9/11-style bipartisan commission on his own. They said they had pushed
that idea with senior White House officials, although Mr. Obama has not
committed to it, either in public or, they said, in private.

On Capitol Hill, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Patrick J.
Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, has proposed a ''truth commission,'' an idea
endorsed by some other Democrats.

But Mr. Obama said Tuesday that he feared a Congressional inquiry would turn
partisan and divide the country. ''I do worry about this getting so politicized
that we cannot function effectively,'' he said, ''and that it hampers our
ability to carry out critical national security operations.'' He said he would
prefer an inquiry ''outside of the typical hearing process,'' with ''independent
participants who are above reproach and have credibility.''

Elisa Massimino, executive director of Human Rights First, an advocacy group
here, said Mr. Obama was using the same language her organization had used in
trying to persuade the White House that he should create a commission. ''Those
criteria that he outlined,'' she said, ''those are the exact same things we've
been saying to them.''

The debate promises only to escalate in the days ahead. The three Bush
administration lawyers who signed the interrogation memos -- John C. Yoo, Jay S.
Bybee and Steven G. Bradbury -- are the subject of a coming report by the
Justice Department's ethics office that officials say is very critical of their
work. The office has the power to recommend disbarment or other professional
penalties or, less likely, to refer cases for criminal prosecution.

Mr. Obama was not specific in discussing what course of action, if any, the
attorney general might take, saying only, ''I think that there are a host of
very complicated issues here.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
INTERVIEWS (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (72%); HISTORY (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(69%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); RAHM EMANUEL (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); ERIC HOLDER
(59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             157 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2009 Thursday
                                National Edition

The Good Lobbyist

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 294 words


It's a cliche for a candidate to denounce the power of Washington insiders and
the corruption of lobbyists' wealth. So it was refreshing to see President Obama
deliver on his campaign stand and refuse to hire registered lobbyists for jobs
in their areas of special advocacy.

There also can be too much of a good thing. We think the White House is being
overly rigid with its decision not to nominate Tom Malinowski, the Washington
advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, to be the administration's global
human rights chief.

By any fair judgment, Mr. Malinowski is ideally qualified, having worked
ardently across the world -- both outside government and in -- on the gamut of
rights issues, from torture to genocide. He is the antithesis of the
deep-pocketed, back-slapping K Street insiders who gave the lobbying profession
a black eye across the Capitol reign of Tom DeLay.

White House officials agree on Mr. Malinowski's virtues but nevertheless are
making a show of insisting there must be no double standard for him as a
registered lobbyist. What makes it especially puzzling is the Obama policy does
allow for an occasional waiver. The president issued one for William Lynn, a
lobbyist for the powerful defense contractor Raytheon who was his indispensable
choice to be deputy secretary of defense.

The White House said then that while Mr. Obama favored strict ethical rules, he
also believed ''any standard is not perfect,'' and ''a waiver process that
allows people to serve their country is necessary.''

The administration won its case for Mr. Lynn in Senate hearings. Mr. Malinowski
should be nominated and given the same chance to argue that he is committed to
promoting American values and serving the interests of all of the American
people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LOBBYING (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ETHICS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (70%); GENOCIDE (70%); DEFENSE
CONTRACTING (65%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (65%)

COMPANY: RAYTHEON CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

TICKER: RTN (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (55%); NAICS336414 GUIDED
MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (55%); NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING
(55%); NAICS334511 SEARCH, DETECTION, NAVIGATION, GUIDANCE, AERONAUTICAL &
NAUTICAL SYSTEM & INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             158 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 2, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abu Dhabi Torture Video Raises Doubts in U.S. About Nuclear Pact

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon


A gruesome videotape showing a member of the Abu Dhabi ruling family torturing
an Afghan grain merchant has begun casting a lurid new light on allegations of
human rights abuses in a city-state better known for skyscrapers and global
finance.

The 45-minute videotape shows Sheik Issa bin Zayed al-Nahyan, assisted by
uniformed police officers, torturing the merchant with whips, cattle prods and a
wooden plank with a protruding nail, and finally driving over him with an S.U.V.

The videotape -- first shown last week by ABC News -- has provoked outrage from
members of Congress, who said it could add fuel to lawmakers' reservations about
a pending civilian nuclear agreement between the United States and the United
Arab Emirates, the seven-member federation on the Persian Gulf to which Abu
Dhabi belongs.

The controversy comes at a delicate time for the oil-rich Emirates, whose
reputation for tolerance and soaring financial success has already been
tarnished in recent months by a collapsing real estate boom and a crackdown on
the foreign news media. Web sites with links to the torture tape have been
blocked in the Emirates, in violation of the Emirates' own policies. No local
news media reported on it until the Abu Dhabi government issued a short
statement on Wednesday condemning the acts shown on the video.

Still, outrage has been quietly growing among citizens of the Emirates, where
the prestige of the ruling family is important to political stability.

''They've put a lot of political capital into this nuclear deal; they have to
push it through,'' said Christopher M. Davidson, a scholar who has written
extensively on the Emirates. ''But to do so, they may have to sacrifice one of
their own, and that will damage the myth of the ruling family.''

The videotape, made in 2004, emerged in a separate lawsuit filed by Bassam
Nabulsi, a former business partner of Sheik Issa. Mr. Nabulsi, an American
citizen from Houston, claims he was later tortured by Emirates police officers
after he refused to hand over the videotape.

The tape was made by Mr. Nabulsi's brother on orders from Sheik Issa, who liked
to film torture sessions and watch them later in his palace, said Anthony G.
Buzbee, Mr. Nabulsi's lawyer.

In its statement, the government of Abu Dhabi -- the emirate to whose ruling
family Sheik Issa belongs -- promised a ''comprehensive review'' of the matter.
It also said the government ''understands that the matter depicted on the video
was resolved between the two parties and that no criminal charges were brought
by either party.''

The man being tortured in the video is Mohammed Shah Poor, an Afghan grain
merchant who Sheik Issa believed had cheated him, Mr. Buzbee said. Mr. Poor was
gravely injured but survived, Mr. Buzbee said.

ABC News reported that the Abu Dhabi authorities had acknowledged Sheik Issa's
role in the torture, and that they had said it was ''not part of a pattern of
behavior.''

A spokesman for the Abu Dhabi government declined to comment, and sent a text
message saying, ''All we have is now public knowledge.''

Mr. Buzbee says he has two additional videos showing Sheik Issa torturing other
men, including Sudanese immigrants. In those tapes, 15 to 20 Abu Dhabi police
officers can be seen assisting in the torture, he says.

''These videotapes capture behavior that went on for some time and was well
known to Sheik Issa's brothers,'' who include the president, interior minister
and foreign minister of the Emirates as well as other high-ranking officials,
Mr. Buzbee said. Sheik Issa does not hold a government position.

Daryl Bristow, Sheik Issa's lawyer, said in a statement that ''Bassam Nabulsi
and his lawyer are attempting to use a videotape of a third party to influence
the court and public opinion'' about the lawsuit. He added that he could not
comment on details because of the suit, but that ''when all the facts are known,
the one-sided 'story' being told by Nabulsi and his lawyer will be completely
addressed and Nabulsi will be discredited.''

Last year, another member of the ruling family, Falah bin Zayed al-Nahyan, was
convicted by a Swiss court of beating an American man with a belt in a Geneva
hotel bar in 2003. He has appealed that verdict.

Under the pending nuclear agreement, the United States would share expertise,
technology and fuel in exchange for a promise by the Emirates to abide by
international safeguards and the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. The United
States has already signed agreements with India, Egypt and Morocco, and is
planning nuclear pacts with other states in the Middle East even as it leads
efforts to stop Iran's nuclear program.

Some American lawmakers have concerns about the deal, saying Dubai -- one of the
seven parts in the Emirates federation -- has been used as a transit point for
technology bound for Iran. The torture video could add to those reservations.

''How can we move forward with such a delicate agreement in the face of such an
atrocious human rights violation?'' said Representative James P. McGovern,
Democrat of Massachusetts, the co-chairman of the House Human Rights Commission.
''If it were brought to Congress now, I would certainly ask that it be
rejected.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A frame from a video as it was shown last week on ABC News shows
an Afghan grain merchant being tortured in Abu Dhabi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (74%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (72%); REAL ESTATE (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (66%)

CITY: ABU DHABI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (95%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); GULF STATES (79%);
LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A World of Least-Wanted Lists

BYLINE: By GRAHAM BOWLEY

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1073 words


Last week, the British government published a list of 16 people barred from the
country. Eight Muslim clerics, writers and political advocates were among them.
And then there was a right-wing radio host from San Francisco, an anti-gay
pastor and his like-minded daughter from Kansas, and a former grand wizard of
the Ku Klux Klan from Florida.

Their crimes: ''spreading hate.''

The first reaction of many was shock. To ban someone for what they say (like the
radio host, Michael Savage) rather than what they do? That's out of place in a
democracy, right?

The level of shock may be a measure of how far we have traveled in the United
States since our own 9/11 neurosis: in the age of Obama, America is dismantling
the prison at Guantanamo Bay and lifting restrictions on Cuban-Americans who
want to travel to Cuba, rules from an even more ancient era.

According to Ben Ward of Human Rights Watch in London, the British list was
mainly about the Muslims -- the American right-wingers were politically correct
padding -- and shows just how much Britain and countries like France and Spain
still worry about the militant Islamists in their midst.

But of course we shouldn't be so naive. People are stopped from traveling all
the time -- around the globe and in the United States. They are held back for
minor and major infractions, but also for what they think or say, although
Britain more or less stands alone in making public who is banned -- a
name-and-shame list, as the British government put it.

Perhaps the most common reason for being stopped at a border is a shady past,
like a criminal record. According to Lucille Cirillo, a spokeswoman for United
States  Customs and Border Protection, the approach is not list-based but more
opportunistic: asked at the border to declare a criminal history or other
illicit activity on a visa waiver form, reprehensibles often do so.

This approach has been enough to catch ''the odd Rolling Stone or two,'' Ms.
Cirillo said. It also stopped Amy Winehouse, and in March 2008, Sebastian
Horsley, a British artist/exhibitionist and author of an antic memoir of rampant
drug use and encounters with prostitutes. Mr. Horsley was turned back at Newark
airport for ''moral turpitude.'' The definition ''is pretty broad, from child
endangerment to drug use to rape,'' Ms. Cirillo said.

In a seeming celebrity diplomatic tit-for-tat, Britain continues to fight to bar
the rapper Snoop Dogg after a reported melee at Heathrow Airport.

Apart from run-of-the-mill misdeeds like heroin addiction and financial fraud,
the United States will stop you for suspected terrorist activity -- and for this
it has a list, although it is not public.

To make the Coordinated Terrorist Watchlist, which has been maintained since
2003, you have to be ''reasonably'' suspected of ''involvement in terrorist
activity,'' according to Chad Kolton, spokesman for the F.B.I.'s Terrorist
Screening Center in northern Virginia. It can be fund-raising or recruiting,
''but it's a fairly high standard,'' he said, and so probably does not include
simply speaking about terrorism.

The list has 400,000 names. About 95 percent of people on the list are not
United States citizens, and the vast majority are not in the country. Last week,
a Justice Department report found that about 24,000 names had been kept on the
list in error because of outdated or irrelevant information.

Mr. Kolton said that 40 to 50 people who are named show up in a ''positive
encounter'' on the center's screens each day. Some are stopped, he said; others
are allowed to fly on and are monitored.

During the cold war, the United States had a rich tradition of excluding people
it didn't like on ideological grounds. Morton H. Halperin, a consultant to the
Open Society Institute, an organization that promotes democracy around the
world, said the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952 targeted Communists but in the
following decades was applied rather more broadly. According to the American
Civil Liberties Union, the act famously excluded the future Canadian prime
minister Pierre Trudeau and the writers Graham Greene, Gabriel Garcia Marquez,
Doris Lessing and Dario Fo.

Although Congress eventually repealed the act, the power of ''ideological
exclusion'' persists today in the USA Patriot Act, according to Caroline
Fredrickson of the A.C.L.U. The act allows the authorities to bar foreigners who
use a ''position of prominence within any country to endorse or espouse
terrorist activity.'' In a letter in March to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton, among others, the A.C.L.U. and other human rights groups said that
dozens of scholars and intellectuals were being banned from the country ''not on
the basis of their actions but on the basis of their ideas.''

Perhaps the most celebrated recent case is that of Tariq Ramadan, a Swiss Muslim
scholar who was prevented from entering the United States by the Bush
administration in 2004 when he had a job lined up at the University of Notre
Dame. He now teaches at Oxford.

Lists or no lists, ''many governments exclude people whose views they don't
like,'' said Aryeh Neier, president of the Open Society Institute. ''They simply
deny them visas. China excludes people all the time. They don't ordinarily give
explanations.''

Finally, there are those restrictions imposed on heads of state -- international
pariahs and their entourages -- whose behavior has made them subject to
international sanctions. This includes the Mugabes and Bashirs of the world.

But do bans work? One of the consequences of the British list, it seems, was the
sudden global celebrity of Mr. Savage, who responded by saying he would sue the
British home secretary.

Mr. Savage's inability to enter Britain (and he apparently hadn't even expressed
a wish to) will presumably not stop him from espousing his views. The British
can hear him on the Internet.

In another recent incident, Geert Wilders, a Dutch politician, was barred  from
Britain after he had been invited to the House of Lords for a screening of his
film ''Fitna.'' The film caused outrage in the Muslim world. He later traveled
to Washington for a screening.

Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who has been barred by the European Union from
entering member states, nevertheless claimed an exemption under United Nations
rules when he traveled last year to a food conference in Rome -- where,
according to the European press, his wife went shopping.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS CHART: Don't Even Think About Visiting: A selection of those who
have been barred entry by various governments, with reasons for banishment, when
given.(Sources: The New York Times and other news reports
Human Rights Watch
American Civil Liberties Union
Amnesty International
 British government)(CHART BY BILL MARSH/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WRITERS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (74%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (73%);
RELIGION (73%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); TERRORISM (69%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (69%); CHILD ABUSE (69%); BORDER CONTROL (68%); HIP HOP
CULTURE (64%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (62%); HEROIN (60%); RAP MUSIC (60%); SUBSTANCE
ABUSE (60%); PROSTITUTION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%); AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); CUBA (91%); SPAIN (79%);
FRANCE (55%)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             167 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Accuses Israel and Hamas of War Crimes in Gaza

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL; Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Amnesty International on Thursday accused both Israel and Hamas, the militant
movement that controls Gaza, of committing war crimes during the three weeks of
fighting there early this year.

The human rights group singled out what it called the ''unprecedented'' scale
and intensity of the Israeli onslaught and the ''unlawful'' Palestinian use of
rockets against Israeli civilians.

Both Hamas and Israel rejected the report as unbalanced.

The Israeli military suggested that the ''slant'' of the report ''indicates that
the organization succumbed to the manipulations'' of Hamas. Moreover, it said in
a statement, the report ignored Israeli efforts to minimize civilian casualties.

The statement also said Israel's investigations into the behavior of its forces
during the war in late December and January proved that the military ''operated
throughout the fighting in accordance with international law, maintaining high
ethical and professional standards.'' It acknowledged, however, that the
inquiries ''found a few, unfortunate incidents'' resulting from Hamas's decision
''to fight from within civilian population centers.''

A Hamas spokesman, Fawzi Barhoum, quoted by The Associated Press, declared:
''The report equated the victim and the executioner and denied our people's
right to resist the occupation. The report ignores the scale of destruction and
serious crimes committed by the occupation in Gaza and provides a misleading
description in order to reduce the magnitude of the Israeli crimes.''

The Amnesty International report was the second this week by an international
human rights organization calling into question Israeli military practices in
the Gaza war.

A report released Tuesday by Human Rights Watch said 29 civilians were killed in
what appeared to be six missile strikes by Israeli drones. The group questioned
whether Israeli forces had taken ''all feasible precautions'' to avoid civilian
casualties. Israel's military has never acknowledged using the remotely piloted
planes to fire missiles.

Amnesty International, which is based in London, released its 117-page report on
Thursday.  It explicitly rejected Israeli claims that Hamas used civilians as
human shields but said that in several cases, Israeli soldiers used Palestinian
civilians, including children, as ''human shields, endangering their lives by
forcing them to remain in or near houses which they took over and used as
military positions.''

''The scale and intensity of the attacks on Gaza were unprecedented,'' the
report said, citing the deaths of hundreds of unarmed civilians, including many
children.

Referring to breaches of the ''laws of war'' in the conflict, Amnesty
International said Palestinian rocket fire into southern Israel -- cited by
Israel as its reason for invading Gaza -- killed three civilians, wounded scores
and drove ''thousands from their homes.''

''For its part, Hamas has continued to justify the rocket attacks launched daily
by its fighters and by other Palestinian armed groups into towns and villages in
southern Israel during the 22-day conflict,'' Donatella Rovera, an Amnesty
International official who led an investigation team in Gaza and southern Israel
in January and February, said in a statement. ''Though less lethal, these
attacks, using unguided rockets which cannot be directed at specific targets,
violated international humanitarian law and cannot be justified under any
circumstance.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Two Palestinian girls on Thursday stood on the balcony of a
building riddled with bullets in Rafah, in southern Gaza.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID
KHATIB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ETHICS (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (71%); CHILDREN (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (59%); LONDON, ENGLAND (52%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); FRANCE (59%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             169 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Displaced by War, Many Tamils Languish in Sri Lankan Camps

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1333 words

DATELINE: CHEDDIKULAM, Sri Lanka


When the piercing whistle and sharp thuds of artillery shells grew faint, S.
Theventhran dashed to safety.

After days of cowering in a narrow, open trench on a strip of beach in the
northeastern corner of Sri Lanka, he was cheered by the sight of Sri Lankan Army
soldiers helping wounded and terrified survivors of the last stand of the Tamil
Tiger rebels, who had held nearly 300,000 Tamil civilians hostage.

More than two months later, Mr. Theventhran, a 56-year-old Tamil civil servant,
finds himself once again a captive, this time of the people who freed him from
the Tigers' grip.

''We were liberated,'' he said in an interview at one of the sprawling, closed
camps set up here to house those displaced in the war against the rebel group,
known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. ''Now we are prisoners again. I
lost everything in this war. The Tigers killed my son. I lost my property. Now I
have lost my freedom, too.''

Hundreds of thousands of Tamils remain locked in camps almost entirely off
limits to journalists, human rights investigators and political leaders. The Sri
Lankan government says that the people in the camps are a security risk because
Tamil Tiger fighters are hiding among them.

But diplomats, analysts, aid workers and many Sri Lankans worry that the
historic chance to finally bring to a close one of the world's most enduring
ethnic conflicts is slipping away, as the government curtails the rights of
Tamil civilians in its efforts to stamp out the last remnants of the Tigers.

''The government told these people it would look after them,'' said Veerasingham
Anandasangaree, a prominent Tamil politician who has been a staunch supporter of
the government's fight against the Tamil Tigers. ''But instead they have locked
them up like animals with no date certain of when they will be released. This is
simply asking for another conflict later on down the road.''

The Sri Lankan government has portrayed its final battle against the 26-year
insurgency by the Tamil Tigers, which ended in late May with the killing of the
group's leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, as a rescue mission to liberate
civilians held hostage by one of the world's richest and most ruthless armed
groups, branded terrorists by governments across the globe.

''We can't say this was a war; it was a humanitarian operation to safeguard the
people of the area,'' said Sri Lanka's president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, in a rare
interview last week. ''They knew we were not against the Tamil people, against
the civilians. This was only against the terrorists.''

Although many of the camps' residents are grateful to the government for freeing
them from the rebels, frustration and anger are building as it becomes clear
that reconciliation and finding a political solution to the grievances of the
Tamils and other minority groups in Sri Lanka will have to wait.

Conditions in the camps have improved since the early days in April and May when
the sudden influx of hundreds of thousands of people caught the government and
aid groups flatfooted. Hundreds of sturdy shelters are being built to replace
flimsy tents.

Children are attending schools, and health centers and hospitals are helping
check the spread of infectious diseases. But that has done little to tamp down
the impatience of those living here. The screening process has lasted longer
than most people had imagined.

Mr. Rajapaksa said that he had ordered that 80 percent of the displaced should
be resettled by the end of the year. But government officials say this goal may
be tough to meet, because many of the land mines across much of the north have
not been cleared.

Many of the displaced people here said they would happily leave the crowded
camps to stay with relatives elsewhere in the country until they could return to
their villages.

Some elderly people have been allowed to leave, but government officials refused
to say when others who have been screened would be released.

Mr. Rajapaksa said that the residents of the camps, which the government refers
to as ''welfare villages,'' must be confined, because anyone could be a hidden
rebel.

The government says about 10,000 fighters have been identified so far, most
because they turned themselves in.

Indeed, the murky status of the people held here in what many describe as
internment camps is emblematic of the conundrum at the heart of Sri Lanka's
civil war. The Tamil Tigers so thoroughly insinuated themselves into Tamil
communities, particularly here in the Tamil Tigers' former stronghold in the
north, that in the government's eyes the two have become virtually synonymous.

''They recruited everybody,'' Mr. Rajapaksa said, including old men and teenage
girls. ''Everyone was ready to take the gun.''

Mr. Rajapaksa, who was elected in 2005 after promising to end the war, has cast
the struggle against the Tamil Tigers as part of the war against terrorism. He
is fond of saying that there are no minorities in Sri Lanka, ''only people who
love their country and people who don't love their country.''

Sri Lanka's government has celebrated its triumph over the Tigers as the world's
first purely military defeat of an insurgent terrorist group. The war spanned
nearly three decades and left tens of thousands of people dead and uprooted
hundreds of thousands more.

But human rights organizations here and abroad have documented some of the other
heavy costs of the victory.

The government has clamped down hard on dissent. Journalists have been
mysteriously killed, arrested and chased from the country.

Thousands of Tamils have disappeared, presumably arrested by the government on
suspicion of being Tamil Tiger fighters, according to Mano Ganesan, a Tamil
member of Parliament who has been tracking disappearances for years.

Questions remain about how many civilians were killed in the last bloody weeks
of the war, when the Tigers were pushed onto a narrow stretch of beach along
with hundreds of thousands of civilians.

After insisting for months, improbably, that no civilians had died, Mr.
Rajapaksa acknowledged that some must have been killed and said that the
government was investigating the last days of the war.

''My instruction was there cannot be any single civilian casualty,'' he said.
''The army was very careful.''

But the United Nations has said that at least 7,000 people died up to the end of
April, when the last push began. No one is sure how many were killed in those
last few weeks of fighting, but witnesses said the battlefield was covered with
bodies.

Satellite images of the zone seem to contradict government claims that no heavy
weapons were used there, revealing large, scorched craters.

''We had to walk over dead bodies,'' said Priyadharshai Jeeveraj, whose husband,
a salaried policeman who had worked for the Tigers, was arrested  on the last
day of the fighting and has not been seen since. ''There were hundreds of bodies
everywhere.''

The Sri Lankan government has managed to brush off outside efforts to
investigate, quashing an effort to do so by the Human Rights Council in Geneva
in May.

But the longer the camps for displaced Tamils remain hidden from view, the
harder it will be for the Sri Lankan government to keep the support of the
foreign countries helping to pay the millions of dollars required to feed,
shelter and clothe the displaced.

''Perversely, if we keep helping we become the jailer of these people,'' said
one diplomat from a country that is helping pay for the relief effort.

Aid organizations, too, are expressing reservations.

''The longer it goes on, the more it looks like internment,'' said one aid
official, who asked not to be identified to protect the charity's work.

But Mr. Rajapaksa said that preventing the Tamil Tigers from regrouping was his
first priority.

''The citizen's security is No. 1,'' he said. ''You must remember that we have
just defeated the most ruthless terrorist group. We are very careful. I can't
let this become like Baghdad.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A worker took a break last week from building shelters for
refugees near Vavuniya, Sri Lanka. (pg.A1)
People who fled fighting this spring in Sri Lanka were still living in a camp
near Vavuniya last week. Hundreds of thousands of Tamils remain locked in camps.

 People lined up for medical treatment last week in the camp near Vavuniya.
Human rights investigators have little access. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KEITH BEDFORD FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A8)   MAP: Many displacement camps are situated near
Cheddikulam. (pg.A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (89%); INTERVIEWS
(88%); BEACHES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); ARMIES (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
CIVIL SERVICES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             174 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 28, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial of Myanmar Rights Leader Nears End

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


The prosecution in Myanmar concluded its final arguments on Monday in the trial
of the jailed pro-democracy leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, her lawyer said.

The lawyer, U Nyan Win, said the defense would respond to those arguments on
Tuesday, concluding a case that has drawn international condemnation since it
opened May 18. No date has been set for a verdict, Mr. Nyan Win said by
telephone from Myanmar's main city, Yangon.

Further hearings are continuing in the case of John Yettaw, the American whose
two-day intrusion in early May at the villa of Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi was the
cause of her trial. She faces a possible five-year prison term on a charge of
violating the terms of her house arrest, which has been in place for 14 of the
last 19 years.

Mr. Yettaw faces a similar term on immigration charges and on a charge of
violating city ordinances for swimming across a lake to her house. Two women who
live with Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi are also on trial on charges similar to those
brought against her.

Adding its voice to international condemnation of the military junta in Myanmar,
formerly known as Burma, Amnesty Internationalawarded its highest honor on
Monday to Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, 64, naming her this year's ''Ambassador of
Conscience.''

The recognition, on the 20th anniversary of her original arrest, adds to other
awards Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi has received, including the Nobel Peace Prize in
1991.

''In those long and often dark years, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has remained a symbol
of hope, courage and the undying defense of human rights, not only to the people
of Myanmar but to people around the world,'' Irene Khan, the secretary general
of Amnesty International, said in announcing the award.

Many analysts say the trial is a pretext for extending her house arrest, at
least through what is expected to be a tightly controlled parliamentary election
next year.

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi's party, the National League for Democracy, won the last
parliamentary election, in 1990, but was prevented from taking office as the
country's military rulers clung to power. Many of the party's winning candidates
have since been imprisoned.

The defense has not contested the facts of the case, but argues that Mrs. Aung
San Suu Kyi did not break any relevant laws. Her lawyers say she allowed Mr.
Yettaw to spend two nights at her house because he pleaded that he was hungry
and tired after his swim. He was arrested after swimming back across the lake.

On the day after her latest arrest, President Obama ordered a one-year extension
of a package of economic sanctions against the military junta, initially imposed
in response to its human rights violations. The United States had said it was
reviewing its policy of sanctions before the announcement.

Despite condemnation from abroad, there has been very little public protest
within Myanmar. Reporters on the scene said security had been tightened outside
Insein Prison, where the trial was being held and where Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi
was being detained.

The trial has been mostly closed to the public. But on four occasions, a few
diplomats have been allowed inside the courtroom, including part of Monday,
according to reports from Myanmar.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The case of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, pictured in 2007, has drawn
global condemnation.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MYANMAR NEWS AGENCY, VIA A.P.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (90%); MILITARY RULE (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); AWARDS & PRIZES (89%); HOUSE ARREST (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
PRISONS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); NOBEL PRIZES
(77%); ORDINANCES (76%); IMMIGRATION (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (60%); US PRESIDENTS (60%); ANNIVERSARIES (50%)

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI (90%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: YANGON, MYANMAR (58%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             177 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 2, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

100 Dissidents On Trial in Iran For Conspiracy

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH and NAZILA FATHI; Robert F. Worth reported from
Beirut, and Nazila Fathi from Toronto.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1201 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon


The Iranian authorities opened an extraordinary mass trial against more than 100
opposition figures on Saturday, accusing them of conspiring with foreign powers
to stage a revolution through terrorism, subversion, and a media campaign to
discredit last month's presidential election.

The trial, coming just days before President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is to be sworn
in for a second term, signaled an intensified government attack on the
opposition movement, which maintains that the June 12 election was rigged and
continues to muster widespread street protests.

The accusations read out in the courtroom were a broadside against virtually
every major figure associated with reform in Iran, going well beyond those
actually arrested. State television broadcast images of the defendants, who
included a former vice president and a Newsweek reporter, as well as some of the
reform movement's best-known spokesmen, clad in prison uniforms and listening as
prosecutors outlined their accusations in a large marble-floored courtroom. Some
were shackled.

Opposition leaders angrily disputed the accusations on Saturday and protested
that the defendants had had no access to lawyers or to details of the charges
against them.

The leading opposition presidential candidate, Mir Hussein Moussavi, issued a
call on his Web site, Ghalam News, for Iranians to resume their nightly protest
chants of ''God is great'' more intensely than ever.

Those protests have infuriated the country's ruling ayatollahs, and Basij
militiamen roam the streets in force in an effort to snuff out the chanting
wherever it crops up.

Although the trial was expected, its scale took many Iranians by surprise,
coming days after the government said there would be only 20 defendants.

As the trial started, just after 9 a.m., prosecutors named a long and
wide-ranging list of conspirators, including the Nobel laureate Shirin Ebadi and
the Stanford historian Abbas Milani, and echoed the Iranian government's
longstanding claims that its internal critics are pawns of an international plot
to undermine the Islamic republic through human rights groups and even
terrorists. There was no indication that the authorities intended to arrest Mr.
Moussavi or any others not yet charged, but prosecutors accused him of drawing
crucial support from enemies of the state in Iran and abroad.

The only media organization allowed to cover the trial was the semiofficial Fars
news agency, which has links to the country's Islamic Revolutionary Guards
Corps. That, in combination with recent revelations about the Guards' central
role in holding detained protesters, bolstered a widespread view that the Guards
were aggressively leading the effort to put down the opposition movement. Some
have taken Mr. Ahmadinejad's dismissal last week of his intelligence minister,
who had objected to the broadcasting of confessions by detainees, as yet another
sign of the Guards' control.

On Saturday, prosecutors highlighted what they called a confession by Muhammad
Ali Abtahi, a cleric who served as vice president under the reformist government
of Mohammad Khatami. Mr. Abtahi, one of Iran's most widely read bloggers, was
arrested shortly after the election, and word later emerged that he had appeared
in a tearful videotaped confession. Such confessions, which have frequently been
used before, are almost always obtained under duress, according to human rights
groups and the defendants themselves.

''I believe the reformists had prepared for two or three years for this
election, in order to limit the powers of the supreme leader,'' Mr. Abtahi said,
according to a Fars transcript. ''I want to tell all friends that there was no
fraud in the election, it was just a lie to build the protests around.''

In his confession, Mr. Abtahi began by praising the high election turnout. Later
in the confession, he said the three leading opposition figures -- Mr. Moussavi,
Mr. Khatami and former President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani -- ''promised to
always back each other up'' in distorting the election results.

Mr. Rafsanjani, a powerful insider who has shown support for the opposition,
harshly criticized the trial on Saturday, saying that ''the obtaining of
confessions from those who have recently been imprisoned,'' which formed the
basis of the indictment, had thrown the basis of the country's entire government
into question, according to a statement posted on the semiofficial Mehr news
agency.

In photographs, Mr. Abtahi could be seen sitting in a gray prison uniform in the
front row at the trial clutching a white piece of paper, his cleric's turban
gone and his face a grim mask. Seated near him was Muhammad Atrianfar, a
prominent journalist who served as deputy interior minister.

There were other former high-ranking officials in the dock as well, including a
former deputy Parliament speaker, Behzad Nabavi, and a former deputy economy
minister, Mohsen Safai-Farahani. Also on trial was an Iranian-American scholar,
Kian Tajbakhsh, who was seized last month by the police.

The deputy prosecutor in Tehran, Abdolreza Mohebati, also referred to what he
called incriminating remarks by Maziar Bahari, a journalist who works for
Newsweek, suggesting that there was a ''policy of the Western media'' to say the
trial was rigged before it even took place. Later, Mr. Bahari was brought out to
speak to journalists on the sidelines of the trial, where he delivered a short,
chilling lecture on the media's alleged role in fomenting a ''velvet
revolution.'' He then asked forgiveness from the Iranian people and the supreme
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

Some senior government officials touted Mr. Abtahi's confession as proof of the
opposition's malign intent. But the confession, which was disjointed and at
times almost incoherent, seemed to be a kind of compromise with what his
interrogators wanted him to say. At one point, Mr. Abtahi is quoted as saying,
''I think there was the capacity for what the deputy prosecutor called a 'velvet
revolution,' but I don't know if the intention was there or not.''

Like the prosecutors' opening statement, the six-part indictment was
wide-ranging but focused heavily on the role of the media, suggesting repeatedly
that acts as simple as taking pictures of protests should be seen as criminal
acts aimed at subverting the Islamic republic and its supreme leader. Its claims
were based largely on the alleged confessions of Mr. Abtahi and others, and on
the testimony of an unnamed alleged spy.

The indictment did not identify specific charges, but in past trials the
government accused defendants of ''acting against national security,'' which can
carry the death penalty. In earlier cases, reformists were convicted and
sentenced to long prison terms, which often were significantly reduced by
appeals courts.

Omid Memarian, an Iran consultant at Human Rights Watch who was jailed in 2004
on accusations of jeopardizing national security, said the government now wants
to justify its use of violence in putting down the demonstrations.

''It is part of their effort to say the results were not rigged,'' he said.
''But it will backlash against them like other efforts.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A photo by the Fars news agency showed Muhammad Ali Abtahi,
second from right, a former vice president, among the more than 100 defendants
at a trial for reformers on Saturday.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY HOSSEIN SALEHI ARA/FARS
NEWS AGENCY, VIA EUROPEAN PRESS) (A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONSPIRACY (91%); TERRORISM (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (87%);
IRANIAN ELECTION PROTESTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); ELECTIONS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%);
NEWS REPORTING (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); ELECTION
FRAUD (72%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (69%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (69%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (63%); NOBEL PRIZES (50%)

PERSON: MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (58%); MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (56%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             178 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbs' Claim of Kosovo Organ Ring Is Investigated

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE


Europe's leading human rights group began an investigation on Monday into Serb
allegations that Serbian civilians were abducted in Kosovo during the Kosovo war
of 1998-99 and taken to Albania, where their organs were extracted for sale
before they were killed.

The inquiry, by the Council of Europe, based in Strasbourg, France, is being led
by Dick Marty, a Swiss senator, who previously investigated the existence of
alleged secret Central Intelligence Agency prisons in Europe used to interrogate
terrorist suspects. The Council said Mr. Marty would meet this week with leading
war crimes officials and human rights groups in Serbia and Albania.

Distrust between the two groups remains high even a decade after the war, with
each side accusing the other of atrocities. Serbian war crimes investigators are
now alleging that up to 500 Serbs from Kosovo disappeared during the Kosovo war.
Ethnic Albanian guerrillas fought Serb forces under the Serbian leader Slobodan
Milosevic in a conflict over control of Kosovo in which 10,000 people were
killed, most of them ethnic Albanians.

Ethnic Albanian officials in Pristina, Kosovo's capital, have strenuously denied
the allegations, saying they are politically motivated and aimed at undermining
Kosovo, which defied Serbia by declaring independence last year. Serbia
considers Kosovo its cultural heartland.

Serbian investigators say they have evidence that at least 10 people were
abducted by ethnic-Albanian guerrillas as part of an alleged underground
trafficking operation in which the guerrillas made use of a network of hidden
hospitals in Albania to extract organs, before dumping the bodies of victims
into mass graves.

The allegations surfaced publicly last year in a memoir by Carla Del Ponte, the
former chief United Nations prosecutor for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
In the book, Ms. Del Ponte claims, based on what she describes as credible
witnesses and reports, that after NATO bombed Serbia in 1999, ethnic Albanian
guerrillas transported hundreds of Serbian prisoners into Northern Albania,
where they were killed and their organs ''harvested'' and trafficked out of
Tirana, the Albanian capital.

When the book was published, ethnic Albanian officials and many analysts
questioned why Ms. Del Ponte had chosen to reveal the allegations five years
after her investigators examined the claims. They also noted that the inquiry
had failed to provide enough evidence to form a case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); WITNESSES (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (73%); TERRORISM (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (64%)

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (58%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (57%)

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (79%); TIRANA, ALBANIA (77%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (92%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (98%); SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); KOSOVO (95%);
EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             181 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 25, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rendition to Continue, but With Better Oversight, U.S. Says

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Obama administration will continue the Bush administration's practice of
sending terrorism suspects to third countries for detention and interrogation,
but pledges to closely monitor their treatment to ensure that they are not
tortured, administration officials said Monday.

Human rights advocates condemned the decision, saying that continuing the
practice, known as rendition, would still allow the transfer of prisoners to
countries with a history of torture. They said that promises from other
countries of humane treatment, called ''diplomatic assurances,'' were no
protection against abuse.

''It is extremely disappointing that the Obama administration is continuing the
Bush administration practice of relying on diplomatic assurances, which have
been proven completely ineffective in preventing torture,'' said Amrit Singh, a
lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, who tracked rendition cases
under President George W. Bush.

Ms. Singh cited the case of Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian sent in 2002 by
the United States to Syria, where he was beaten with electrical cable despite
assurances against torture.

The announcement, by President Obama's Interrogation and Transfer Policy Task
Force, seemed intended in part to offset the impact of the release on Monday of
a long-withheld report by the C.I.A. inspector general, written in 2004, that
offered new details about the brutal tactics used by the C.I.A. in interrogating
terrorism detainees.

Though the Obama administration previously signaled that it would continue the
use of renditions, some civil liberties groups were disappointed because, as a
presidential candidate, Mr. Obama had strongly suggested he might end the
practice. In an article in Foreign Affairs in the summer of 2007, Mr. Obama
wrote, ''To build a better, freer world, we must first behave in ways that
reflect the decency and aspirations of the American people.''

Mr. Obama continued, ''This means ending the practices of shipping away
prisoners in the dead of night to be tortured in far-off countries, of detaining
thousands without charge or trial, of maintaining a network of secret prisons to
jail people beyond the reach of the law.'' In January, the president ordered
secret prisons run by the C.I.A. to be shut down.

The task force has proposed a more vigorous monitoring of the treatment of
prisoners sent to other countries, but Ms. Singh said the usual method of such
monitoring -- visits from American or allied consular officials -- had been
ineffective. A Canadian consular official visited Mr. Arar several times, but
the prisoner was too frightened to tell him about the torture, a Canadian
investigation found.

The administration officials, who discussed the changes on condition that they
not be identified, said that unlike the Bush administration, they would operate
more openly and give the State Department a larger role in assuring that
transferred detainees would not be abused.

''The emphasis will be on ensuring that individuals will not face torture if
they are sent overseas,'' said one administration official, adding that no
detainees would be sent to countries known to conduct abusive interrogations.

Rendition began to be used regularly under President Bill Clinton and its use
expanded rapidly under President Bush after the terrorist attacks in September
2001. American intelligence agencies often appeared to send detainees to other
countries to avoid the legal complications of bringing them to the United
States.

Some human rights advocates said they thought the Obama administration was
maintaining the rendition program out of fear that its elimination would force
the government to accept additional detainees on American soil and threaten Mr.
Obama's pledge to close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by
January.

The task force that recommended the modified transfer policy was set up in
January to study changes in rendition and interrogation policies under an
executive order signed by President Obama.

Another recommendation approved by Mr. Obama was a proposal to establish a
multiagency interrogation unit within the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to
oversee the interrogations of top terrorism suspects using largely noncoercive
techniques approved by the administration earlier this year.

The creation of the new unit will formally strip the C.I.A. of its primary role
in questioning high-level detainees, but agency officials said they would
continue to play a substantial role.

''The C.I.A. took active part in the work of the task force, and the agency's
strong counterterrorism knowledge will be key to the conduct of future
debriefings,'' said Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman. ''That won't change.''

The new unit, to be called the High Value Interrogation Group, will be made up
of analysts, linguists and other personnel from the C.I.A. and other
intelligence and law enforcement agencies. It will operate under policies set by
the National Security Council.

The officials said all interrogations would comply with guidelines contained in
the Army Field Manual, which outlaws the use of physical force. The group will
study interrogation methods, however, and may add additional noncoercive methods
in the future, the officials said.

Tom Malinowski of Human Rights Watch said the new interrogation policy
represented a significant step toward more humane treatment, though he expressed
dismay that administration officials failed to impose stricter limits on
rendition.

But he praised the Obama administration's overall approach to difficult
counterterrorism issues, saying the government had adopted ''some of the most
transparent rules against abuse of any democratic country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Maher Arar testified in 2007 before a House panel about his
transfer by the United States to Syria, where he was tortured. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
KEVIN WOLF/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); PRISONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (75%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (67%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SYRIA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 26, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Papers

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 601 words


The Obama administration has taken important steps toward repairing the grievous
harm that President George W. Bush did to this nation with his lawless and
morally repugnant detention policies. President Obama is committed to closing
the Guantanamo Bay camp and creating legitimate courts to try detainees. He has
rescinded the executive orders and the legal rulings that Mr. Bush used to
excuse the abuse of prisoners.

The Defense Department has taken the important step of reversing policy and
notifying the International Committee of the Red Cross of the identities of
militants who were being held in secret at camps in Iraq and Afghanistan. And
Attorney General Eric Holder has appointed a prosecutor to investigate the
interrogation of prisoners of the Central Intelligence Agency, whose inhuman
treatment was detailed in a long-secret report written by the agency's inspector
general in 2004 and released on Monday.

Yet despite these commendable individual steps, Mr. Obama and his political
advisers continue to shrink from the broad investigation of the full range of
his predecessor's trampling on human rights, civil liberties and judicial
safeguards that would allow this country to make sure this sordid history is
behind it for good.

Indeed, the administration seemed reluctant to make public the C.I.A. report,
which was released under a court order and was heavily censored, with whole
pages blacked out -- including the four pages of recommendations. Before Mr.
Holder announced his investigation, the White House made it clear that it was
unhappy with his decision -- repeating its sadly familiar line about ''looking
forward, not backward.''

Mr. Holder displayed real courage and integrity in ordering the investigation.
But he stressed that it was limited to the specific interrogations outlined in
the C.I.A. report, and did not amount to a full-blown criminal investigation of
the Bush-era detention policies.

The interrogations are certainly worthy of criminal investigation. The report
describes objectionable and cruel practices well beyond waterboarding. They
included threatening a detainee's family members with sexual assault and
threatening to kill another's children; the staging of mock executions; and
repeatedly blocking a prisoner's carotid artery until he began to faint.

The report said the interrogations generally followed guidelines approved by Mr.
Bush's Justice Department, which dedicated itself to finding ways to authorize
abuse and evade legal accountability. But it offered a scathing condemnation of
those guidelines, which it said diverged ''sharply'' from the practices of
military and police interrogators, and the positions of pretty much everyone
else, including the State Department, Congress, other Western governments and
human rights groups.

The inspector general said that, in some cases, interrogations exceeded even the
Bush Justice Department's shockingly lax standards.

The report offers one more compelling reason for a far broader inquiry into Mr.
Bush's lawless behavior. It is possible to sympathize with Mr. Obama's desire to
avoid a politically fraught investigation. But the need to set this nation back
under the rule of law is no less urgent than it was when he promised to do so in
his campaign.

That will not be accomplished by investigating individual interrogators. It will
require a fearless airing of how the orders were issued to those men, and who
gave them. Only by making public officials accountable under the law can
Americans be confident that future presidents will not feel free to break it the
way Mr. Bush did.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
APPROVALS (72%); SEX OFFENSES (69%); CENSORSHIP (65%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (62%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (75%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE
RED CROSS (57%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%); ERIC HOLDER (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); IRAQ (79%); AFGHANISTAN (77%)

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 5, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Setting Priorities in Civil Rights Enforcement

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg.

LENGTH: 470 words


To the Editor:

''Reviving Civil Rights'' (editorial, Sept. 2) is, well, uncivil.

The fact is that most of the work of the federal government's civil rights
enforcement agencies, including the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division,
remains the same from administration to administration. On the other hand, there
are also important differences: disagreements about the use of racial
preferences (a k a affirmative action), whether actual discriminatory intent
needs to be shown, whether the focus should be on nondiscrimination and equal
opportunity versus racial balancing and equal results.

Different administrations will also have different policy priorities -- for
example, addressing discrimination on the basis of religion versus sexual
orientation, or human trafficking versus predatory lending.

But the language in your editorial ignores these good-faith differences.
Instead, the Bush administration ''declared war on the whole idea of civil
rights,'' appointed a ''far-right ideologue'' who ''screened out job applicants
with civil rights sympathies,'' ''abandoned'' civil rights enforcement (the word
''abandoned'' is used three times), even ''aggressively fought on the
anti-civil-rights side'' on issues like voting rights. Come on.

I served as deputy to the head of the Civil Rights Division in the Reagan and
George H. W. Bush administrations. My organization monitored the more recent
Bush administration's work carefully and found much to criticize: it was not
conservative enough.

Roger Clegg President and General Counsel Center for Equal Opportunity Falls
Church, Va., Sept. 2, 2009

To the Editor:

''Reviving Civil Rights'' correctly points out the dire state of prisoners'
rights under the Bush administration. But the abandonment of prisoners has been
bipartisan and reached its height in 1996, when Congress passed and President
Bill Clinton signed the Prison Litigation Reform Act.

This law creates a separate and unequal legal system for incarcerated people,
singling out their lawsuits in federal court for a host of burdens and
restrictions that apply to no one else.

As a result, many cases in which prisoners seek court protection from unhealthy
or dangerous conditions or a remedy for sexual assault or other serious injury
have been dismissed. Human Rights Watch is not aware of any other country in
which national legislation singles out prisoners for such restrictions.

A reinvigorated Civil Rights Division in the Justice Department will do much to
improve conditions in prisons, jails and juvenile facilities. But equally
essential is amending or repealing the Prison Litigation Reform Act to ensure
that the federal courts are open to all civil rights claimants without
discrimination.

David C. Fathi Director, U.S. Program Human Rights Watch Washington, Sept. 2,
2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (95%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN
EMPLOYMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); PRISONS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%);
LEGISLATION (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); RACE &
RACISM (76%); LAWYERS (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (75%); BUSINESS TORTS (75%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (74%); GAYS & LESBIANS (73%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (72%); SEX OFFENSES
(69%); RELIGION (69%); JAIL SENTENCING (68%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (66%); CORPORATE
COUNSEL (64%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); PREDATORY LENDING (54%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE H W BUSH (77%); BILL CLINTON (56%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             184 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Rejects U.N. Call for Gaza Inquiry

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Jerusalem,
and Taghreed el-Khodary from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israeli officials on Wednesday bluntly dismissed one of the main recommendations
of the United Nations fact-finding mission's report on the three-week war in
Gaza last winter: a call for the Israeli government to begin an independent
investigation of ''serious violations'' of international humanitarian and human
rights law, including evidence of war crimes, during the military campaign.

Mark Regev, a spokesman for the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said
that the internal military investigations into the Israeli Army's conduct in
Gaza already under way were ''a thousand times more serious'' than the
investigation just completed by the United Nations mission led by Richard
Goldstone, a respected South African judge.

Reflecting a broad consensus in Israel, the Israeli president, Shimon Peres,
also harshly criticized the report,  calling it ''a mockery of history'' for
failing ''to distinguish between the aggressor and a state exercising its right
for self-defense.'' Mr. Peres, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, added that the
report ''legitimizes terrorist activity, the pursuit of murder and death.''

The report, released on Tuesday, says that if no appropriate independent inquiry
gets under way in Israel within six months, the United Nations Security Council
should refer the matter to the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
It made a similar recommendation for Palestinian authorities, calling for an
inquiry into evidence of war crimes committed by Palestinian armed groups firing
rockets into Israel.

Ahmed Yousef, a senior adviser to the Hamas government in Gaza, said the local
authorities would investigate  the relevant cases  in the report. But he
reiterated his government's position that Israeli civilians killed by rockets
were victims of the fact that the Palestinians had only ''primitive weapons, and
with such weapons, mistakes are to be expected.'' The rockets, he added, were
fired in self-defense.

Israeli officials were particularly incensed about what they called the report's
delicate treatment of Hamas. Israel mounted its military offensive in
self-defense and as a last resort, they said, to curb the rocket fire from Gaza
against southern Israel. In a statement late Tuesday, the Foreign Ministry said
the report ''effectively ignores Israel's right of self-defense, makes
unsubstantiated claims about its intent and challenges Israel's democratic
values and rule of law.''

''At the same time,'' it said, ''the report all but ignores the deliberate
strategy of Hamas of operating within and behind the civilian population and
turning densely populated areas into an arena of battle.''

The report addressed the Israeli allegations, but said it found limited evidence
that Palestinian fighters had deliberately used civilians as human shields.

Mr. Regev, the Israeli government spokesman, said he found the whole equation
between Israel and Hamas in the United Nations report's recommendations
''bordering on the bizarre.''

Among the Israeli public, the  report elicited, for the most part, a furious
reaction. Most Israelis strongly supported the offensive in Gaza as the only way
to stop the rocket fire. The  international condemnation  did little to crack
that unity, nor have the highly critical reports issued since the war by
international organizations and human rights groups. Instead, the reports have
prompted  a sense that Israel's very legitimacy is under attack.

The Goldstone report fell into the same pattern. Some Israelis said they were
shocked by the breadth of topics it addressed -- its description of life in the
West Bank and the separation barrier, for example, and Israel's internal
politics -- seeing many issues as outside the commission's mandate. Instead,
they said, the report appeared to embrace years of United Nations complaints.

Many Israelis also criticized the report for what they called its failure to
understand the difficulties of asymmetrical warfare.

''The whole body of international law is based on army against army,'' said
Gerald M. Steinberg, a political scientist at Bar-Ilan University and a leading
force in Israel against what some here consider the politicized nature of human
rights discourse. ''What is a civilian? They used to be people who don't wear
uniforms and are outside the military. But if you have Gaza or Southern Lebanese
guerrilla forces who don't wear uniforms, who are illegal combatants, when is it
a legitimate target?''

Yaron Ezrahi, a political scientist at Hebrew University who has been highly
critical of the Gaza operation,  said:  ''Goldstone should have acknowledged
that this asymmetry creates a disadvantage for the state. It places a great
strain on our political system. Israel has an extremely difficult time staying
democratic in the ruthlessly hostile environment of the Middle East. Comfortable
governments in the West cannot begin to understand the plight of a country that
went through nine wars.''

During the years when Hamas sent thousands of rockets at Israeli civilians, the
United Nations human rights bodies did not put together an investigation or
issue a condemnation, Professors Steinberg and Ezrahi, and other experts,  said,
doing so only after Israel retaliated. In addition, officials here said,
Israel's attack on Gaza was part of its need to deter Iran and its proxies and
could not be looked at in isolation.

Amid the furor, some in Israel concurred with the panel's call for further
investigation. A group of nine  rights organizations said in a statement that
they had  written to  Israel's attorney general to demand that he establish an
independent body to investigate the military's activities in Gaza, but that he
rejected their request.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO A Palestinian on Wednesday cleaned the tent used by her family
since their Gaza home was destroyed by Israel last winter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); EVIDENCE (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); AWARDS & PRIZES (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (90%); SELF DEFENSE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HAMAS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); RULE OF LAW
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); NOBEL PRIZES (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); TERRORISM
(71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); JUDGES (69%); POPULATION DENSITY (60%); MURDER
(57%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%)

PERSON: SHIMON PERES (74%); BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (59%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%)

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             186 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Protester Flees Country After Telling of Rape and Torture in Prison

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1133 words


When he eagerly joined the mass street protests that followed Iran's tainted
June 12 presidential elections, Ibrahim Sharifi, 24, hoped only to add his voice
to the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators demanding that the government
nullify the results. He never imagined that he would eventually have a far
greater impact, as the only person willing to speak publicly about the brutal
treatment he was subjected to in prison, including rape and torture.

Mr. Sharifi, who recounted his ordeal to the opposition leader and former
presidential candidate Mehdi Karroubi, and then released a video account last
month on opposition Web sites, is now in Turkey. He said he fled Iran after a
stranger stopped him on the street to tell him his family would be killed if he
testified before a parliamentary committee that was investigating the torture
and rape accusations.

''I felt that I was not safe anymore and I could put my family's life in danger,
too,'' he said in a series of telephone interviews, in which he spoke in detail
about the protests, his imprisonment and the psychological scars he said the
abuse had left.

Since he was dumped by his captors on the side of a Tehran highway, he said, he
has been terrified of being alone. First, he had trouble sleeping, fearing that
the guard who raped him in prison would attack him again. Now he is convinced he
is being followed by someone who means to kill him.

''I was ready to be tortured to death,'' he said, his voice trembling. ''But not
ever to go through what happened to me there.''

Mr. Karroubi and another opposition leader and presidential candidate, Mir
Hussein Moussavi, have vigorously condemned the vicious tactics the security
authorities used against the demonstrators, 72 of whom they say were killed.
Yet, of all the allegations of brutality and abuse that were lodged, none have
presented such a threat to the government as those involving rape and sodomy,
which are culturally and religiously unacceptable in Iran.

The rape allegations were aired publicly by Mr. Karroubi after the victims began
coming to his office to report the abuses. The allegations -- which appeared to
reinvigorate the battered opposition -- were immediately rejected by the
government, which then raided the offices of Mr. Karroubi and Mr. Moussavi and
seized materials. Subsequently, a judicial investigating committee ruled that
documents presented as evidence of rapes and other abuse were fabricated.

But the government has been unable to silence the opposition and human rights
groups who dismiss the government's claims.

Human rights groups say that Mr. Sharifi's account conforms closely with those
of other abuse victims. Omid Memarian, a researcher with Human Rights Watch,
said he had confirmed the credibility of Mr. Sharifi's story with people close
to Mr. Karroubi.

''His narrative is consistent,'' Mr. Memarian said. ''He has no reason to risk
making up a story like that, especially because he also met with judiciary
authorities and demanded a thorough investigation.''

Mr. Sharifi was one of five brothers raised in north Tehran in a middle class
family that was religious but not fanatically so. His father, a retired military
officer, was a supporter of the 1979 revolution and participated in the rallies
against the shah. His mother wore the traditional head-to-toe chador.

At Open University in Tehran, Mr. Sharifi studied computer engineering, and
Italian at the Italian Consulate, the latter in hopes of studying medicine in
Italy.

Not overtly political, he said he wanted more democracy and freedom, but
gradually and peacefully. ''I always told my father that even the 1979
revolution was a mistake, and that my generation did not want one,'' he said.

He says everyone in his family favored the reform movement and were shocked when
Mr. Ahmadinejad announced that he had won in a landslide victory, an outcome
that has been denounced as a fraud.

Mr. Sharifi was outraged, and the only one in his family who began participating
in rallies every day. He was on his way back home the afternoon of June 22 when
he was grabbed by two men. ''I had taken part in every single protest, so I saw
this coming,'' he said.

He said he was handcuffed, blindfolded and, as he later learned, taken to the
notorious Kahrizak detention center in southwestern Tehran, where even the
government concedes that several detainees were killed.

He said he remained handcuffed and blindfolded for four days in a cramped cell
with about 30 other prisoners.

They were beaten senseless the first day, he said, and periodically after that
over the next four days. Urine and blood covered the floor.

By the fourth day he was beginning to lose hope of getting out alive. He had
trouble closing his mouth and he said he began vomiting blood.

''I told the guard that he should go ahead and just kill me if he wanted to,''
he said, breaking into tears. ''Then he called another guard and said 'Take this
bastard and impregnate him.' ''

They took him out of the cell to another room where they pushed him against a
wall that had handcuffs and two metal hooks to keep his legs open. The guard
pulled down his underwear, he said, and began raping him.

''He laughed mockingly as he was doing it and said that I could not even defend
myself so how did I think that I could stage a revolution.

''They wanted to horrify and intimidate me,'' he said, weeping.

At that point, Mr. Sharifi said, he passed out. The next thing he remembered was
opening his eyes and realizing he was in a hospital with one hand cuffed to his
bed. Another young man was screaming hysterically on a bed next to him.

He said he heard a doctor tell someone, ''Dump him or you'll have the same
problem as the other ones,'' meaning that he would die in custody. Two days
later, he said, they put him in a car, took him to a highway in Tehran and left
him there, blindfolded.

He immediately went to a psychiatrist who put him on a heavy dose of anxiety
medication. Then he went to a police station to file a complaint, but the
officers advised him to be thankful that he was alive and to try to forget about
it.

In time, he decided to go see Mr. Karroubi, having heard that other victims of
rape and torture were doing so. At first he spoke only about the torture; the
rape was too painful and embarrassing to talk about.

But Mr. Karroubi pressed him, suspecting that he had been sexually assaulted
because he began weeping and shaking every time he was asked about his last day
in prison. Finally, Mr. Sharifi told him.

Even after his shattering ordeal, Mr. Sharifi, who hopes eventually to get to
the United States, refuses to be intimidated.

''I think they are following me to kill me,'' he said. ''But I will not let them
force me into silence.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ibrahim Sharifi, 24, said he was beaten and raped during his
detention in a Tehran prison. He is now living in Turkey.(PHOTOGRAPH BY THE NEW
YORK TIMES)(A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); IRANIAN ELECTION PROTESTS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); TORTURE (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (74%); EVIDENCE (69%)

PERSON: MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (58%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); TURKEY (92%); IRAN (88%)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             187 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 4, 2009 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Questions Mount in India on Executions Attributed to the Police

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN; Hari Kumar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1151 words

DATELINE: AHMEDABAD, India


The tableau was as improbable as it was grisly. The bullet-riddled bodies of
four Muslims lay neatly lined up in the middle of a road. One of the dead
cradled a machine gun. Bomb-making chemicals and a suitcase full of cash sat in
the trunk of their car. Intelligence reports had identified the four  as
terrorism suspects.

It was a tidy crime scene with a story to match: four Islamic extremists who
planned to assassinate the powerful chief minister of India's richest state
stopped cold by a fearless band of policemen early on the morning of June 15,
2004. The officers were hailed as heroes.

But the story was too good to be true, according to a recently released
magistrate's report.  The supposed militants included a 19-year-old college
student, a woman named Ishrat Jehan, who had no evident links to terrorist
groups, the magistrate wrote.

The forensic evidence showed that the four had not died in a shootout but were
shot at point-blank range, much earlier than the police had said. None of the
four had actually fired a gun. They had been killed, the magistrate declared, in
cold blood.

The sensational case has fed a heated national debate about the longstanding
Indian police practice of killing suspects. Known euphemistically as ''encounter
killings,'' such extrajudicial executions have been a tolerated and even
celebrated method of dealing swiftly with crime in a country with a notoriously
slow and sometimes corrupt judiciary. An officer in such cases invariably
''encounters'' a suspect and kills him, supposedly in self-defense.

In cities like Mumbai, which was for decades gripped by violent organized crime
syndicates, officers who killed notorious gangland figures were often seen as
dark folk heroes, selflessly carrying out the messy business of meting out
justice. These officers, known as encounter specialists, became celebrities,
even boasting about the number of gangsters they had killed.

But Indians have become increasingly wary of police officers crusading as judge,
jury and executioner. Since 2006, 346 people have been killed in what seem to
have been extrajudicial police killings, according to the National Human Rights
Commission.

In many of these killings, investigations have found, the motive was not
vigilante justice. The police often staged such killings for personal gain:
bumping off a rival of a powerful politician in the hopes of a big promotion;
killing a crime boss at the behest of one of his rivals; settling scores between
businessmen.

Here in the state of Gujarat, the grim practice took on an even more sinister
form. According to court documents, lawyers, human rights activists and the
families of the victims, police officers seeking the favor of Gujarat's chief
minister, Narendra Modi, began killing small-time Muslim criminals and framing
them as big-time terrorists bent on mass murder. No evidence has been offered to
show that Mr. Modi encouraged such killings.

Riots in Gujarat killed more than 1,000 people, most of them Muslims, in the
aftermath of an attack on a train carrying Hindu pilgrims that killed 59 people
in 2002. Mr. Modi, a prominent member of the Hindu nationalist party, the
Bharatiya Janata Party, has long been accused of fueling the anti-Muslim
violence with inflammatory remarks.

Tensions between Hindus and Muslims here are high. The officers who carried out
the killings hoped to win promotions and other favors from lawmakers, according
to court documents and human rights workers here.

In Gujarat, the team of officers suspected of carrying out these killings
usually chose their victims carefully. In all five cases pending in the courts
so far, the main targets had shady pasts confirmed by an arrest or conviction,
usually for a petty crime. Most were Muslims.

But in the killing of Ms. Jehan that formula went awry. She hardly fit the usual
profile of encounter victims. She was a full-time college student who also
worked to provide for her widowed mother and six siblings.

According to her family, she was on a trip with her employer to help him set up
his marketing business. On June 15, she was shot, according to the police, along
with her accomplices as they tried to evade capture.

But the Gujarat magistrate's report shredded that claim. The food in the
victims' stomachs proved that they had been killed much earlier, the report
said. Their wounds were consistent with point-blank shootings. Their hands
showed no trace of gunpowder residue. The police had planted weapons on the
victims and staged the crime scene.

Gujarat government officials dispute the magistrate's report, and Gujarat's High
Court has stopped the authorities from arresting the officers it named as the
court conducts an inquiry.

Jay Narayan Vyas, a spokesman for the state government, said that the four
people killed had been identified by the central government as terrorism
suspects. A government intelligence report said that the four were possible
terrorism suspects, but the central government has said that these were merely
suspicions and could not justify the killings. Mr. Vyas said that the magistrate
had overstepped his authority. He dismissed the findings as ''false propaganda''
from political opponents who wished to discredit Gujarat's leaders.

Lawyers had known for years that something strange was happening in the Gujarat
police force and that the killings of terrorism suspects were dubious, said
Mukul Sinha, a lawyer for the relatives of several victims. But hardly anyone
thought the killers would be brought to justice.

Then in 2005, the brother of one victim -- a small-time bandit named Sohrabuddin
Sheikh -- sent a letter to India's Supreme Court demanding an inquiry into the
death of Mr. Sheikh, who had been killed by the police and branded a terrorist
and who, like the four  killed in June 2004, had been accused of planning to
kill the chief minister of Gujarat.

Under Indian law any citizen can petition the country's highest court directly,
and the Supreme Court demanded an investigation. In 2007, Gujarat's government
acknowledged that the killing did not happen as the police had claimed and that
the police had also killed Mr. Sheikh's wife to cover up the crime.

The revelation opened the floodgates. ''People realized that something can be
done, that it is not impossible to get justice in Gujarat,'' Mr. Sinha said.

After the officers who made up the elite squad that had carried out these
encounters were arrested in the death of Mr. Sheikh, the killings stopped.

''All of a sudden the terrorists have stopped coming to kill Modi,'' Mr. Sinha
said.

But families of the victims are still waiting for justice.

Ms. Jehan's mother, Shamima Kausar, said that the charge that her daughter was a
terrorist was ludicrous. ''She was just a college girl,'' she said, tears
welling in her eyes. ''She was my right hand. I am lost without her.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 11, 2009



CORRECTION: An article last Sunday about extrajudicial killings by the police in
India overstated what is known about the cause of a train fire in 2002 that
killed Hindu pilgrims in the Indian state of Gujarat, which led to deadly
anti-Muslim riots there and may have contributed to what rights activists called
an atmosphere in which extrajudicial police killings of Muslim suspects were
encouraged. While the Gujarat government concluded the fire was a Muslim attack,
that finding has been disputed by a central government investigation, which
concluded the fire was an accident.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ishrat Jehan, top, was killed by Indian policemen in 2004. Her
mother, Shamima Kausar, above, rejects the officers' account.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
KEITH BEDFORD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAP: Tensions between Hindus and Muslims
plague Ahmedabad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); EVIDENCE
(89%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); FORENSICS (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CORRUPTION (76%); ASSASSINATION (76%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (72%); JURY TRIALS (67%); POLITICAL DEBATES (65%)

CITY: AHMEDABAD, GUJARAT, INDIA (90%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (79%)

STATE: GUJARAT, INDIA (90%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (79%); WEST INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             188 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Law on State Secrets

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 156 words


To the Editor:

Re ''An Incomplete State Secrets Fix'' (editorial, Sept. 29):

Please add this to the list of reasons we need legislation to check government
use of the state secrets doctrine, which has been asserted by the Bush and Obama
administrations to thwart court claims by victims of torture and other illegal
government conduct:

The United States is party to the Torture Convention and International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. Both treaties require member states to provide
enforceable remedies for human rights violations. If the United States is to
regain its reputation as a credible champion for human rights -- indeed, if the
United States wants other countries to take seriously the very concept of an
international legal order -- it must be seen to walk the walk of respect for its
own international legal obligations.

Gabor Rona International Legal Director Human Rights First New York, Sept. 29,
2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); TORTURE (87%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             192 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Arab Clan, Days of Agony In a Cross-Fire

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem. Neil MacFarquhar contributed
reporting from the United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1404 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Israel's attack has razed buildings and upended families in much of crowded
Gaza. But few neighborhoods suffered more than Zeitoun, a district of eastern
Gaza City. And few families felt the wrath of the Israeli military more than the
Samounis.

Israeli troops swarmed Zeitoun shortly after the ground invasion of Gaza began a
week ago, and members of the extended Samouni family said they were moved from
house to house as soldiers took over the neighborhood. On Monday,  with nearly
100 Samounis huddled together in one house, the shooting and the shelling began,
according to accounts of family members and witnesses that were partly
corroborated by the Red Cross and the United Nations.

Thirty Samounis died, not all of them quickly. Ahmed al-Samouni, 16, survived.

''I could feel the blood dripping inside my head,'' Ahmed said, recalling the
days he lay wounded in the bombed-out building. ''My father was crawling -- he
couldn't move his legs,'' he said. His cousin Abdallah, 10, was trying to stand
up but kept falling down; his brother Yaqoub, 12, kept removing large pieces of
shrapnel from his own stomach; and his sister Amal, 9, was not moving at all.
Another brother, Ishaq, 12, was wounded in the legs. He bled for two days before
he died.

Ahmed, speaking from his hospital bed, said he wanted to call for help. But his
mother, Laila, was among the dead, and her cellphone was nowhere to be found.

The story of the Samouni family has horrified many since Red Cross officials on
Wednesday publicized their discovery of four emaciated Samouni children trapped
for days in a home with the corpses of their mothers. The Red Cross said the
Israeli military denied its paramedics access to the area for several days after
the ground invasion began on Jan. 3, part of the offensive against Hamas that
Israel says is intended to stop the firing of rockets into southern Israel.

Israeli officials said they were still looking into the Zeitoun episode. A
military spokeswoman, Maj. Avital Leibovich, said Monday that the army had ''no
intention of harming civilians.'' Hamas, which governs Gaza, ''cynically uses''
civilians for cover by operating in their midst, she said.

But some international aid officials are arguing that the plight of civilians in
Zeitoun, as well as the shelling of a United Nations school where civilians had
sought refuge, should be investigated as war crimes.

''Accountability must be ensured for violations of international law,'' Navi
Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, said in an
address in Geneva to a special session of the Human Rights Council focused on
Gaza. The council has a reputation for censuring Israel. Ms. Pillay is a
respected South African judge who recently assumed the top United Nations human
rights job, which is separate from the council.

Ms. Pillay said, ''Violations of international humanitarian law may constitute
war crime, for which individual criminal responsibility may be invoked.'' She
suggested that the council weigh dispatching a mission to assess violations
committed by both sides.

The Israeli military has not said whether the strike on the house in Zeitoun was
intentional or a mistake. In the case of the United Nations school, Israel has
said that Hamas militants were firing mortars from a location near the school.

According to Ahmed and other witnesses interviewed at the hospital, soldiers
came to several of the Samouni homes that make up a section of Zeitoun soon
after the ground invasion started. They told family members to vacate their
homes and to gather together in one home down the street. Ahmed said they were
moved a second time as well, until nearly 100 of his relatives crowded into one
house.

Soldiers searched and occupied the now-empty houses. The Zeitoun neighborhood is
strategically located and is known to have many supporters of Hamas. Ahmed said
the Israelis wanted to turn it into ''a military camp.''

Samouni family members did not deny that Hamas militants operated in the area. A
family member said there was no active Hamas resistance in the immediate
vicinity, although militants were firing rockets at Israel a little more than a
mile away.

At about 6 a.m. on Monday morning, Ahmed said, tanks started demolishing a wall
of the house where the extended clan was sheltered. His father moved toward the
door, presumably to warn the soldiers that civilians were inside, but the troops
started shooting, he said.

The shooting then stopped, and the soldiers appeared to withdraw. But a short
time later, three rockets and several shells hit the building and tore apart the
rooms where his family was gathered.

Ahmed said he and his brother Yaqoub pulled blankets over their relatives and
managed to shut the doors in an attempt to hide from the tanks and soldiers
outside. Everyone was crying, he recalled, and he did not immediately realize
the scope of the damage.

Some relatives, like Masouda Samouni, 20, Ahmed's sister-in-law, managed to
crawl out by themselves and arrived at the hospital that same day. A few hours
after the attack on Monday, she recounted how she had lost her mother-in-law,
her husband and her 10-month-old son.

At that time, witnesses and hospital officials believed that 11 members of the
extended family were killed and 26 wounded, with five children age 4 and under
among the dead. The first survivors who arrived at the hospital may not have
been aware of the full extent of the disaster and apparently had not counted all
those left behind.

Ahmed, rescued nearly three days later, named 27 relatives who died in the
building where he was hiding; the Red Cross said three more corpses were found
in a house nearby.

The survivors ate tomatoes, drank water and cooked noodles over a fire, but
tried to avoid attracting the attention of soldiers in the area. Relatives who
escaped repeatedly asked the Red Cross to send help, but Red Cross officials
said their requests to respond to the emergency were rejected by the Israelis
during the initial days of the siege.

It was 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday when help finally came, half an hour before the
end of a three-hour pause in the fighting ordered that day by Israel to allow
humanitarian aid and rescue workers to enter Gaza.

Antoine Grand, the head of Red Cross operations in the Gaza Strip, said in a
telephone interview on Thursday that the first rescue team on Wednesday had to
leave the dead and take out only the wounded, ''horrible as that seems,''
because they had only limited time and only four ambulances.

''We had no other choice,'' Mr. Grand said.

He added that the ambulances had to stop on one side of an earth mound put up by
the military. The team had to walk a mile to the houses and bring back the
wounded in a donkey cart.

On Thursday, they went back to the same area and brought out another 103
survivors, three of them wounded.

A report issued by the United Nations Office for Humanitarian Affairs on
Thursday, based on telephone interviews with several members of the Samouni
family, largely corroborated Ahmed's version of events, saying about 30 people
were killed when the house was shelled repeatedly. The report said the attack on
the Samouni home was one of the ''gravest incidents'' in the Israeli campaign.

In another statement issued on Friday, the humanitarian affairs office
emphasized that its report was not intended to render a legal verdict on the
attack.

In a rare public statement on Thursday, the Geneva-based International Committee
of the Red Cross said it believed that in this instance, the Israeli military
failed to meet its obligation under international humanitarian law to care for
and evacuate the wounded. The delay in permitting entry to rescue services was
''unacceptable,'' it said.

The rescue team found ''four small children next to their dead mothers in one of
the houses,'' the Red Cross said. ''They were too weak to stand up on their
own.''

The Red Cross added that Israeli soldiers were posted at a military position
some 80 yards away from the house, and there were several other army positions
and two Israeli tanks nearby.

Mark Regev, a spokesman for the Israeli government, said Friday that it was
important that ''we have better channels of communication and coordination''
with the Red Cross and other aid groups. He said Israel had an interest in the
Red Cross's ''successfully carrying out its mission.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Left, Palestinians set down the bodies of two members of the
Samouni family during a funeral in Gaza City on Monday. A house in the Zeitoun
district was hit during the Israeli offensive, leaving 30 in the family dead.
Ahmed al-Samouni, 16, right, survived.(PHOTOGRAPHS, LEFT TO RIGHT, BY HATEM
MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 ASHRAF AMRA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FAMILY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HAMAS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (83%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (79%); CHILDREN (78%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (78%); ARMIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%);
ARMED FORCES (77%); WAR CRIMES (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(75%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (69%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
PARAMEDICS (63%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             193 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Body Of Inquiries

BYLINE: By JACK M. BALKIN.

Jack M. Balkin is a professor at Yale Law School.

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 974 words


New Haven

IN the past eight years, our government has tortured people and spied on its own
citizens. Administration lawyers created a series of secret laws to justify
these activities. The Justice Department has been riddled with scandals alleging
corruption, illegality and incompetence. What should the next administration do
about these practices? Do we punish wrongdoing or discover the truth?

We should opt for the truth, for three reasons. First, we must restore America's
commitment to human rights by exposing and condemning our own abuses. Second, we
must counteract the tendency toward secret laws that facilitate these
violations. Third, we must create a public record of government misconduct as a
lesson to future generations and a caution to future administrations.

Criminal prosecutions might serve these functions, but they face enormous
obstacles. The administration repeatedly, systematically twisted the law to
immunize its criminal conduct, and much of what was done was authorized by
executive branch lawyers, particularly in the Justice Department's Office of
Legal Counsel. However mistaken this advice, relying on it provides government
officials a strong defense. Moreover, at the Bush administration's urging,
Congress has given potential defendants legal immunity through the Military
Commissions Act of 2006 and other statutes. (And, for now, President Bush still
retains the pardon power.)

Of course, criminal prosecutions make sense where lawbreaking was not immunized
or approved by Congress or the Justice Department, but in the most serious cases
-- torture and surveillance -- prosecutions may be least effective.

Seeking the truth is the better option. One model is South Africa's Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, led by Archbishop Desmond Tutu. The South African
experience, however, is very different from ours. The apartheid regime had
directed violence at its own people; its opponents sometimes used violence in
return. The new South African government sought not only to preserve a
historical record but also to reconcile and rehabilitate former enemies and
unite the country's diverse populations.

In the United States, torture and inhumane treatment was largely directed at
non-citizens, many held outside the country, at Guantanamo Bay or in secret
locations. We are not trying to coax former adversaries together to build a new
nation; rather, we need to renew our commitment to human rights and the rule of
law and prevent future abuses. Our aim is not truth and reconciliation; it is
truth and repudiation.

Instead of the South African model, we should use a two-pronged approach.

First, a central cause of human rights violations was the proliferation of
secret laws that immunized government conduct, avoided accountability and
corroded the foundations of our democracy. The incoming administration should
begin by releasing the Justice Department and Office of Legal Counsel memos that
justified the surveillance, detention and interrogation practices at issue, and
require appropriate and regular disclosure of future opinions.

Our new president must also reform the Justice Department, which has lost its
ability to give independent legal advice. The Bush administration regularly shut
out lawyers it believed would tell the White House what it did not want to hear
and short-circuited consultative procedures intended to produce both wise and
lawful policies.

Second, both the new administration and Congress should create presidential
commissions and Congressional oversight hearings on various subjects: detention
and interrogation practices, extraordinary rendition, reform of military
commissions and reform of surveillance practices. These different commissions
have different objects and functions; a single truth commission could not begin
to address them all.

Congress and the president should divide up subjects efficiently to prevent
conflicting jurisdictions and turf battles. And both branches should signal the
importance of these hearings to the public, giving them the gravity and
attention they deserve.

The South African model offered witnesses potential amnesty (which was not
always given) to coax testimony (which did not always occur). American
commissions and hearings should have the power to bestow immunity to compel
testimony, either ''use'' immunity (the testimony cannot be used in any future
prosecution) or ''transactional'' immunity (no prosecution for acts connected to
the subject of the testimony). Sensitive evidence that affects national security
could be taken in closed proceedings and summarized or published in redacted
form.

The goal of these specialized commissions and hearings will not be merely
retrospective. They will also be prospective, aimed at specific government
reforms. The next administration will still have to detain and try people, and
it will still have to gather intelligence. The Military Commissions Act of 2006,
which set up rules for terrorism trials, requires a significant overhaul, and
Congress should hold hearings on how the incoming president plans to use the
vast surveillance powers given him by the FISA Amendments Act of 2008.

Above all, the new president and Congress must work together. If Barack Obama
does not cooperate with Congress and help make present and former officials
available for testimony, these hearings will not succeed. Once out of office,
President Bush will likely invoke executive privilege to prevent members of his
administration from testifying, but that privilege is not absolute; it should
also depend on the current president's determination of the national interest.
Mr. Obama must use the powers of his office to uncover past wrongdoing and to
make sure that past misdeeds do not occur again.

We do not need a one-size-fits-all truth commission. But we do need the truth.
Our democracy depends on it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ALAN DYE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MISCONDUCT (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%);
SCANDALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); IMMUNITY
(78%); CORRUPTION (77%); MILITARY COURTS (74%); HISTORY (73%); APPROVALS (72%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (72%); PARDONS (69%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (85%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (94%); CUBA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Opponents Of Mugabe Tell Court Of Torture

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1125 words

DATELINE: JOHNANNESBURG


Jestina Mukoko, a well-known human rights campaigner in Zimbabwe, was forced to
kneel on gravel for hours and was beaten on the soles of her feet with rubber
truncheons during interrogations, she said in a sworn statement recently
submitted to a court in Zimbabwe.

Chris Dhlamini, an aide to Zimbabwe's opposition leader and prime minister in
waiting, Morgan Tsvangirai, said in an affidavit that his head was pushed down
into a sink full of water until he believed that he would drown.

They are among more than a dozen activists who say they were tortured to obtain
false confessions after they were abducted and detained for weeks in secret
locations by agents of President Robert Mugabe's government. They are now
imprisoned in Harare, Zimbabwe's capital, accused of crimes related to acts of
sabotage and terrorism against the government.

Ms. Mukoko wept on the stand on Thursday in a Harare courtroom as she recounted
her ordeal. ''I was abducted, kidnapped, tortured, assaulted,'' she testified,
according to The Associated Press.

With yet another round of power-sharing talks between Mr. Mugabe and Mr.
Tsvangirai looming next week, Mr. Tsvangirai demanded Thursday that all those
imprisoned on what he called ''trumped-up charges'' be released before he would
consider jointly governing Zimbabwe with Mr. Mugabe. Eleven of his party workers
are still missing ''amidst growing fears for their safety,'' he said.

''Those abducted and illegally detained must be released unconditionally if this
agreement is to be consummated,'' he said at a news conference in Johannesburg.

It was four months ago that Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Tsvangirai signed a power-sharing
agreement that would have ended Mr. Mugabe's nearly three decades as
unchallenged leader of Zimbabwe, where the economy and public services are now
in ruins. Mr. Tsvangirai outpolled Mr. Mugabe in March elections but dropped out
before the June runoff because of state-sponsored attacks on his supporters.

Mr. Tsvangirai said he would return to Zimbabwe on Saturday after two months
away. And when he and Mr. Mugabe meet next week, with South Africa's current and
immediate past presidents mediating, he said, he will insist that before a new
government is formed, the abducted be freed and legislation be put in place to
ensure that he and his party oversee state security forces along with Mr. Mugabe
and his ruling party, ZANU-PF.

Mr. Mugabe's adversaries are even now trying to understand why one of Africa's
wiliest, longest-serving leaders deployed his usual agents of repression against
opposition activists so soon after he agreed to share power with Mr. Tsvangirai.

Does he really believe that his opponents in politics and civil society are
using Botswana, whose leaders are his most outspoken critics in the region, as a
base to train guerrillas bent on his downfall, despite categorical denials from
all those accused?

Certainly that is what Mr. Mugabe's allies suggest. Johannes Tomana, recently
appointed attorney general by Mr. Mugabe, told the state-owned newspaper this
week that evidence gathered so far proved that Ms. Mukoko, the human rights
leader, ''is a threat to society and should not be released now.''

And State Security Minister Didymus Mutasa refused in an affidavit filed with
the court to identify the agents who investigated the activists on grounds of
national security.

Mr. Mugabe's critics contend that his government cynically fabricated the case
against the activists to smear Botswana and weaken his fiercest adversaries. But
to what end?

Some in the opposition Movement for Democratic Change believe that Mr. Mugabe
aims to instill fear in its grass-roots organizers in case the deal fails.
Others say Mr. Mugabe, who has used violence to hang on to power throughout his
long rule, may be trying to bludgeon Mr. Tsvangirai into accepting a role as a
relatively powerless junior partner.

South Africa, the region's most powerful nation, is pressing Mr. Tsvangirai to
accept the post of prime minister, while Mr. Mugabe stays on as president, and
worry later about getting his people out of prison.

''We remain of the view that the agreement should be implemented immediately,''
said Thabo Masebe, the spokesman for President Kgalema Motlanthe of South
Africa.

But many in the opposition now believe that it was a mistake for Mr. Tsvangirai
to have signed the power-sharing deal in September before nailing down an
agreement that his party would control at least one arm of the state security
forces, the police.

Mr. Tsvangirai, who sees South Africa as siding with Mr. Mugabe, now seems far
more resistant to its insistence that he enter a deal that leaves such crucial
matters unresolved.

The fate of the abducted activists now rests in the hands of Zimbabwean judges,
many of them compromised by the Mugabe government's gifts to them of farms,
televisions, cars and other luxuries.

The activists' lawyers have argued, so far unsuccessfully, that their clients
are the real victims, while it is their abductors in the state security services
who should be behind bars.

Beatrice Mtetwa, Zimbabwe's leading human rights lawyer, said that her client,
Ms. Mukoko, leader of the Zimbabwe Peace Project, was trying to keep up a brave
face, but that she was deeply traumatized. She was taken away at dawn on Dec. 3,
still in her pajamas, and not seen again for almost three weeks.

''It's like she's no longer the same person they took away,'' Ms. Mtetwa said.

Lawyers for the accused say the authorities have allowed them to meet their
clients only briefly and in the presence of prison officials, so their accounts
of what happened  in captivity were given hurriedly and fearfully. The language
in the affidavits is often stilted, the descriptions incomplete. Still, the
horrors they say they endured come through.

Mr. Dhlamini described having his legs tied together, his hands cuffed behind
his back and being ''suspended from a considerable height'' while being beaten
all over his body by something ''like a tin with stones in it being swung round
and round.''

''I felt like Jesus must have felt upon his crucifixion, and was completely
delirious,'' he said.

Ms. Mukoko, whose nonprofit group has documented rampant state-sponsored attacks
on opposition supporters before the election, described lengthy assaults on the
soles of her feet, a form of torture known as falanga.

''I was told to raise my feet onto the table, and the beatings ensued,'' she
said. ''By now it appeared to be around evening. My interrogators took a break
and returned after a few hours. They were all visibly drunk and some of them
carried bottles of liquor. Some were drinking and watching while others
continued to assault me under the feet.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE (90%); ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
EVIDENCE (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); TESTIMONY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(76%); POLITICS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (76%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); LEGISLATION (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); ADMISSIONS
& CONFESSIONS (72%); TERRORISM (68%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (79%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (92%); JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (98%); SOUTH AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (79%); BOTSWANA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             196 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Outcry Erupts Over Reports That Israel Used Phosphorus Arms on Gazans

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: GAZA


In early January, a week into Israel's war in Gaza, the home of Sabah Abu Halima
was hit by an Israeli shell. Ms. Abu Halima, the matriarch of a farming family
in the northern Gaza area of Beit Lahiya, was caught in an inferno that burned
her husband and four of their nine children to death.

But as she lay in a bed on the third floor of an annex to Shifa Hospital  in
Gaza City  on Wednesday, bandaged all over and in terrible pain, it was less the
magnitude of her loss than the source of the fire that was drawing attention,
not only from her doctors but also from human rights organizations and even the
Israeli military.

Though there has been no independent confirmation, Palestinian officials say her
family was hit by white phosphorus, a weapon that militaries use widely to
obscure the battlefield but that is also limited under an international
convention that bans targeting civilians with it.

The Israeli military issued a short statement on Wednesday, saying it  was
investigating whether its use of phosphorous weapons was improper and
reiterating that it was ''obligated to international law'' in the matter. Early
in the war, Israeli officials would not confirm whether the military was using
white phosphorus at all, but said only that it was using weapons in legal ways.

Meanwhile, Amnesty International said it found ''indisputable evidence of
widespread use of white phosphorus in densely populated residential areas in
Gaza City and in the north.'' In a statement, it said its investigators ''saw
streets and alleyways littered with evidence of the use of white phosphorus,
including still-burning wedges and the remnants of the shells and canisters
fired by the Israeli Army.'' It called such use a likely war crime and demanded
a full international investigation.

The use of white phosphorus and other incendiary weapons is covered in one
protocol of a 1980 international treaty, the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, that bans making civilians ''the object of attack'' by such arms. More
broadly, though, international officials have acknowledged that militaries can
legitimately use the substance in some cases.

Phosphorus rounds are usually used to spread a thick, white smoke to screen
military actions and  mark specific areas. Military experts say phosphorus is
often particularly useful in urban warfare, in part because it creates tall
columns of smoke that can obscure upper-story windows.

But human rights groups harshly criticize its use, saying that the horrible
burns and the widespread fires that phosphorus causes make it a menace to
civilians. Peter Herby, the head of the Arms Unit for the International
Committee of the Red Cross, said in a statement that his agency would not
comment publicly on whether it considered Israel's use of white phosphorus a
violation of international humanitarian standards, pending further
investigation.

In Gaza, Ms. Abu Halima said that when her family was hit, ''fire came from the
bodies of my husband and my children.''

''The children were screaming, 'Fire! Fire!' and there was smoke everywhere and
a horrible, suffocating smell,'' she said. ''My 14-year-old cried out, 'I'm
going to die. I want to pray.' I saw my daughter-in-law melt away.''

Dr. Nafez Abu Shaban, head of Shifa's burn unit, said the  family's burns, which
he and an assisting doctor from Egypt had treated, were of a kind he had never
encountered, reaching to the muscle and bone.

''They were deeper and wider than anything I had seen; a bad odor came from the
wounds and smoke continued to come out of them for many hours,'' he said in his
office around the corner from Ms. Abu Halima's sickbed.

He added, ''We took out a piece of foreign matter that a colleague identified as
white phosphorous.''

Dr. Shaban said that dozens of such cases came to Shifa during the war and that
his unit was unprepared to handle them. Many of the burn patients have been sent
to Egypt and abroad from there. In a few cases, he said, seemingly limited burns
led to the patients' deaths.

The doctors discovered that the best way to deal with such burns was to get the
patients immediately into surgery and clean the areas well.  Initial attempts to
dress phosphorous burns like normal ones made them worse.

Part of what makes white phosphorus controversial is that it can be difficult to
control how wide the effects are. When the shells explode in the air, they
disperse pieces of felt soaked in phosphorus -- larger version of the shells
contain more than 100 of them -- that can land on people and cause intense
burning, according to Chris Cobb-Smith, a British Army veteran who is here as
part of Amnesty International's investigative team.

The newspaper Haaretz reported Wednesday that one focus of the Israeli
military's inquiry was the use of white phosphorus by a reserve brigade that
fired about 20 such shells in Beit Lahiya, where Ms. Abu Halima lives. Col. Shai
Alkalai, an artillery officer, is leading the investigation.

Haaretz said about 200 such shells were fired in the fighting, nearly all at
orchards where Hamas gunmen and rocket-launching crews were taking cover.

The article added that some of the rounds used were recently acquired
120-millimeter phosphorus shells that have a computerized targeting system
attached to a G.P.S. unit. It quoted commanders as saying the shells had been
effective but were apparently also responsible for the strike on a United
Nations school that killed two and a friendly-fire episode that seriously
wounded two Israeli officers.

Donatella Rovera, Amnesty International's researcher for Israel, the West Bank
and Gaza, said in an interview, ''We don't know why they used them, but we do
know that it could constitute a war crime.''

She added, ''It is not a banned weapon, but it matters how you use it and there
is no reason to use it in such densely populated areas. We want a full impartial
investigation, not one by the army that used it.''

Ms. Abu Halima said that on Tuesday some relatives  went to her home and found
it destroyed. They then properly buried the dead.

She wept with fury, saying  that as farmers she and her family had good
relations with Israelis, selling them produce in past years. But now, she said,
she wants to see Israel's leaders -- she named the foreign minister and
president -- ''burn like my children burned.''

''They should feel the pain we felt.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sabah Abu Halima, left, lost her husband and four children in a
fire that Palestinian officials say was caused by white phosphorus.(PHOTOGRAPH
BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); ARMIES
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); BURN INJURIES (77%); CITY LIFE (76%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%);
ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%);
POPULATION DENSITY (64%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2009 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Evacuates Wounded From Sri Lankan Battlefield

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: CALCUTTA


Amid mounting international criticism of Sri Lankan government forces and the
Tamil Tiger rebels, a United Nations convoy carrying more than 200 wounded
civilians who had been trapped in the fighting crossed into safety on Thursday,
the United Nations said. The evacuation was followed by a promise from the
government to give safe passage to all those still confined behind the front
line.

The International Committee for the Red Cross confirmed the evacuation and said
the convoy was carrying 226 civilians, including children, who had been wounded
in intense fighting over the last 10 days in and around Mullaittivu, the last
rebel stronghold along the northeastern coast of Sri Lanka.

An estimated 250,000 civilians are hemmed in within a dwindling wedge of
rebel-held territory in Sri Lanka's northeast, according to the Red Cross. As
food stocks dwindle and fighting makes it difficult to ferry in aid, the Red
Cross said in a statement Thursday, ''the overall humanitarian situation remains
precarious for thousands.''

President Mahinda Rajapaksa of Sri Lanka late on Thursday challenged the rebel
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam to allow civilians to leave the combat zone,
though his military has not agreed to a cease-fire.

''I urge the L.T.T.E., within the next 48 hours to allow free movement of
civilians to ensure their safety and security,'' Mr. Rajapaksa said on the Web
site of the Ministry of Defense. ''For all those civilians, I assure a safe
passage to a secure environment.''

Those who were transported on Thursday to a government-run hospital in the town
of Vavuniya might have been wounded by government shelling, though it was
impossible to verify because journalists and aid workers had been barred from
the combat zone. For three days, the convoy was prevented from crossing the
front line by the Tamil Tigers.

The breakthrough came Thursday, after aid agencies, human rights groups and the
United Nations, which has been unable to evacuate some of its staff members and
their dependents, issued unusually strong statements criticizing the warring
parties.

This week, the Geneva-based International Committee for the Red Cross, which
rarely comments publicly in these kinds of situations, estimated that ''hundreds
of people had been killed'' and scores wounded in the latest fighting, and it
urged both sides to respect international humanitarian law by allowing aid
workers to reach displaced people and permitting trapped civilians to leave the
war zone.

Sri Lanka on Thursday rejected the Red Cross statement, saying that the rebels
were to blame for firing from near civilian areas and then blocking ambulances.

''The fact that Geneva seems oblivious to all this suggests either willful
ignorance or naivete,'' said Rajiva Wijesinha, a senior government official,
writing on the Sri Lankan Ministry of Defense Web site.

For several weeks, fighting has intensified between government troops and the
Tamil Tigers, pushing civilians living in rebel-held areas into a shrinking
corner near the northeastern coast.

Mullaittivu fell on Sunday, the government announced earlier this week,
insisting that in its battles with the Tamil Tigers it has carefully spared
civilians. But information emerging from behind the front line challenges that
claim, even as it signals that the rebels are using civilians as shields.

In Asia's longest-running war, the Tamil Tigers have fought for 25 years to
carve out a separate homeland for the ethnic Tamil minority, relying on
conventional ground, sea and air forces and a cadre of suicide bombers.

The government has maintained that its assault on the Tamil Tigers has caused no
civilian deaths and angrily rejected any criticism of its war efforts. Several
prominent Sri Lankan journalists have fled the country.

The Red Cross added that supplies at its emergency hospital in a village called
Puthukkudiyiruppu were running out and that it was unable to cope with the 350
patients there.

Amnesty International has said that reports from the war zone suggest that both
sides were committing war crimes. Human Rights Watch also urged both the
government and the Tamil Tigers ''to abide by the laws of war, including taking
all feasible precautions to minimize harm to civilians during military
operations and ensuring that civilians have access to humanitarian assistance.''

In a stern warning to the government on Thursday, the United Nations high
commissioner for human rights, Navi Pillay, said that alongside the military
gains made in recent months, ''the rule of law has been undermined.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 5, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Friday about an evacuation by the United Nations of
wounded civilians who had been trapped between government and rebel forces in
Sri Lanka misstated the formal name of the group that confirmed the evacuation.
It is the International Committee of the Red Cross, not the International
Committee for the Red Cross. The error also appeared in a brief article on Jan.
17 about international laws governing warfare and in an article on April 9,
2008, about an attack by militants on road construction workers in Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (87%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (72%); LAW OF WAR (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (66%); WEB SITES (64%); WRITERS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             203 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Warrant Issued for Sudanese Leader Over Darfur War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Marlise Simons reported from
Paris, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations. Lydia Polgreen contributed
reporting from Bissau, Guinea-Bissau, and a journalist in Khartoum, Sudan,
contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Judges at the International Criminal Court ordered the arrest Wednesday of
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan for atrocities committed in Darfur, but
Sudanese officials swiftly retaliated, ordering Western aid groups that provide
for millions of people to shut down their operations and leave.

After months of deliberation, the judges charged Mr. Bashir with war crimes and
crimes against humanity for playing an ''essential role'' in the murder, rape,
torture, pillage and displacement of large numbers of civilians in Darfur. But
the judges did not charge him with genocide, as the prosecutor had requested.

In issuing the order, the three judges put aside diplomatic requests for more
time for peace talks and fears that the warrant would incite a violent backlash
in Sudan, where 2.5 million Darfur residents have been chased from their homes
and 300,000 have died in a conflict pitting non-Arab rebel groups against the
Arab-dominated government and its allied militias.

Within minutes of the court's announcement, thousands of people gathered in
central Khartoum, the Sudanese capital, denouncing the decision and waving
national flags and posters of Mr. Bashir's face.

The Sudanese government has long vowed to resist the court, and it summoned
several humanitarian organizations to a meeting almost immediately after the
warrant was announced, according to aid officials. As many as 10 groups received
letters ordering them to leave or curb their work, according to people briefed
on the meeting.

The British charity Oxfam said that the government had revoked its license to
operate, a decision the group said could affect more than 600,000 people. The
Dutch section of Doctors Without Borders, which provides health care in one of
the world's biggest camps for displaced people, in South Darfur, was ordered to
leave the country.

''It happened right after the announcement,'' said one aid official, speaking on
the condition of anonymity because of negotiations to persuade the government to
back down. ''The connection was clear.''

The warrant is the first in which  the court, which opened in 2002 in The Hague,
has sought the arrest of a sitting head of state. Other war-crimes courts have
issued warrants for sitting presidents, including Slobodan Milosevic of
Yugoslavia and Charles Taylor of Liberia.

''We strongly condemn this criminal move,'' said Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem, the
Sudanese ambassador to the United Nations, adding that the government would no
longer work with aid groups it deemed hostile. ''It amounts to an attempt at
regime change. We are not going to be bound by it.''

But many human rights groups and Darfur exiles saluted the judges' decision.
Niemat Ahmadi, of the Save Darfur Coalition, called the warrant a lifeline for
those living in camps. ''It will change the mood of frustration and helplessness
for our people,'' Ms. Ahmadi said.

Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch, said the warrant was likely to
isolate Mr. Bashir internationally. ''This means he will be a fugitive, a man on
a wanted poster,'' he said.

In their statement, the judges called for the cooperation of all countries --
not just the 108 that are members of the court -- to bring Mr. Bashir to
justice.

Legally, Sudan is obliged to arrest Mr. Bashir, but that seems unlikely. The
court has no police force or military, and the  United Nations peacekeepers in
Sudan have no mandate to detain war-crimes suspects.

Beyond that, Mr. Abdalhaleem said, there is little chance that the president
will  be arrested in a friendly country, because many African and Arab states
have rejected the prosecution of Mr. Bashir as counterproductive to peace
efforts.

The question of genocide has also been divisive, but the judges said 2 to 1 that
the prosecutor had not provided sufficient evidence of the president's specific
intent to ''destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or
religious group,'' the most crucial issue in determining genocide.

The prosecutor had argued that the government tried to exterminate three ethnic
groups -- the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa groups -- and that after driving them off
their lands and killing many people, armed militias continued their genocidal
campaign by raping and impregnating the women in the refugee camps.

The arrest warrant is likely to further complicate the debate over how to solve
the crisis in Darfur. It came despite concerns from United Nations diplomats,
the African Union, the Arab League and some humanitarian organizations that such
a move could provoke renewed violence and threaten the peace deal that ended an
even more deadly civil war in southern Sudan.

One sign of fallout came almost immediately. The Justice and Equality Movement,
a major rebel group in Darfur that signed a preliminary accord with Khartoum
last month, announced that it would now reject negotiating with Mr. Bashir's
government.

''There will be some violence here and there,'' said Alain Le Roy, the United
Nations under secretary general for peacekeeping operations.

Mr. Le Roy said there might now be further delays in deploying United Nations
peacekeeping troops to Darfur, where only about 64 percent of the force is in
place. Still, he said Sudan had reassured United Nations officials that it would
protect peacekeeping missions.

Some figures in the government have threatened bloodshed in response to an
indictment. Salah Gosh, the head of Sudanese intelligence, was recently quoted
in Sudanese news reports as calling for the ''amputation of the hands and the
slitting of the throats of any person who dares bad-mouth al-Bashir or support''
the court's case against him.

At the United Nations, Michele Montas, the spokeswoman for the secretary
general, Ban Ki-moon, said the Sudanese government had revoked the operating
licenses for 6 to 10 humanitarian organizations, as well as seizing the assets
of some of them. The Sudanese government has long accused aid organizations of
collaborating with the court by providing data and testimony used to build cases
against Sudanese officials, something aid groups strongly deny.

While United Nations agencies were not expelled, their work is often carried out
by charities like the ones facing suspension, United Nations officials said.

The court issued warrants for two other Sudanese citizens in 2007 -- a
government minister and a former militia leader -- but neither has been
arrested.

The United Nations Security Council can postpone the prosecution against Mr.
Bashir, but it has remained largely divided. Sudan's supporters, including the
African Union and Arab League, have called for the Council to suspend any
indictment. But France, Britain or the United States would probably use a veto
to block such a move.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Demonstrations in support of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir
began in Khartoum, Sudan, after the International Criminal Court issued a
warrant for his arrest.(PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (79%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (79%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); TORTURE (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (72%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); MEDICAL
CHARITIES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); NETHERLANDS (79%); LIBERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             208 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 15, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Libya Complains

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 420 words


Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi did the right thing five years ago in deciding to end
Libya's illicit nuclear and chemical weapons programs. Since then, he and his
aides have not stopped complaining that they did not get a big enough payoff.

Last week, Libyan officials told our colleague Michael Slackman that Washington
had failed to deliver on promises of conventional weapons sales, civilian
nuclear cooperation and help in destroying chemical weapons. They also expressed
hurt that the State Department continues to catalog Libyan human rights abuses.

Those complaints are particularly outrageous and offensive to the victims of
past Libyan terrorism and to those still suffocating under the colonel's
arbitrary rule, which includes routine torture, disappearances and a ban on all
political party activity.

Colonel Qaddafi's decision to come clean on his weapons programs was part of a
broader repositioning meant to ease pressures on his government. Tripoli also
belatedly acknowledged its responsibility for the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight
103 and offered compensation to the families of its 270 victims.

Tripoli fulfilled the conditions the international community had set for its
rehabilitation, and it has been rewarded. In 2004, the United States lifted
economic sanctions. Two years later it removed Tripoli from the list of
terrorist states and renewed diplomatic relations. When France agreed to sell
Libya civilian nuclear reactors in 2007, Washington raised no objections or
obstacles.

Libya, not Washington, canceled the deal for help destroying its chemical
weapons -- after complaining about the cost and liability terms. It has since
proceeded on its own. Fine. Libya can certainly afford to pay the whole cost,
and Washington can put its finite funds for securing and destroying weapons to
better use.   Libya is legally entitled to buy defensive and transport-related
military equipment from the United States, and the Pentagon recently said it was
ready to discuss such sales. If Libya wants Washington to stop citing it for
human rights violations, all it has to do is stop committing  them.

We hope that other countries, notably Iran, eventually follow Libya's example
and give up their nuclear weapons ambitions. The United States and its allies
have plenty of valuable economic, diplomatic and security incentives they should
be offering in good faith.

If accepted, those commitments must be fulfilled. But even grand bargains do not
require blank checks or silence on human rights abuses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (89%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (76%); TERRORISM (75%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(75%); TORTURE (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (74%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (73%);
BOMBINGS (70%)

CITY: TRIPOLI, LIBYA (88%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);
FRANCE (54%)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             209 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Intergalactic Representatives at the U.N.

BYLINE: By SAM GROBART

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 436 words


A gathering at the United Nations headquarters on Tuesday will address topics
familiar to the international body: child soldiers, terrorism, human rights and
religious extremism. Attendees will represent several nations, and one abandoned
planet: Caprica.

The Sci Fi Channel series ''Battlestar Galactica'' will be the subject of a
panel discussion involving the creators of the show, two of its stars, Mary
McDonnell and Edward James Olmos, and representatives from the United Nations'
offices of the secretary general and high commissioner for human rights.

How a television series about interstellar travel, ancient prophecies and
genocidal robots came to join forces with a terrestrial intergovernmental body
relates to the Sci Fi Channel's philanthropic activities and the United Nations'
efforts to become more media savvy.

The channel, a division of NBC Universal, has worked with the educational
nonprofit group ThinkQuestNYC to bring 100 New York City high school students to
the event and have them participate in the discussion.

For the United Nations, the event represents the second effort of its Creative
Community Outreach Initiative. Announced by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon at
last June's Jackson Hole Film Festival, the initiative is the organization's
attempt to ''establish partnerships with the entertainment industry to tell the
U.N.'s story,'' said Juan Carlos Brandt, a spokesman.

Its first undertaking was to allow a television crew to shoot at United Nations
facilities  this month for an episode of ''Law & Order: Special Victims Unit,''
about child soldiers.

Representatives from the Sci Fi Channel approached the United Nations early this
year. ''They came to us and explained that there were themes common to both the
show and the U.N.,'' Mr. Brandt said, ''and that those themes could be discussed
here in a serious manner.''

Whoopi Goldberg will moderate the discussions.

Since it began in 2003, ''Battlestar Galactica,'' based on a TV series from the
1970s, has gained attention for its frank treatment of issues that seem to
mirror ones on Earth: resistance fighters who use terrorism to battle an
occupying army; interrogation techniques and the rights of prisoners of war;
genocide; and weapons of mass destruction. Its final episode will be shown on
Friday.

''The show has been a sort of laboratory for the choices and issues real people
in governments are making every day,'' said Ms. McDonnell, who plays President
Laura Roslin on the program. ''I've had the chance to meet some of those
people,'' she added. ''Many of them are big fans of the show.''

SAM GROBART

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Battlestar Galactica (TV Program); Battlestar Galactica (TV Program)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: From left, Rekha Sharma, Mary McDonnell, Edward James Olmos and
Michael Hogan in ''Battlestar Galactica.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLE SEGAL/SCI FI
CHANNEL)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); RELIGION (73%); POWS &
MIAS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); FESTIVALS (73%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (72%); HIGH SCHOOLS
(68%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (66%); PHILANTHROPY (54%)

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (58%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); EARTH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside The Times: April 8, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2178 words


International

PERU'S FORMER PRESIDENT

Sentenced to 25 Years in Prison

Former President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru was convicted of human rights
abuses by the country's Supreme Court and sentenced to 25 years in prison.
Included in the abuses were the killings of 25 people by a military death squad
created by Mr. Fujimori in the 1990s. Page A6

ISRAELI POLICE KILL MOTORIST

A Palestinian motorist who ran into a roadblock in East Jerusalem was shot and
killed by Israeli police officers. A police spokesman said the motorist had
tried to run over the officers operating the roadblock. Page A7

CHINESE RIGHTS ADVOCATE BEATEN

Sun Wenguang, a 75-year-old retired university professor, was beaten severely by
several men when he tried to enter a cemetery, a Hong Kong-based human rights
group said. He was trying to honor the death of a former Communist Party
minister who lost his position after sympathizing with the demonstrators of the
1989 Tiananmen Square protests. Page A7

RESCUERS SCRAMBLE AFTER QUAKE

The death toll rose to 235 in Italy after a devastating earthquake hit L'Aquila.
Aftershocks continued to ravage the city and topple more buildings, hampering an
already frenzied rescue effort. Page A8

Luxembourg Journal

Change Splashes Landlocked State

Luxembourg sits between Germany, Belgium and France. It's known for low taxes,
liberal banking laws and its grand duke, Henri, who holds the last position of
that kind anywhere in the world. But some changes are coming that may attack two
of the three salient qualities of the tiny country: its banking laws and the
grand duke himself. Page A9

STRICKEN, BUT NOT BEATEN, IN IRAQ

The baby's face was streaked with cuts from broken glass after a car bomb killed
eight people in Baghdad, including the parents. The infant was pulled from the
wreckage, cleaned up and fed milk from a bottle by a man near the scene. Despite
nearly six years of ceaseless, senseless violence, moments like this one show
that Iraqis are still capable of great feats of humanity. Page A10

FORMER HUSSEIN AIDE SURFACES

In an audiotape, a former deputy of Saddam Hussein called for Iraqis to topple
their government and return the Baath Party to power. At the same time, Prime
Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki angrily blamed Baathists for a series of car bomb
attacks in the capital. Both developments may stall efforts by Mr. Maliki's
government to reach out to former Baathists. PAGE A10

NATIONAL

LAWMAKERS AND ADVOCATES

Push Back Against Weapons Cuts

Members of Congress and advocates for the armed services pushed back against
Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates's plans to cut billions of dollars in Pentagon
weapons spending, but others said that the trims were prudent and that fights
over them would be limited to several key programs. PAGE A12

CAR DEALER SAYS BUYERS ARE SCARCE

Ralph W. Sifford's seven General Motors dealerships in New York and Florida
carry a distinctly American name: Grand Prize. ''Everyone's a winner,'' Mr.
Sifford said. ''That's our slogan.'' But these days, buyers are harder to find.
Survival might be, too. Nationwide, more than 1,000 car dealerships shut down in
2008. PAGE A12

MAYOR TRIES TO END GRANT BAN

Mayor Kevin Johnson of Sacramento and his lawyer are trying to persuade federal
authorities to reverse an action against the mayor by a local nonprofit group
that oversees federal grants to service and volunteer organizations. Some fear
that problems with the group could cost the city millions in federal stimulus
money. PAGE A13

VANDALS STRIP CALIFORNIA ESTATE

After a 16,000-square-foot estate in the San Diego County community of
Olivenhain fell into foreclosure, vandals took $1 million worth of fixtures,
including toilets, from their sockets and hinges. PAGE A13

FRANKEN'S LEAD GROWS BY 87 VOTES

Al Franken's lead in the Minnesota race for a Senate seat grew after some
absentee ballots were counted in court, but some issues remain to be decided,
and Mr. Franken's opponent, Norm Coleman, plans to appeal. PAGE A14

TEST OVER RECORDS IN PENNSYLVANIA

In one of the first tests of a new Pennsylvania law intended to make state
records more readily available to the public, the State Department of
Environmental Protection was ordered to copy and mail out documents to people
who request them, rather than force people to come to its offices in Harrisburg.
PAGE A15

Immigration Raid Leads to Lawsuit A16

OBITUARIES

DOROTHY CULLMAN, 91

A philanthropist, she, with her husband, Lewis B. Cullman, donated about $250
million to a host of arts, science and educational institutions in New York,
among them the Museum of Modern Art, the American Museum of Natural History and
the New York Public Library. PAGE 21

New York

INDICTMENT SAYS BUSINESSMAN

Sold Banned Materials to Iran

Prosecutors in New York have charged a Chinese businessman and his company with
selling materials like tungsten and exotic metals to the Defense Industries
Organization, an arm of the Iranian military. The transactions took place from
2006 to 2008 and went through shell corporations to conceal them, an indictment
says. Page A19

UNCERTAINTY AFTER FOSTER CARE

Young people out on their own after growing too old for the foster care system
are facing a hard road, made harder now by the economy. Though the
Administration for Children's Services issues letters to them saying that they
are most likely eligible for public assistance, many child-welfare advocates
worry that a number may still end up homeless. Page A20

Business

RATINGS SERVICE HAS GRIM REPORT

On Local Governments

Moody's Investors Service said it had assigned a negative outlook on the
creditworthiness of all local governments in the United States. It is a grim
assessment and a sign of how the credit crisis is affecting towns. It is the
first time the ratings agency, which usually sticks to private industry, gave a
look at local governments. Page B1

Advertising

When a Line Just Gets Finer

In the mad scramble for ad revenue, the break between editorial and advertising
has just shrunk to a hairline fracture. Recent issues of popular magazines like
Esquire, Entertainment Weekly and Time have had advertising in new places and
roles, including appearing on the front cover. Page B1

WILL CONSUMERS PAY FOR NEWS?

Most media companies used to believe the formula for Internet success was to
offer free content, find an audience and rake in advertising revenue -- in that
order. But now media executives from several publications are trying to switch
things up a bit and encourage consumers to pay. Page B1

DARWIN COMES TO SILICON VALLEY

When the economy began to falter, Silicon Valley thought it would be fairly
insulated. Nope. So when executives gave it a stark wake-up call about the
future of start-ups that were slow to cut costs and become profitable, Jive
Software's chief executive did what was necessary. The company managed to stay
afloat while many of its peers sunk. Page B1

Sports

THE UNLIKELY BEDMIDJI ST.

Reaches the Frozen Four

Bemidji State University's hockey team surprised everybody with its unlikely
wins over Notre Dame and Cornell. Now the No. 16 seed -- the first ever -- will
reach the Frozen Four, the semifinals of the N.C.A.A. hockey tournament. Page
B10 STATE INQUIRY INTO HORSE OWNER

The New York State Racing and Wagering Board opened an investigation into Ernie
Paragallo, a prominent thoroughbred owner, about the treatment of the horses at
his farm. Page B11

Arts

AT LONG LAST, BEATLES FANS

Get Something They Really Want

Apple Corps has developed quite a bit of Beatles-specific content in the last
few years; a site-specific show in Las Vegas, a video game and expensive
memorabilia. But now something is poised to hit the market that fans of the
group actually asked for: enhanced re-issues of the group's original British
albums. Page C1

BAD BUSINESS GOOD FOR ROMANCE

With the recession hovering like a storm cloud, happily ever after seems more
desirable than ever. As book sellers struggle to attract readers to the shelves
and the cash registers, romance novels have actually been outselling other
genres. Page C1

Television Review

From Wealth to the Uniform

Two new television shows, Alessandra Stanley writes, seem to suggest a new
trend: that the in thing for the wealthy to do right now is be ashamed of it.
''Southland,'' on NBC and the ''Unusuals,'' on ABC both feature protagonists who
have turned their backs on the upper class to become police officers. Page C1

Music Review

Growth Under the Spotlights

At her show at the Fillmore at Irving Plaza, Katy Perry seemed to be searching
for something more than her usual accusatory or tantalizing lyrics about
emotionally feckless boys. Her performance contained hints of Alanis Morissette
and Liza Minnelli. Page C5

Film Review

Engaging, Despite Being Old Hat

Despite a formulaic story about the trials of adolescence and the effect parents
have on their children, Manohla Dargis writes, ''Lymelife,'' directed by Derick
Martini, keeps you hooked. Cast members like Alec Baldwin and Kieran Culkin
shine. Page C5

DINING

BUILDING LAYERS

On a Vietnamese Staple

A rising generation of American cooks of Vietnamese descent are tinkering with a
once-rigid culinary tradition. They started by reinventing the banh mi, the
classic street-vendor Franco-Vietnamese sandwich, nudging it with cross-cultural
fillings, local breads and American influences like the Sloppy Joe. PAGE D1

WHERE INNARDS ARE THE SPECIALTY

The Houston restaurant Feast, about to celebrate its first birthday, has
survived despite its owners' occasional doubts. And with lamb's tongue, calf's
heart, rabbit's kidney and pig's foot on the menu, Feast leaves no doubt about
its whole-hog approach. The three proprietors knew the restaurant would be a
gamble anywhere in America. PAGE D1

NOTHING LIKE WINE ON TAP

Wine on tap? Is this another means of depriving wine lovers of their
pretensions? On the contrary, wine, stored in kegs and served through a method
similar to a draft-beer line, may be the glorious future of by-the-glass pours
in bars and restaurants. PAGE D1

FIRES OF TRADITION KEEP BURNING

In the Ironbound neighborhood of Newark, where 25 percent of the population is
of Portuguese descent, the tradition of communal cooking and eating remains --
especially during Pascoa, or Easter. Because home ovens can't always accommodate
a whole animal, the Portuguese-preferred way of roasting, many animals are
brought to restaurant kitchens; others are roasted in backyards, in hand-built
brick ovens. PAGE D3

The Minimalist D4

Off the Menu D4

A Good Appetite

Seafood, Easy and Guilt Free

It used to be that if you wanted seafood, you would make a trip to the fish
market. But, as in most markets, the Internet has taken over. And why wouldn't
it? With just the click of a button, you can find out if a certain variety is
overfished or has high levels of mercury. Now you can enjoy a stress-free meal,
both for you and the ecosystem. PAGE D4

On the Dining Blogs D7

THE CRUST UPSTAGES THE PIZZA

The new restaurant Co. -- pronounced ''company'' -- in Chelsea was born of a
worship of dough. And while its sire and guiding spirit, Jim Lahey, can do
wonders with flour and water, he could improve upon his pizzas somewhat, Frank
Bruni writes. PAGE D7

$25 and Under D7

Editorial

MR. GATES'S BUDGET

Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates has made a credible effort to bring new
discipline and focus to military spending. He has shifted billions of dollars
from complex systems of little use in places like Iraq and Afghanistan to
weapons needed right now by troops fighting today's wars. The only problem is
that he did not go far enough. PAGE A22

GUARDING THE FAMILY FORTUNE

Last week, as the unemployment rate hit a 25-year high, 10 Democrats in the
Senate joined all 41 Republican senators to cut estate taxes for the wealthiest
families. The provision would funnel an additional $91 billion over 10 years to
the heirs of megafortunes, money that would otherwise have been paid in federal
taxes or donated to charity. PAGE A22

VERMONT EQUALITY

A lot has happened since Vermont led the country by becoming the first state to
adopt civil unions for same-sex couples. Among other things, Vermont came to see
that civil unions are an inadequate substitute for marriage. On Tuesday, the
Vermont Legislature formally recognized that reality. PAGE A22

Op-Ed

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

I am quite encouraged by President Obama's commitment to clean energy and
combating climate change. I just have three worries: whether he has the right
policies, the right politics and the right official to translate his commitments
into action. PAGE A23

MAUREEN DOWD

All that glitters. We're knee-deep in gold-flecked muck. PAGE A23

THE PASSOVER SONG

Wednesday night, Passover celebrations begin. In an Op-Ed article, Nathan
Englander, the author of ''The Ministry of Special Cases,'' writes about how
translating a new Haggadah unlocked his memories of Passover's past. PAGE A23

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); EARTHQUAKES (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
DEFENSE SPENDING (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);
NATURAL DISASTERS (72%); BANKING LAW (70%); BANKING & FINANCE (70%); BANKING &
FINANCE REGULATION (65%); PRIME MINISTERS (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(54%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (84%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); ROBERT M GATES (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PERU (94%); IRAQ (93%); ISRAEL (93%); LUXEMBOURG (92%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); HONG KONG (79%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (79%); BELGIUM
(74%); ITALY (70%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Mexican Killings Rise, Groups Take Envoy to Task

BYLINE: By ELISABETH MALKIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


Lawless Ciudad Juarez has become a potent symbol of Mexico's escalating drug
war. Drug cartels recently chased out the police chief there, and citizens have
become fearful witnesses to daily murders of drug dealers, police officers and
bystanders. But lost amid the headlines are the murders of young women  that
drew international notice more than a decade ago and that continue today.

Now, frustrated women's groups are making new headlines of their own,
challenging the recent appointment of Mexico's ambassador to Canada, Francisco
Barrio Terrazas. They say he was negligent in dealing with the killings in the
1990s as governor of the state of Chihuahua, where Ciudad Juarez is located,
across the border from El Paso, Tex.

The women's groups, along with other human rights organizations, sent a formal
protest to Mexico's Ministry of Foreign Relations this month. They are also
asking the Foreign Relations Commission of the Mexican Senate to reconsider Mr.
Barrio Terrazas' appointment. Several human rights groups in Quebec have
supported their protests.

''He doesn't represent Mexicans,'' said Marisela Ortiz, a founder of May Our
Daughters Return Home, an association of victims' families in Ciudad Juarez that
is leading the challenge. ''Because of his misogynistic characteristics, we
oppose him having any position, and even less in a country that is known as a
promoter of peace.''

Rights groups estimate that as many as 500 women have been killed since 1993 in
Ciudad Juarez and other cities in the state of Chihuahua. Many of them were
tortured before they were killed, their bodies often found weeks later, dumped
in the desert.

Many of the killings remain unsolved. Although several people have been
convicted in some of the slayings over the years, some were later released after
evidence suggested they were tortured into confessing.

Women's groups have long maintained that the police did not try to solve the
cases, either because they feared that organized crime was involved or because
they were involved themselves, or both.

The groups also argue that the authorities simply did not care because the
victims were poor. Many of those killed had challenged Mexico's machismo culture
by earning their own livings in the area's assembly plants.

The women's groups' most incendiary assertion against Mr. Barrio Terrazas -- and
one that the Mexican media have repeated -- is that he once suggested that the
victims should not have worn miniskirts and walked through unlighted streets.
But it is unclear whether Mr. Barrio Terrazas, who was governor for six years
starting in 1992, ever made such a statement.

In response to a query, the Mexican Embassy in Ottawa said the ambassador
''rejects the notion that he was indifferent or insensitive about the topic or
that he insinuated that the murdered women of Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, bore
some responsibility for their own deaths.''

The embassy statement also said he had ''strongly encouraged the punishment of
the perpetrators of murders or disappearances of women.''

Mr. Barrio Terrazas, a member of President Felipe Calderon's National Action
Party, has held several national posts since his years as governor, including
serving as a deputy in the Mexican Congress. He began work as ambassador on Feb.
26, after Senate ratification.

As violence in Juarez has risen in the past year, so, too, have the killings of
women, said Ms. Ortiz, of May Our Daughters Return Home. The state government
said that 98 women were killed last year in Juarez, although Ms. Ortiz estimated
the toll at 130.

Although attention in Mexico to the plight of the women of Juarez has wavered,
the murders have caught the attention of celebrities. The latest to take up the
cause is the singer Peter Gabriel who, along with representatives of human
rights groups, met with Mr. Calderon last month  to deliver a petition asking
him to work to end violence against women.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Francisco Barrio Terrazas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); MURDER (89%); WITNESSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
POLICE FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); TORTURE (88%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ORGANIZED CRIME (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
GOVERNORS (74%); CARTELS (73%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (50%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%); EL PASO, TX, USA (79%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA
(78%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (78%); QUEBEC, CANADA (57%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); UNITED STATES (79%); CANADA (78%)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             218 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia Announces End Of Operation in Chechnya

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Russia officially ended what it called its counterterrorism operation in the
southern region of Chechnya on Thursday with an announcement that carried
symbolic weight as the end of a decade of Muslim separatist battles for
independence.

The announcement also underscored the success of Chechnya's strongman president,
Ramzan A. Kadyrov, in establishing a fragile stability that has, among other
things, allowed rebuilding to begin in Grozny, the obliterated capital. But
critics charge that the peace has been achieved through campaigns of unsparing
brutality that have included  human rights violations.

Russia's National Antiterrorist Committee said in a statement that the decision
was made ''to guarantee conditions for the further normalization of the
situation in the republic and for the development of its social and economic
spheres.''

The committee did not mention troop withdrawals, though Russian officials said
they would now have more legal leeway to scale down the number of federal
military and security forces. While the violence in Chechnya has declined,  it
seemed likely that many troops and security forces could remain for some time.

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Chechnya has been perhaps the most
troubled region in Russia, the site of two wars that caused thousands of deaths.

The second war began in 1999, under President Boris N. Yeltsin, after explosions
at several apartment buildings in Moscow and elsewhere that killed hundreds. The
government blamed Chechen terrorists for the bombings and sent forces to the
republic.

The military assault was coordinated by Vladimir V. Putin, then and now Russia's
prime minister. The strong-armed response bolstered Mr. Putin's image, helping
him win election as the country's president in 2000.

In 2007 Mr. Putin gave Mr. Kadyrov the task of cleaning up  after  the Russian
campaign and ending the insurgency. Mr. Kadyrov moved with speed and brutality,
killing rebel leaders while also granting amnesty to separatist fighters in
exchange for their loyalty. Human rights groups have accused his government of
employing kidnapping, torture and extrajudicial executions to meet these ends.

On Thursday, Mr. Kadyrov said the end of the counterterrorist operation
signified victory over terrorism in Chechnya and a return to normalcy.

''We have come a long way to this day,'' he said at a news conference, according
to a transcript on his Web site. ''I have lost more than 400 of my colleagues,
friends and family. Today we have confirmed that our republic is the most
peaceful and safest region of Russia.''

Thursday's decision is a victory for Mr. Kadyrov, who has long made ending the
Russian operation a major policy goal in his drive for greater autonomy from
Moscow.

''This is a demonstration that he is able to beat out the federal center and to
gain political space for the Chechen government,'' said Sergei Markedonov, head
of the inter-ethnic relations department at the Institute of Political and
Military Analysis in Moscow.

In the near term, analysts said, the decision to end the operation could serve
to mask the many problems still associated with Chechnya and its leadership.

It was just three weeks ago that Sulim B. Yamadayev, a former Chechen general
and a leading opponent of Mr. Kadyrov, was assassinated in Dubai, United Arab
Emirates, a murder that resembled similar killings of the Chechen president's
enemies in recent months.

And inside Chechnya, the situation is not as rosy as it is depicted by Mr.
Kadyrov and the Kremlin, said Grigory S. Shvedov, the editor of the Web-based
news service Caucasian Knot.

''The number of bombings, terrorist attacks and murders as in the past remains
high; they occur every week,'' he said. ''It is a fairy tale that Chechnya has
become a stable region.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dancers performed Thursday in Grozny at a celebration of the
official end of Russia's counterterrorism operation in Chechnya.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
MUSA SADULAYEV/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (75%); TORTURE (75%); BOMBINGS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); AMNESTY (70%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); TRANSCRIPTS (64%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (79%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             223 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Pakistan, Guile Helps Taliban Gain

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ and PIR ZUBAIR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1357 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Initially, Buner was a hard place for the Taliban to crack. When they attacked a
police station in the valley district last year, the resistance was fearless.
Local people picked up rifles, pistols and daggers, hunted down the militants
and killed six of them.

But it was not to last. In short order this past week the Taliban captured
Buner, a strategically vital district just 60 miles northwest of the capital,
Islamabad. The militants flooded in by the hundreds, startling Pakistani and
American officials with the speed of their advance.

The lesson of Buner, local politicians and residents say, is that the dynamic of
the Taliban insurgency, as methodical and slow-building as it has been, can
change suddenly, and the tactics used by the Taliban can be replicated
elsewhere.

The Taliban took over Buner through both force and guile -- awakening sleeping
sympathizers, leveraging political allies, pretending at peace talks and then
crushing what was left of their opponents, according to the politicians and the
residents interviewed.

Though some of the militants have since pulled back, they still command the high
points of Buner and have fanned out to districts even closer to the capital.

That Buner fell should be no surprise, local people say. Last fall, the
inspector general of police in North-West Frontier Province, Malik Naveed Khan,
complained that his officers were being attacked and killed by the hundreds.

Mr. Khan was so desperate -- and had been so thoroughly abandoned by the
military and the government -- that he was relying on citizen posses like the
one that stood up to the Taliban last August.

Today, the hopes that those civilian militias inspired are gone, brushed away by
the realization that Pakistanis can do little to stem the Taliban advance if
their government and military will not help them.

The people of Buner got nothing for their bravery. In December, the Taliban
retaliated for the brazenness of the resistance in the district, sending a
suicide bomber to disrupt voting during a by-election. More than 30 people were
killed and scores were wounded.

Severe disenchantment toward the government rippled out of the suicide bombing
for a very basic reason, said Amir Zeb Bacha, the director of the Pakistan
International Human Rights Organization in Buner. ''When we took the injured to
the hospital there was no medicine,'' he said.

The election was rescheduled but turned out to be a farce. Voters were too
scared to show up, said Aftab Ahmad Sherpao, a former interior minister, who
lives in the area and has twice escaped Taliban suicide bombers.

The peace deal the military struck with the Taliban in February in neighboring
Swat further demoralized people in Buner. Residents and local officials said
they asked themselves how they could continue to resist the Taliban when the
military had abandoned the effort. The Taliban were emboldened by the deal: it
called for the institution of Shariah, the strict legal code of Islam based on
the Koran, throughout Malakand Agency, which includes Swat and Buner. It allowed
the Taliban amnesty for their killings, floggings and destruction of girls
schools in Swat.

Still, when the Taliban rolled into Buner from Swat through the town of Gokan on
April 5, a well-to-do businessman, Fateh Mohammed, organized another posse of
civilian fighters to take on the militants in the town of Sultanwas.

Five civilians and three policemen were killed, he said. Some newspaper reports
said 17 Taliban were killed.

At that point, the chief government official in charge of Malakand, Mohammed
Javed, proposed what he called peace talks. Mr. Javed, an experienced bureaucrat
in the Pakistani civil service, was appointed in late February as the main
government power broker in Malakand even though he was known to be sympathetic
to the Taliban, a senior government official in North-West Frontier Province
said. The government had been under pressure to bring calm to Swat and
essentially capitulated to Taliban demands for Mr. Javed's appointment, the
official said.

In an apparent acknowledgment that Mr. Javed had been too sympathetic to the
Taliban, the government announced Saturday that he had been replaced by Fazal
Karim Khattack.

In what some residents in Swat and now in Buner say had been a pattern of
favorable decisions led by Mr. Javed on behalf of the Taliban, the talks in
Buner turned out to be a ''betrayal,'' said a former police officer from the
area, who was afraid to be identified.

The talks gave the militants time to gather reinforcements from neighboring
Swat, he said. And at the same time, the Taliban put such pressure on the
members of Mr. Mohammed's posse, or lashkar, that they disappeared or fled, Mr.
Mohammed said.

''The police part of our lashkar left, and I was all alone,'' he said. On the
night of April 11, he fled, too, he said in a telephone conversation from
Karachi, where he has gone to hide.

The militants at that point occupied his three gas stations, his flour mill and
his 20-room house, he said. They had also commandeered more than 20 other houses
in Sultanwas belonging to his relatives, he said.

In a show of who was in charge in Mr. Mohammed's absence, the Taliban
established a training camp in Sultanwas, said Mr. Bacha, the human rights
officer.

To bolster their strength, and insinuate themselves in Buner, the Taliban also
relied heavily on the adherents of a hard-line militant group, the Movement for
the Implementation of the Shariah of Muhammad, which has agitated for Islamic
law in Pakistan.

Their leader, Sufi Mohammed, comes from the region around Swat and Buner and has
whipped up local support and intimidated Taliban opponents.

The group has called on graduates of a huge madrasa near the main town of Daggar
in Buner to run local district governments, beckoning one from as far as the
southern port of Karachi to run a municipality, said Khadim Hussain, a professor
of linguistics and communication at Bahria University in Islamabad.

Whatever the number, early last week the Taliban showed their power by ordering
the state courts shut. They announced that they would open Islamic courts,
practicing Shariah, by the end of the month.

The militants have also placed a tax payable to the Taliban on all marble
quarried at mines, said a senior police officer who worked in Buner.

At gas stations belonging to Mr. Mohammed, they pumped gas and drove off without
paying, the officer said.

''No one dare ask them for payment,'' he said.

The police were so intimidated they mostly stayed inside station houses, he
said. ''They are setting up a parallel government.''

With their success in Buner, the Taliban felt flush with success and
increasingly confident that they could repeat the template, residents and
analysts said. In the main prize, the richest and most populous province,
Punjab, in eastern Pakistan, the Taliban are relying on the sleeper cells of
other militant groups, including the many fighters who had been trained by the
Pakistani military for combat in Kashmir, and now felt abandoned by the state,
they said.

It would not be difficult for the Taliban to seize Peshawar, the capital of
North-West Frontier Province, by shutting down the airport and blocking the two
main thoroughfares from Islamabad, a Western official with long experience in
the province said.

At midweek, a convoy of heavily armed Taliban vehicles was seen barreling along
the four-lane motorway between Islamabad and Peshawar, according to Mr. Sherpao,
the former minister of the interior.

Across North-West Frontier Province, the Taliban are rapidly consolidating power
by activating cells that consisted of a potent mix of jihadist groups, he said.

In some places, the Taliban have entered mosques saying they had come only to
preach, but in fact the strategy is to spread fear that pushes people into
submission and demoralizes the police, he said.

Everywhere, they have preyed on the miseries of the poor, saying that Islamic
courts would settle their complaints against the rich. ''Every district is
falling into their lap,'' Mr. Sherpao said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Taliban fighter leaving Buner, Pakistan, on
Friday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY NAVEED ALI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A1)
 Taliban militants with weapons, above, and an office area at the district
court, left, in the main town of Daggar in the Buner District of Pakistan, where
the militants have taken charge.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MOHAMMAD SAJJAD/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)(A10) MAP: Buner, which the Taliban won, is 60 miles from the capital. Map
details Buner, Pakistan.(A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); POLICE FORCES (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); ELECTIONS (75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (70%); PEACE
PROCESS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (66%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (93%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             225 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 2, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. May Revive Guantanamo Military Courts

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 961 words


The Obama administration is moving toward reviving the military commission
system for prosecuting Guantanamo detainees, which was a target of critics
during the Bush administration, including Mr. Obama himself.

Officials said the first public moves could come as soon as next week, perhaps
in filings to military judges at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, outlining an administration plan to amend the Bush administration's system
to provide more legal protections for terrorism suspects.

Continuing the military commissions in any form would probably prompt sharp
criticism from human rights groups as well as some of Mr. Obama's political
allies because the troubled system became an emblem of the effort to use
Guantanamo to avoid the American legal system.

Officials who work on the Guantanamo issue say administration lawyers have
become concerned that they would face significant obstacles to trying some
terrorism suspects in federal courts. Judges might make it difficult to
prosecute detainees who were subjected to brutal treatment or for prosecutors to
use hearsay evidence gathered by intelligence agencies.

Obama administration officials -- and Mr. Obama himself -- have said in the past
that they were not ruling out prosecutions in the military commission system.
But senior officials have emphasized that they prefer to prosecute terrorism
suspects in existing American courts. When President Obama suspended Guantanamo
cases after his inauguration on Jan. 20, many participants said the military
commission system appeared dead.

But in recent days a variety of officials involved in the deliberations say that
after administration lawyers examined many of the cases, the mood shifted toward
using military commissions to prosecute some detainees, perhaps including those
charged with coordinating the Sept. 11 attacks.

''The more they look at it,'' said one official, ''the more commissions don't
look as bad as they did on Jan. 20.''

Several officials insisted on anonymity because the administration has directed
that no one publicly discuss the deliberations.

Administration officials said Friday that some detainees would be prosecuted in
federal courts and noted that Mr. Obama had always left open the possibility of
using military commissions.

Still, during the presidential campaign Mr. Obama criticized the commissions,
saying that ''by any measure our system of trying detainees has been an enormous
failure,'' and declaring that as president he would ''reject the Military
Commissions Act.''

The military commissions, which were established specifically for trying
Guantanamo detainees, have been subject to repeated delays and court challenges
that argued that detainees were being denied basic rights of American law. Only
two trials have been completed in the nearly eight years since the Bush
administration announced that it would use military tribunals.

Any plan to adjust the military commissions would walk a tightrope of granting
the suspects more rights yet stopping short of affording them the rights
available to defendants in American courts. Several lawyers say the commissions
are only beneficial for the government if they make it easier to win a
prosecution than it would be in federal court.

The Bush administration's commission system was criticized in part because it
permitted evidence that would often be barred in federal court, like evidence
obtained through coercive interrogations and hearsay.

The administration is likely to make it more difficult for prosecutors to admit
hearsay, while not excluding it entirely, the lawyers said. The hearsay issue is
central to many Guantanamo cases because they are based on intelligence reports
and detainees may never be permitted to cross-examine the sources of those
reports.

Human rights groups said Friday that using any form of military commission would
be seen as permitting shortcuts that would not be available in existing American
courts.

Anthony D. Romero, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union,
said that Mr. Obama had pledged to return the country to the rule of law and
that ''continuing with the military commission system would be a retreat from
that promise.''

Gabor Rona, the international legal director of Human Rights First, said
military commissions would only be necessary if the administration wanted to
assure convictions that might not otherwise be certain.

''The administration is making a huge mistake,'' Mr. Rona said, ''if they
believe getting convictions through suspect methods is more valuable than
letting justice take its course.''

It is not clear how many of the remaining 241 detainees are likely to be
prosecuted. The four-month suspension of military commission proceedings Mr.
Obama ordered is to end May 20. As a result, administration officials are
considering whether to ask military judges at Guantanamo for an additional
delay. In making such a request, administration lawyers might outline their
proposed changes.

In recent days, senior administration officials have hinted publicly that
commissions were far from dead, yet offered no specifics and their comments drew
little attention. In Congressional testimony on Thursday, Defense Secretary
Robert M. Gates said, ''The commissions are still very much on the table.''

In a news conference this week, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. emphasized
that if the administration did use military commissions, the rules must give
detainees ''a maximum amount of due process.''

But, speaking of detainees whom American officials have accused of involvement
in major terrorist plots, Mr. Holder added, ''It may be difficult for some of
those high-value detainees to be tried in a normal federal court.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The four-month suspension of military commission proceedings
ordered for Guantanamo detainees is to end on May 20.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD
HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A1)
  It is not clear how many detainees are likely to be prosecuted, but officials
said Friday that some would be in federal courts.(PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUIE PALU)(A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); MILITARY COURTS (91%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS
(78%); HEARSAY (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); JUDGES (77%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (77%); NAVIES (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (70%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (52%)

COMPANY: AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             227 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 6, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

TORTURE MEMOS: INQUIRY SUGGESTS NO PROSECUTIONS

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


An internal Justice Department inquiry has concluded that Bush administration
lawyers committed serious lapses of judgment in writing secret memorandums
authorizing brutal interrogations but that they should not be prosecuted,
according to government officials briefed on its findings.

The report by the Office of Professional Responsibility, an internal ethics unit
within the Justice Department, is also likely to ask state bar associations to
consider possible disciplinary action, which could include reprimands or even
disbarment, for some of the lawyers involved in writing the legal opinions, the
officials said.

The conclusions of the 220-page draft report are not final and have not yet been
approved by Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. The officials said that it is
possible that the final report might be subject to further revision but that
they did not expect major alterations in its main findings or recommendations.

The findings, growing out of an inquiry that started in 2004, would represent a
stinging rebuke of the lawyers and their legal arguments.

But they would stop short of the criminal referral sought by some human rights
advocates, who have suggested that the lawyers could be prosecuted as part of a
criminal conspiracy to violate the anti-torture statute. President Obama has
said the Justice Department would have to decide whether the lawyers who
authorized the interrogation methods should face charges, while pledging that
interrogators would not be investigated or prosecuted for using techniques that
the lawyers said were legal.

The draft report is described as very detailed, tracing e-mail messages between
the Justice Department lawyers and officials at the White House and the Central
Intelligence Agency. Among the questions it is expected to consider is whether
the memos were an independent judgment of the limits of the federal anti-torture
statute or were deliberately skewed to justify the use of techniques proposed by
the C.I.A.

At issue is the question of whether the lawyers acted ethically and competently
in writing a series of Justice Department legal opinions from 2002 to 2007.

The opinions permitted the Central Intelligence Agency to use a number of
methods that human rights groups and legal experts have condemned as torture,
including waterboarding, wall-slamming and shackling for hours in a standing
position. The opinions allowed many of these practices to be used repeatedly and
in combination.

The main targets of criticism are John Yoo, Jay S. Bybee and Steven G. Bradbury,
who, as senior officials of the department's Office of Legal Counsel, were
principal authors of the opinions.

It was unclear whether all three would be the subject of bar association
referrals. One person who saw the report said it did not recommend bar action
against Mr. Bradbury.

Mr. Bradbury, and lawyers for Mr. Yoo, now a law professor at Berkeley, and for
Mr. Bybee, now a federal appeals court judge in Nevada, all declined to comment
Tuesday, saying Justice Department rules require confidentiality for ethics
reviews.

The work of other lawyers in the counsel's office was also questioned in the
report, the officials said, but none are believed to be the subject of
disciplinary recommendations. The report reaches no conclusions about the role
of lawyers at the White House or the C.I.A. because the jurisdiction of the
ethics unit does not extend beyond the Justice Department.

The draft report on the interrogation opinions was completed in December and
provoked controversy inside the Bush administration Justice Department. But
criticism of the legal work in the memos has intensified since last month when
the Obama administration disclosed one previously secret opinion from 2002,
drafted mainly by Mr. Yoo and signed by Mr. Bybee, and three from 2005, signed
by Mr. Bradbury, which for the first time described the coercive interrogation
methods in detail.

Michael B. Mukasey, attorney general when the draft report was first completed,
was said by colleagues to have been critical of its quality and upset over its
scathing conclusions. He wrote a 10-page rebuttal to its findings, and, in his
farewell speech to employees, warned against second-guessing the legal work of
the department's lawyers.

Several legal scholars have remarked that in approving waterboarding, the
near-drowning method Mr. Obama and his aides have described as torture, the
Justice Department lawyers did not cite cases in which the United States
government previously prosecuted American law enforcement officials and Japanese
World War II interrogators for using the procedure.

In a letter on Monday, the Justice Department advised two Democratic senators on
the Judiciary committee, Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Sheldon Whitehouse of
Rhode Island, that the former department lawyers who wrote the opinions had
until May 4 to submit written appeals to the findings.

The letter, written by Ronald Weich, an assistant attorney general, also said
the report had been given to the C.I.A. for review and declassification, and
some officials said they expected a version to be made public, probably late
this month.

Mr. Durbin and Mr. Whitehouse, who have criticized the Bush administration's
interrogation policies, have repeatedly demanded the release of the report. Mr.
Whitehouse is scheduled to hold a hearing on May 13, to examine issues related
to the report.

The professional responsibility office first began examining the actions of the
lawyers nearly five years ago. Recently, Mr. Holder named Mary Patrice Brown, a
senior federal prosecutor in Washington to head the office, moving its longtime
chief, H. Marshall Jarrett, to another job within the Justice Department.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); TORTURE
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ETHICS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
(89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (78%); DISBARMENT (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); LEGAL ETHICS
(78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); APPROVALS (73%); WRITERS (73%); JUDGES (73%); CONSPIRACY (67%);
ELECTRONIC MAIL (64%); APPEALS COURTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (78%); ERIC HOLDER (58%)

STATE: NEVADA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             234 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Ignores Calls by Aid Groups for Better Access to War Refugees

BYLINE: By THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


Sri Lanka's government ignored mounting calls by international relief
organizations on Friday for greater access to the country's swelling refugee
camps, as the military continued to weed out people suspected of being former
Tamil Tiger rebels hiding among civilians.

Even as the end of the war has brought a new flood of refugees in the north in
recent days, the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other groups have said that the military's new restrictions have curtailed
their activities and are endangering the lives of the refugee population, now
estimated at 280,000.

In a joint statement on Friday, 14 international relief organizations operating
in the camps said that the government had restricted the movement of their
vehicles, making it impossible to provide adequate services.

''The government is afraid that with such a large number of vehicles going in
and out of the camps, some L.T.T.E. members may escape,'' said David White, the
head in Sri Lanka of Oxfam, one of the 14 organizations. He referred to the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or Tamil Tigers.

''Also, the large number of international vehicles in the camps makes it seem as
if it's an international relief effort, whereas the government is very keen on
portraying this as a national effort,'' he said.

While the government has said it is screening out suspected Tamil Tigers in the
camps, aid officials said the authorities appeared worried that some former
rebels had escaped or bribed their way out. The government, which Western
governments and human rights organizations have accused of indiscriminately
shelling rebel-held areas containing civilians, also seemed intent on
controlling access to witnesses, aid officials and diplomats here said, speaking
on the condition of anonymity under normal diplomatic rules.

The government rejected criticism of its handling of the refugees, describing
its efforts as satisfactory. ''Those who are ignorant of such efforts should at
least try to see what is happening at ground level before making irresponsible
statements to criticize the good work done by the government under difficult
conditions,'' the health secretary, Dr. Athula Kahandaliyanage, said in a
statement. ''If such statements are irresponsibly stated, it may be with
ulterior motives in order to bring disrepute and to discredit the government.''

The government, which barred journalists from the combat zones and rejected
international calls for a cease-fire, stuck to its hard-line stance on Friday,
hours before Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, was scheduled to
make a 24-hour visit here. Mr. Ban was to meet with President Mahinda Rajapaksa
and visit a refugee complex called Manik Farm in the northern district of
Vavuniya, where 250,000 of the 280,000 refugees are being sheltered.

After circling over the combat zone in the country's northeast, Mr. Ban's chief
of staff, Vijay Nambiar, described the area on Friday as ''ravaged,'' with many
burned-out vehicles and clusters of battered tents.  ''What was truly striking
was the almost total absence of human habitation,'' he said at a news conference
here. ''It was almost eerie.''

Asked about an investigation into possible war crimes by the Tamil Tigers and
the government, Mr. Nambiar said the issue would probably be raised at a session
of the United Nations Human Rights Council next week.

But the Sri Lankan president, addressing tens of thousands of people outside
Parliament on Friday afternoon, dismissed any investigation. ''There are some
who tried to stop our military campaign by threatening to haul us before war
crimes tribunals,'' Mr. Rajapaksa said. ''They are still trying to do that, but
I am not afraid.''

In the final weeks of the war, government troops cornered the Tamil Tigers in a
tiny strip of coastline in the island nation's northeast. Tens of thousands of
civilians caught in that area, and used as human shields by the Tamil Tigers,
have been moved south to the Vavuniya district.

Some of those seriously wounded are being taken to the main hospital in the town
of Vavuniya, where 1,900 people were being treated earlier this week in a center
with a capacity for 450, according to Doctors Without Borders, the aid group
that is helping Sri Lankan doctors there. Most of the refugees were taken to
four camps, collectively called Manik Farm and lining a main road in Vavuniya
district.

Aid officials with operations there said the government had set up the camps
relatively well, with about 10 people sharing tents measuring  16 feet by 10
feet. ''The camp management is actually not bad,'' said one aid official.
''That's not why the government doesn't want to let people inside. They don't
want the media to be talking to people about what happened in the conflict
zones.''

Mr. Nambiar said Mr. Ban would press for greater access to the camps while the
United Nations was working with the Sri Lankan government. He added that the
''world is watching'' the government's actions, hinting that badly needed
assistance to rebuild the former rebel-held zones may hinge on the government's
postwar behavior.

The United States, whose calls for a cease-fire were ignored by the government
here, recently suggested withholding a $1.9 billion International Monetary Fund
loan for Sri Lanka. In response, the Sri Lankan central bank governor, Nivard
Cabraal, told reporters here that the government was working on ''Plan B, Plan C
and Plan D.''

The comment suggested that the government might turn for help to China, one of
the main suppliers of weapons in its victory over the Tamil Tigers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sri Lankans defied the rain on Friday during a parade in the
capital, Colombo. The event was part of continuing celebrations of the
government's victory over the Tamil Tigers rebel group.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID
GRAY/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (92%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (91%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (91%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (91%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (90%);
DISASTER RELIEF (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (78%); NATURAL DISASTERS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (94%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF
THE RED CROSS (57%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (76%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 24, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. RELIES MORE ON AID OF ALLIES IN TERROR CASES

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT and MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1270 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The United States is now relying heavily on foreign intelligence services to
capture, interrogate and detain all but the highest-level terrorist suspects
seized outside the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan, according to current
and former American government officials.

The change represents a significant loosening of the reins for the United
States, which has worked closely with allies to combat violent extremism since
the 9/11 attacks but is now pushing that cooperation to new limits.

In the past 10 months, for example, about a half-dozen midlevel financiers and
logistics experts working with Al Qaeda have been captured and are being held by
intelligence services in four Middle Eastern countries after the United States
provided information that led to their arrests by local security services, a
former American counterterrorism official said.

In addition, Pakistan's intelligence and security services captured a Saudi
suspect and a Yemeni suspect this year with the help of American intelligence
and logistical support, Pakistani officials  said. The two are the
highest-ranking Qaeda operatives captured since President Obama took office, but
they are still being held by Pakistan, which has shared information from their
interrogations with the United States, the official said.

The current approach, which began in the last two years of the Bush
administration and has gained momentum under Mr. Obama, is driven in part by
court rulings and policy changes that have closed the secret prisons run by the
Central Intelligence Agency, and all but ended the transfer of prisoners from
outside Iraq and Afghanistan to American military prisons.

Human rights advocates say that relying on foreign governments to hold and
question terrorist suspects could carry significant risks. It could increase the
potential for abuse at the hands of foreign interrogators and could also yield
bad intelligence, they say.

The fate of many terrorist suspects whom the Bush administration sent to foreign
countries remains uncertain. One suspect, Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi,  who was
captured by the C.I.A. in late 2001 and sent to Libya, was recently reported to
have died there in Libyan custody.

''As a practical matter you have to rely on partner governments, so the focus
should be on pressing and assisting those governments to handle those cases
professionally,'' said Tom Malinowski, Washington advocacy director for Human
Rights Watch.

The United States itself has not detained any high-level terrorist suspects
outside Iraq and Afghanistan since Mr. Obama took office, and the question of
where to detain the most senior terrorist suspects on a long-term basis is being
debated within the new administration. Even deciding where the two Qaeda
suspects in Pakistani custody will be kept over the long term is ''extremely,
extremely sensitive right now,'' a senior American military official said,
adding, ''They're both bad dudes. The issue is: where do they get parked so they
stay parked?''

How the United States is dealing with terrorism suspects beyond those already in
the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, was a question Mr. Obama did not address in
the speech he gave Thursday about his antiterrorism policies. While he said he
might seek to create a new system that would allow preventive detention inside
the United States, the government currently has no obvious long-term detention
center for imprisoning terrorism suspects without court oversight.

Mr. Obama has said he still intends to close the Guantanamo prison by January,
despite misgivings in Congress, and the Supreme Court has ruled that inmates
there may challenge their detention before federal judges. Some  suspects are
being imprisoned without charges at a United States air base in Afghanistan, but
a federal  court has ruled that at least some of them may also file habeas
corpus lawsuits to challenge their detentions.

American officials say that in the last years of the Bush administration and now
on Mr. Obama's watch, the balance has  shifted toward leaving all but the most
high-level terrorist suspects in foreign rather than American custody. The
United States has repatriated hundreds of detainees held at  prisons in Cuba,
Iraq and Afghanistan, but the current approach is different because it seeks to
keep the prisoners out of American custody altogether.

How the United States deals with terrorism suspects remains a contentious issue
in Congress.

Leon E. Panetta, the director of the C.I.A., said in February that the agency
might continue its program of extraordinary rendition, in which captured
terrorism suspects are transferred to other countries without extradition
proceedings.

He said the C.I.A. would be likely to continue to transfer detainees from their
place of capture to other countries, either their home countries or nations that
intended to bring charges against them.

As a safeguard against torture, Mr. Panetta said, the United States would rely
on diplomatic assurances of good treatment. The Bush administration sought the
same assurances, which critics say are ineffective.

A half-dozen current and former  American intelligence and counterterrorism
officials and allied officials were interviewed for this article, but all spoke
on the condition of anonymity because the detention and interrogation programs
are classified.

Officials say the United States has learned so much about Al Qaeda and other
militant groups since the 9/11 attacks that it can safely rely on foreign
partners to detain and question more  suspects. ''It's the preferred method
now,'' one former counterterrorism official said.

The Obama administration's policies will probably become clearer after two task
forces the president created in January report to him in July on detainee
policy, interrogation techniques and extraordinary rendition.

In many instances now, allies are using information provided by the United
States to pick up terrorism suspects on their own territory -- including the two
suspects seized in Pakistan this year.

The Saudi militant, Zabi al-Taifi, was picked up by Pakistani commandos in a
dawn raid at a safe house outside Peshawar on Jan. 22, an operation conducted
with the help of the C.I.A.

A Pakistani official said the Yemeni suspect, Abu Sufyan al-Yemeni, was a Qaeda
paramilitary commander who was on C.I.A. and Pakistani lists of the top 20 Qaeda
operatives. He was believed to be a conduit for communications between Qaeda
leaders in Pakistan and cells in East Africa, Iran, Yemen and elsewhere.
American and Pakistani intelligence officials say they believe that Mr. Yemeni,
who was arrested Feb. 24 by Pakistani authorities in Quetta, helped arrange
travel and training for Qaeda operatives from various parts of the Muslim world
to the Pakistani tribal areas.

He is now in the custody of Pakistan's main spy agency, the Directorate for
Inter-Services Intelligence, but his fate is unclear. The Pakistani official
said that he would remain in Pakistani hands, but that it would be difficult to
try him because the evidence against him came from informers.

American officials said the United States would still take custody of the most
senior Qaeda operatives captured in the future. As a model, they cited the case
of Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, an Iraqi Kurd who is said to have joined Al Qaeda in
the late 1990s and risen to become a top aide to Osama bin Laden, and who was
captured by a foreign security service in 2006. He was handed over to the
C.I.A., which transferred him to Guantanamo Bay in April 2007. He was one of the
last detainees shipped there.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); ESPIONAGE (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); AL-QAEDA (73%);
ARRESTS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); PAKISTAN (93%);
LIBYA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             236 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Victory in Sri Lanka

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 395 words


Even after declaring victory in Sri Lanka's 26-year civil war, the country's
leaders seem unable to distinguish between the enemy -- the brutal but
apparently vanquished Tamil Tiger separatists -- and innocent bystanders.
Despite appeals from Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, and from
others, the government has not given international aid organizations full access
to government-run camps, where an estimated 280,000 civilians are said to be in
desperate need of food, water and medical care.

The Tamil Tigers have a history of using civilians as human shields and the
government claims it must screen out rebels hiding in the camps. But aid workers
suspect other motives, including a desire to deny access to witnesses who may
have seen abuses by government forces. In the last months of the fighting,
President Mahinda Rajapaksa callously rejected international pleas for a
cease-fire to let civilians escape the war zone, while his troops shelled the
area.

We support the call by Navi Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for
human rights, for an international investigation into possible war crimes
committed by both sides. The United Nations Human Rights Council is debating the
issue this week  in Geneva.

After killing  most of the rebels, including the Tigers' ruthless leader, the
government  is now offering reconciliation with the Tamil minority. We hope this
is more than just lip service.

It must be prepared to forge a political settlement that gives Tamil civilians,
who make up about 12 percent of the population, more autonomy in provinces where
historically they have lived. It must also end all abuses, including
restrictions on movement, and politically motivated killings. And it must work
swiftly to resettle civilians back in their villages.

The government has asked for international help to rebuild. Foreign donors
should make clear that any support is dependent on an agreement to open up the
camps to international aid workers.

Some experts fear that President Rajapaksa and his government view all Tamils --
long oppressed by the Sinhalese majority -- as supporters of the Tigers. Most
were driven to the guerrillas as a desperation move after decades of abuse.
Until the government treats all of its citizens fairly, there is no chance for
the peace that President Rajapaksa has promised his country.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (78%);
WAR CRIMES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (57%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             237 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bomber Kills 3 U.S. Soldiers and 3 Civilians Near Kabul

BYLINE: By ADAM B. ELLICK and ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


A suicide car bomber plowed into a NATO convoy on a main road north of Kabul on
Tuesday morning, killing three American soldiers and three Afghan civilians,
according to Afghan and American military officials.

Separately, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission released its
assessment of an American aerial attack in the western province of Farah on May
4, saying American forces demonstrated ''a disproportionate use of force'' that
might have killed up to 97 civilians, most of them children.

That number is lower than the Afghan government's figure of 140 civilians killed
but higher than the American military assessment of 20 to 30 civilian deaths in
an attack it said singled out Taliban fighters.

The rising number of civilian causalities has increasingly alienated the Afghan
population from the international security forces, and has incited  sharp
criticism from Afghan leaders, especially President Hamid Karzai.

The attack on the NATO convoy on Tuesday was in Kapisa Province, a relatively
peaceful area of strategic importance near Bagram Air Base. There was no
immediate claim of responsibility, but militants are known to use several
districts in Kapisa to plan attacks in Kabul, the capital. However, the Sayad
district, where the attack occurred, rarely sees such violence.

Abdul Wahab Skinwal, a local government council member in Kapisa, said he heard
the explosion from his office and immediately went to the scene, where he saw
the mangled car.

''The American Humvee was rolled over on the main road, and I saw the remains of
two legs that security told me were the remains of the suicide attacker,'' he
said.

The attack also wounded one American soldier and two Afghan civilians, said
Abdul Alim Ayar, a provincial spokesman.

With elections scheduled for August and more American troops arriving in the
country over the coming months, the Taliban have been intensifying attacks on
foreign and Afghan forces in Afghanistan. Last year was the deadliest since
2001, when American-led forces ousted the Taliban.

In its statement on the American aerial attack in Farah, the human rights
commission said that in addition to 11 adult male civilians who were killed,
''available records suggest that 21 were women and 65 were children, 31 of whom
were girls and 34 boys.''

The commission, a seven-person team, included two forensic experts and a
toxicologist. The group spent a week in Farah following the attack.

''Our team was upset that some people were making false claims,'' Ahmad Nader
Naderi, the organization's commissioner, said, referring to the American
military. ''And the [Afghan] government did not do proper verification.''

Mr. Naderi also said the commission concluded that just before the airstrikes,
the Taliban used civilians as human shields to attack a police station.

According to the United Nations, several thousand civilian casualties were
caused last year by the Taliban and other insurgents. In that period, 828
civilian deaths were attributed to American, NATO and Afghan forces, mostly from
airstrikes and village raids, United Nations figures show.

In a separate episode in Farah on Tuesday, one Afghan was killed and another was
wounded when an American convoy on a supply mission fired on their car as it
approached at  high speed, according to the American military. Despite three
warning flares and three rounds of warning shots, the car continued to approach
the convoy, the military said.

Although an investigation is still under way, Col. Chris Kubik, a military
spokesman, said the two Afghans were likely civilians ''who did not understand
our escalation-of-force procedures.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Nuria, 7, who, with her sisters, was wounded in an American
airstrike in Farah Province on May 4, was recovering from burns in Herat. The
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, citing ''a disproportionate use of
force,'' said the aerial attack might have killed up to 97 civilians, most of
them children. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 A soldier in an armored vehicle stood guard by a wrecked Humvee near the site
of an explosion in Kapisa Province on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAFIQ
MAQBOOL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); TALIBAN (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (77%); FORENSICS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); POLICE FORCES (58%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (91%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             238 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Honduras: Report On Attacks On Transgender People

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 103 words


Violence against transgender people is rarely investigated by the Honduran
authorities, Human Rights Watch said Friday in a report. Citing rapes and
killings  in which the assailants were not found, the rights group, based in New
York, called on the police to seriously investigate such crimes and punish those
who committed them, including, in some cases, police officers. ''The police have
an obligation to protect people and to investigate violence, no matter who the
victims are,'' said Juliana Cano Nieto, a researcher for the group. In January,
a leading transgender activist was shot and killed, activists said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TRANSGENDER PERSONS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 30, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

India: Report Alleges Atrocities By a State's Police

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 97 words


Human rights abuses by Indian security forces have helped fuel a Maoist
insurgency that has killed thousands, the Asian Center for Human Rights said in
a report released Friday. The organization, which is based in New Delhi, said
government forces and state-sponsored civilian militias in Chhattisgarh State
''were responsible for gross human rights violations,'' including torture and
extrajudicial killings. A spokesman for the state police dismissed the
allegations as ''Maoist propaganda.'' The report also accused the rebels of
committing ''violence of extraordinary brutality.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TORTURE (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(88%); POLICE FORCES (83%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (91%)

STATE: CHHATTISGARH, INDIA (73%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             241 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 9, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shell Agrees To Settle Abuse Case For Millions

BYLINE: By JAD MOUAWAD

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 787 words


Royal Dutch Shell, the big oil company, agreed to pay $15.5 million to settle a
case accusing it of taking part in human rights abuses in the Niger Delta in the
early 1990s, a striking sum given that the company has denied any wrongdoing.

The settlement, announced late Monday, came days before the start of a trial in
New York that was expected to reveal extensive details of Shell's activities in
the Niger Delta.

The announcement caps a protracted legal battle that began shortly after the
death of the Nigerian activist Ken Saro-Wiwa in 1995. Mr. Saro-Wiwa, Shell's
most prominent critic at the time in Nigeria, was hanged by that country's
military regime after protesting the company's environmental practices in the
oil-rich delta, especially in his native Ogoni region.

Shell continued Monday to deny any role in the death. It called the settlement a
''humanitarian gesture'' meant to compensate the plaintiffs, including Mr.
Saro-Wiwa's family, for their loss and to cover a portion of their legal fees
and costs. Some of the money will go into an educational and social trust fund
intended to benefit the Ogoni people.

In a statement, the company said the agreement ''will provide funding for the
trust and a compassionate payment to the plaintiffs and the estates they
represent in recognition of the tragic turn of events in Ogoni land, even though
Shell had no part in the violence that took place.''

''Shell has always maintained the allegations were false,'' Malcolm Brinded, the
company's executive director for exploration and production, said in the
statement.

Shell said that the trust being set up is in addition to the contribution to
community development made by Shell-run companies in the Niger Delta. According
to Shell, these payments totaled more than $240 million in 2008.

Ten plaintiffs, including the son of Mr. Saro-Wiwa and his brother, accused
Shell of seeking the aid of the former Nigerian regime to silence the critic, as
well as paying soldiers who had carried out human rights abuses in the
impoverished region where it operated.

Mr. Saro-Wiwa, who founded the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni Peoples in
1990, was one of Shell's most forceful critics because of the damage done to the
delta communities, including gas flaring and the destruction of mangroves to
make way for pipelines.

The Niger Delta continues to be marred by violence and ethnic strife. Much of
Shell's  production in the delta is still the target of  militants seeking a
larger share of the country's oil wealth.

The prominent case involving Shell was the latest to challenge the behavior of
some of the world's biggest oil companies in developing countries. Companies are
increasingly being called to account for their environmental record as well as
any collusion with repressive governments.

The suit was brought under the Alien Tort Claims Act, an arcane United States
law that has been increasingly used for lawsuits asserting human rights
violations occurring overseas. The Supreme Court ruled 6 to 3 in 2004 that
foreigners could bring cases before American courts in some limited
circumstances, like crimes against humanity or torture, and the courts have
decided that a wide variety of defendants, including multinational corporations,
can be called to account. Royal Dutch Shell is headquartered in the Netherlands.

So far, no corporation has been found guilty under the alien tort law. Last
year, a jury cleared Chevron of wrongdoing after it was accused of complicity in
the shooting of Nigerian villagers who occupied an offshore oil barge in 1998 to
protest its environmental record and hiring practices.

In 2004, Unocal, a California oil company that was accused of using slave labor
in the construction of a pipeline in Burma during the 1990s, agreed to
compensate villagers there. The terms of that settlement were not made public.

For the Nigerian plaintiffs and their lawyers, Shell's settlement, including
publication of the sum involved, is a significant victory. Companies commonly
demand that details of such settlements be kept secret, for fear of setting
precedents.

''It has been a really long struggle,'' said Jennie Greene, a lawyer with the
Center for Constitutional Rights, which brought the case on behalf of the
plaintiffs. ''But this shows that corporations cannot act without
accountability.''

Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr., the son of the slain rights advocate, was also satisfied with
the outcome.

''We hope this sends a signal,'' he said in a telephone interview from London.
''It's a relief also that we've been able to draw a line over the past. And from
a legal perspective, this historic case means that corporations will have to be
much more careful.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ken Saro-Wiwa Jr. sued Royal Dutch Shell, saying it had
culpability in his father's death. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNIFER S. ALTMAN FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)
 The Shell critic Ken Saro- Wiwa was hanged in 1995. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
(pg.B5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); OIL & GAS
INDUSTRY (89%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (78%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES
(78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); TRUST ARRANGEMENTS (71%); MILITARY RULE
(70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (69%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL
RESOURCES (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%)

COMPANY: ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC (96%)

TICKER: RDSA (LSE) (96%); RDSA (AMS) (96%); RDS.B (NYSE) (96%); RDS.A (NYSE)
(96%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES (96%);
NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (96%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (96%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: NIGER (94%); NIGERIA (92%); UNITED STATES (88%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             244 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AIDS: Discrimination in Visa Laws Poses Risk To Those With AIDS, Rights Group
Says

BYLINE: By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; GLOBAL HEALTH; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 269 words


International migrant workers, foreign students and political refugees are often
endangered by laws that discriminate against people with AIDS, the advocacy
group Human Rights Watch reported last week.

About a third of the world's countries limit the right of people with H.I.V. to
enter or stay, even if their disease is under control with drugs. Some restrict
their access to health care.

The report describes how guest workers from poor countries like the Philippines
and Sri Lanka working in wealthy ones like Saudi Arabia may be given mandatory
H.I.V. testing -- sometimes without their knowledge -- and deported, often
without being able to claim back wages and sometimes after imprisonment without
treatment.

The group said the visa restrictions had led people to commit fraud or stop
treatment, risking their lives. The report detailed one study in which travelers
from Britain stopped taking their AIDS pills or tried to mail them ahead,
sometimes unsuccessfully, out of fear that they would be denied visas to the
United States if they admitted being infected, or would be searched at the
border.

Wealthy countries often deport people without considering whether they will have
access to medical care elsewhere, the report said. South Korea, for example, has
deported hundreds of foreign workers, and some deportees from the United States,
especially those with criminal records, have been jailed without treatment and
died in custody.

The International Organization for Migration estimates 3 percent of the world's
population -- 192 million people -- live outside the country where they were
born.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: MAP: PREVALANCE OF H.I.V.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); AIDS & HIV
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%);
FOREIGN LABOR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); MIGRANT WORKERS (78%); AIDS & HIV TREATMENT
(78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); HEALTH CARE ACCESS (76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(73%); AIDS & HIV TESTING (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MIGRATION
(54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); PHILIPPINES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             247 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 30, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kenya: Report Says Security Forces Tortured Civilians

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 114 words


Kenyan security forces tortured hundreds of civilians and raped at least a dozen
women during a three-day operation to disarm militias in the country's remote
northeast last year, Human Rights Watch, based in New York, said in a report on
Monday. It said it had interviewed victims in the Mandera region who had
''endured continued beating after suffering broken limbs.'' The report said some
men had had their genitals ''pulled with pliers, tied with wire or beaten with
sticks.'' Human Rights Watch urged the government to prosecute those
responsible. Kenya's government spokesman, Alfred Mutua, dismissed the
allegations, saying, ''They never come to us for our side of the story.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (94%); UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             253 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 18, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Warlord Denies Links to '01 Killings

BYLINE: By RICH OPPEL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: KABUL


Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, a powerful Afghan warlord who fought the Taliban and
was supported by the American government after the invasion of Afghanistan, said
in an online column published  Friday that it was ''unimaginable'' that forces
allied with him could have killed Taliban prisoners in 2001 ''to the extent that
has been claimed.''

General Dostum, recently reinstated to a senior position in the Afghan
government and an important political ally of President Hamid Karzai, was
responding to an article published in The New York Times on July 11.

The article reported that Bush administration officials repeatedly discouraged
efforts to investigate the killings of hundreds or even thousands of Taliban
prisoners of war by forces allied with General Dostum when his organization was
part of the American-backed Northern Alliance fighting the Taliban.

In a column on the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Web site, General Dostum
wrote that the Northern Alliance had investigated and determined that there was
no ''intentional massacre'' of prisoners of war.

''I had given very clear orders for all of our troops in the Northern United
Front to treat prisoners well,'' General Dostum wrote. He added: ''The massacre
of prisoners of war to the extent that has been claimed is against the
principles of intelligence gathering and security. From a military point of
view, it is unimaginable.''

The Times article emphasized that accounts of the killings had been previously
reported. The mass deaths occurred in November 2001, after thousands of Taliban
fighters surrendered to General Dostum's forces in Kunduz and were transported
to a prison run by his forces near Shibarghan.

Survivors and witnesses later told The Times and Newsweek that prisoners were
stuffed into closed metal shipping containers and suffocated, or were killed
when guards shot into the containers.

The focus of The Times article was  new revelations that even though officials
from the F.B.I., the State Department, the Red Cross and human rights groups
sought an investigation, Bush administration officials discouraged the inquiry
because General Dostum worked closely with the C.I.A. and American Special
Operations forces and was a member of Mr. Karzai's American-backed government.

After The Times article was published, President Obamatold CNN that ''the
indications that this had not been properly investigated just recently was
brought to my attention.'' Mr. Obama also said he had asked his national
security team to ''collect the facts for me that are known, and we'll probably
make a decision in terms of how to approach it once we have all of the facts
gathered up.''

The Times had sought comment from General Dostum through a spokesman for his
party in Afghanistan, but the spokesman declined to comment on the mass deaths,
and instead recommended trying to reach the general through an intermediary.
Unable to reach General Dostum, The Times cited his prior statements that any
deaths were unintentional and that only 200 prisoners had died, mostly from
combat wounds and disease.

Officials at Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, which is financed by Congress
through the Broadcasting Board of Governors, said that General Dostum's column
was sent to them and other news outlets unsolicited, and that they translated it
from Dari into English.  The organization decided to solicit a rebuttal to run
alongside the column, which ended up ''more or less refuting it,'' said Jay
Tolson, the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty newsroom director in Prague.

''Dostum's version, while highly questionable to say the least, was interesting,
but we didn't want to run it without a very informed counterpoint by somebody
who was on the scene,'' Mr. Tolson said.

The rebuttal published on the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Web site stated
that the ''facts currently available indicate very strongly that many detainees
-- possibly hundreds -- died while in the custody of Dostum's forces in November
2001 and their bodies were dumped in the nearby desert of Dasht-i-Leili.'' It
was written by Sam Zarifi, a human rights investigator in northwestern
Afghanistan in 2002 who is now the Asia-Pacific director for Amnesty
International.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Taliban prisoners huddled on trucks on the road between Kunduz
and Mazar-i-Sharif, after  800 had surrendered to Northern Alliance forces under
General Dostum's command in 2001.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES HILL FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); POWS & MIAS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (83%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: SHERGHAN, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); MAZAR-E SHARIF,
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             255 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 20, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON SEEKS PRISON OVERHAUL IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Abdul Waheed Wafa contributed reporting from Kabul,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1240 words

DATELINE: BAGRAM AIR BASE, Afghanistan


A sweeping United States military review calls for overhauling the troubled
American-run prison here as well as the entire Afghan jail and judicial systems,
a reaction to worries that abuses and militant recruiting within the prisons are
helping to strengthen the Taliban.

In a further sign of high-level concern over detention practices, Adm. Mike
Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sent a confidential message
last  week to all of the military service chiefs and senior field commanders
asking them to redouble their efforts to alert troops to the importance of
treating detainees properly.

The prison at this air base north of Kabul has become an ominous symbol for
Afghans -- a place where harsh interrogation methods and sleep deprivation were
used routinely in its early years,  and where two Afghan detainees died in 2002
after being beaten by American soldiers and hung by their arms from the ceiling
of isolation cells.

Bagram also became a holding site for terrorism suspects captured outside
Afghanistan and Iraq.

But even as treatment at Bagram improved in recent years, conditions worsened in
the larger Afghan-run prison network, which houses more than 15,000 detainees at
three dozen overcrowded and often violent sites.  The country's deeply flawed
judicial system affords prisoners virtually no legal protections, human rights
advocates say.

''Throughout Afghanistan, Afghans are arbitrarily detained by police,
prosecutors, judges and detention center officials with alarming regularity,''
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan said in a report in
January.

To help address these problems, Maj. Gen. Douglas M. Stone of the Marines,
credited with successfully revamping American detention practices in Iraq, was
assigned to review all detention issues in Afghanistan.

General Stone's report, which has not been made public but is circulating among
senior American officials, recommends separating extremist militants from more
moderate detainees instead of having them mixed together as they are now,
according to two American officials who have read or been briefed on his report.

Under the new approach, the United States would help build and finance a new
Afghan-run prison for the hard-core extremists who are now using the poorly run
Afghan corrections system as a camp to train petty thieves and other common
criminals to be deadly militants,  the American officials said.

The remaining inmates would be taught vocational skills and offered other
classes, and they would be taught about moderate Islam with the aim of
reintegrating them into society, said the officials, who spoke on condition of
anonymity because the review's findings had not  been publicly disclosed. The
review also presses for training new Afghan prison guards, prosecutors and
judges.

The recommendations come as American officials express fears that the
notoriously overcrowded Afghan-run prisons will be overwhelmed by waves of new
prisoners captured in the American-led offensive in southern Afghanistan, where
thousands of Marines are battling Taliban fighters.

President Obama signed an executive order in January to review policy options
for detention, interrogation and rendition.

The Defense and Justice Departments are leading two government task forces
studying those issues and are scheduled to deliver reports to the president on
Tuesday.

But administration officials said Sunday that the task forces --  which are
grappling with questions like whether terrorism suspects should be turned over
to other countries and how to deal with detainees who are thought to be
dangerous but who cannot be brought to trial --  were likely to seek extensions
on some contentious issues.

Last month The Wall Street Journal  reported elements of General Stone's review,
but in recent days American military officials provided a more detailed
description of the report's scope, findings and recommendations.

A spokesman for the Afghan Embassy in Washington, Martin Austermuhle, said he
was unaware of the review, and did not know if the government in Kabul had been
apprised of it.

Admiral Mullen felt compelled to issue his message last week after viewing
photographs documenting abuse of prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan by American
military personnel in the early years of the wars there, a senior military
official said.

Mr. Obama decided in May not to make the photographs public, warning that the
images could ignite a deadly backlash against American troops.

The admiral urged top American field commanders to step up their efforts to
ensure that prisoners were treated properly both at the point of capture and in
military prisons.

He told the service chiefs to emphasize detainee treatment when preparing and
training troops who deploy to the Middle East and Southwest Asia.

''It is essential to who we are as a fighting force that we get this right,''
Admiral Mullen said in the message. ''We are better than what I saw in those
pictures.''

American officials say many of the changes that General Stone's review
recommends for Bagram are already in the works as part of the scheduled opening
this fall of a 40-acre replacement complex that officials say will accommodate
about 600 detainees in a more modern and humane setting.

The problems at the existing American-run prison, the Bagram Theater Internment
Facility, have been well documented.

The prison is a converted aircraft hangar that still holds some of the decrepit
aircraft-repair machinery left by the Soviet troops who occupied the country in
the 1980s.

Military personnel who know Bagram and the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
describe the Afghan site as tougher and more spartan.

The prisoners have fewer privileges and virtually no access to lawyers or the
judicial process. Many are still held communally in big cages.

In the past two weeks, prisoners have refused to leave their cells to protest
their indefinite imprisonment.

In 2005, the Bush administration began trying to scale back American involvement
in detention operations in Afghanistan, mainly by transferring Bagram prisoners
to an American-financed high-security prison outside of Kabul guarded by
American-trained Afghan soldiers.

But United States officials conceded that the new Afghan block, at Pul-i-Charkhi
prison, could not absorb all the Bagram prisoners. It now holds about 4,300
detainees, including some 360 from Bagram or Guantanamo Bay, Afghan prison
officials said.

Officials from the general directorate for prisons complained about the lack of
detention space based on international standards in provinces of Afghanistan.
They said most of those prisons were rented houses and not suitable for
detention.

Gen. Safiullah Safi, commander of the Afghan National Army brigade responsible
for the section of Pul-i-Charkhi that holds the transferred inmates from Bagram
and Guantanamo Bay, said his part of the prison had maintained good order and
followed Islamic cultural customs.

But last December, detainees in the other blocks of the prison staged a revolt
in an attempt to resist a security sweep for hidden weapons and cellphones.
Eight inmates died.

''There's a general concern that the Afghan national prisons need to be
rehabilitated,'' said Sahr MuhammedAlly, a senior associate for law and security
at Human Rights First, an advocacy group that is to issue its own report on
Bagram on Wednesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Security lights illuminate the landscape of Bagram Air Base,
where terror suspects are held but also where harsh interrogations have been
practiced.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SPENCER PLATT/GETTY IMAGES)(A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (92%); ARMED FORCES (91%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); MISDEMEANORS (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); US PRESIDENTS
(73%); JUDGES (65%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (57%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Exiles Rally at U.N. For Release Of Prisoners

BYLINE: By NEIL MACFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


A cross-section of prominent voices among Iranian exiles, including the
political dissident Akbar Ganji and the pop diva known as Googoosh, spoke at a
rally outside the United Nations on Wednesday, demanding the release of
political prisoners held by the Islamic republic.

While green flags fluttered overhead and many protesters wore green -- the color
adopted by the reformist presidential campaign of Mir Hussein Moussavi -- Mr.
Ganji, the main proponent of the protest, said the event was meant to support
human rights rather than to endorse any political organization.

''Civil society can put the government under pressure,'' said Mr. Ganji, a
writer who was jailed for six years for, among other things, revealing that
government death squads assassinated dissidents in the 1990s. ''The human rights
violations in Iran cannot be ignored.''

It was Mr. Ganji who insisted that anyone who showed up bearing flags like the
old national flag under the Pahlavi dynasty, deposed by the 1979 revolution,
stay away from the rally. It was attended by several hundred people, some coming
from San Francisco and Los Angeles.

Googoosh, a singer beloved among Iranians since the 1970s, delivered an
emotional speech in which she said the outcome of the June 12 presidential
election, which the protesters accuse President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of stealing,
inspired her to make her first foray into politics. She and the other speakers
stood in front of a banner bearing the names of some of the 600 protesters
believed to remain in jail. The names of those killed were written in red.

''I have come here to be the voice for the sad mothers who lost their loved ones
in peaceful demonstrations,'' said the singer, whose given name is Faegheh
Atashnin. ''I have come here to be the just voice of the grass-roots and
spontaneous movement among my compatriots and to show my solidarity.''

More than 100 people signed up to join a three-day hunger strike, which started
on Wednesday, on Dag Hammarskjold Plaza across the street from the United
Nations to protest human rights violations in Iran. Among their demands is that
Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, intercede on behalf of the
imprisoned protesters.

The Iranian Mission did not respond to telephone calls or e-mail messages
seeking comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS &
UPRISINGS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); IRANIAN ELECTION PROTESTS (78%);
JAIL SENTENCING (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); WRITERS (69%); RELIGION (57%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (58%); MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (57%); BAN KI-MOON (57%)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 6, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico: Leahy Balks at Mexico Report

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 134 words


Senator Patrick J. Leahy, whose subcommittee controls spending at the State
Department, discouraged Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton from releasing
a favorable report on Mexico's human rights record, which would free up $100
million in American anti-drug assistance. Fifteen percent of the aid to Mexico
in the so-called Merida Initiative cannot be spent unless Mexico is found to
have met certain human rights conditions. ''Those requirements have not been
met,'' Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, said Wednesday. Human rights advocates say
that the Mexican Army has committed serious abuses. State Department officials
had been eager to secure the additional funds for Mexico's drug war in advance
of President Obama's trip this weekend to Guadalajara for a summit meeting of
North American leaders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (74%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (90%); PATRICK LEAHY (89%); BARACK OBAMA (59%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (96%); UNITED STATES (91%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             265 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 11, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

MI6 Chief Denies Role Of Agency In Torture

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The head of Britain's Secret Intelligence Service has joined other senior
British government officials in the defense of Britain's counterterrorism
policies, rejecting accusations that  his agency has colluded in the torture of
terrorist suspects being interrogated abroad.

In an interview broadcast by the BBC on Monday, the official, Sir John Scarlett,
said his officers were ''as committed to the values and the human rights values
of liberal democracy as anybody else.'' He said there had been ''no torture and
no complicity in torture'' by Britain's intelligence agencies, as several former
detainees  at the United States camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have alleged.

Sir John's remarks were part of what the BBC described as the first broadcast
interview given by a serving head of Britain's overseas intelligence agency,
which is also known as MI6. The interview was part of a radio series on the
history of the service. In November, shortly after the service's 100th
anniversary, the MI6 chief will retire and be succeeded by Sir John Sawers,
currently Britain's ambassador to the United Nations.

The interview appeared to be part of a wider effort by the government of Prime
Minister Gordon Brown to influence opinion in Britain at a time when pressure
has been growing for a judicial inquiry into allegations that British officials
from MI6 and its sister agency for domestic intelligence, MI5,  knowingly
assisted or allowed torture by agents of foreign governments.

Government concern has focused on a lawsuit by Binyam Mohamed, a former
Guantanamo detainee now living in Britain, where he gained residency status a
year before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. His lawyers are fighting in British
courts to win the publication of secret correspondence between British and
American officials that the lawyers say will show that Britain knew, or had
reason to know, that Mr. Mohamed was being tortured while Britain was
cooperating with American agencies involved in his custody.

Under pressure from the Obama administration, which has warned that intelligence
cooperation between the countries could be affected if the secret documents are
released, the government in London has refused to make the documents public. In
the past week, two parliamentary committees have joined the battle.

Last week, the joint human rights committee of the House of Commons and the
House of Lords said  that there was a ''disturbing number of credible
allegations'' of British complicity in the torture of detainees held abroad, and
urged the government to order a public inquiry. The Commons' Foreign Affairs
Committee  followed with a report saying that it, too, had ''grave concerns''
that British intelligence officers may have been involved, at least indirectly,
in detainees' mistreatment.

The Ethiopian-born Mr. Mohamed, 31, was arrested at an airport in Karachi,
Pakistan, in 2002 carrying a false British passport, and American officials have
said that he trained at a camp in Afghanistan, run by Al Qaeda, for a plot aimed
at detonating a ''dirty bomb'' in the United States. But charges against him
were dropped in 2008 when prosecutors at Guantanamo acknowledged that evidence
against him had been acquired, in part, during the interrogation of another
detainee that involved use of the simulated-drowning technique known as
waterboarding.

After his return to Britain  this year, Mr. Mohamed claimed he was tortured in
Pakistan, Afghanistan and Morocco while in American custody, and when he was
being transferred under the  rendition program adopted by the Bush
administration after the Sept. 11 attacks. He has said that questions put to him
while he was being held in Pakistan and Morocco could only have been based on
information provided by British intelligence agencies.

Mr. Mohamed said he was abused at Guantanamo as well,  and has asked a federal
court in Washington to preserve ''photographic evidence'' that he says shows him
being ''savagely beaten.'' American officials have denied any abuse.

British officials have also denied his accusations  and said the fact that an
MI5 official, who met Mr. Mohamed while he was held in Pakistan, later visited
Morocco three times while he was a prisoner there was unrelated to his case.

But even as it has stood its ground in rejecting the release of the secret
British-American correspondence in the case, the government has adopted a
parallel strategy of arguing that protecting Britain against terrorist attacks
required ''realism'' in the country's intelligence exchanges with other
governments.

The argument was put squarely in an article published over the weekend in The
Sunday Telegraph in which two of the most senior ministers in the cabinet, Home
Secretary Alan Johnson and Foreign Secretary David Miliband, argued that
Britain's intelligence agencies had ''hard choices'' to make in striking the
balance between human rights and the country's security.

''When detainees are held by our police or armed forces we can be sure how they
are treated, and whether our standards are met,'' they said. ''By definition, we
cannot have that same level of assurance when they are held by foreign
governments, whose obligations and practices may differ from our own.

''Yet intelligence from overseas is critical to our success in stopping
terrorism,'' they continued. ''All the most serious plots and attacks in the
U.K. in this decade have had significant links abroad.''

The theme was echoed in the BBC interview with Sir John.

''We are an independent service working to our own laws -- nobody's else's --
and to our own values,'' he said, noting, however,  that MI6 officers had to
weigh their decisions carefully in dealing with foreign intelligence agencies.
''They also have the responsibility to protect the country against terrorism,
and these issues need to be debated and understood in that context.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sir John Scarlett, chief of MI6, said there had been ''no
torture and no complicity in torture'' by Britain's intelligence
agencies.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM BUTLER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); INTERVIEWS (91%); ESPIONAGE (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); BRITISH
PARLIAMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); LAWYERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (73%); PRIME
MINISTERS (73%); LIBERALISM (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); LITIGATION (70%);
ANNIVERSARIES (67%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: GORDON BROWN (58%); BARACK OBAMA (55%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             273 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 4, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

For the Record

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 30 words


In our editorial on Thursday about interrogations: The group Physicians for
Human Rights said psychologists, not psychiatrists, were involved in the torture
and abuse of detainees.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); PSYCHOLOGY (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%)

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%)

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             274 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europeans to Keep Sanctions on Zimbabwe

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


Leaders of a European Union delegation to Zimbabwe said Sunday that they were
not ready to withdraw economic sanctions against the nation's longtime
president, Robert Mugabe, citing widespread human rights violations and the
floundering state of a year-old power-sharing deal between political rivals
there.

Ending a weekend visit, Karel De Gucht, the European commissioner for
development and humanitarian aid, told reporters in the capital of Zimbabwe,
Harare, that the two main partners in the power-sharing arrangement -- Mr.
Mugabe and Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai -- remained at loggerheads over the
agreement both signed last September.

''They do not have the same reading of the same document,'' Mr. De Gucht said,
summing up the findings of the first high-level European Union visit to Zimbabwe
in seven years, according to The Associated Press. ''They have a different
reading on how this should be done and at what speed.''

Gunilla Carlsson, the international development minister of Sweden, said there
was a candid exchange with Mr. Mugabe,  who has run Zimbabwe for nearly three
decades.

''We had reasons to raise very serious concerns, for example on media freedom
and constitutional reforms,'' she told news agencies. ''We still have a lot of
reports of human rights violations, which are unacceptable.''

President Mugabe no doubt had hoped for more. For the weekend, he set aside his
usual vitriol for the West, greeting the delegation ''with open arms'' and
remarking about how well he was getting along with his visitors.

But this show of bonhomie could not mask the fact that he and Mr. Tsvangirai --
strange political bedfellows given their longstanding animosity -- continue to
argue about who is entitled to various positions in government. The European
delegation specifically criticized the president for continuing to block the
replacement of the attorney general, regional governors and the chief of the
central bank.

There was much at stake for Mr. Mugabe. The European Union has applied travel
and financial restrictions to 203 people and 40 companies linked to the
president and his political party, ZANU-PF.

Financial aid continues, however. ''We have never stopped helping Zimbabwe,''
news agencies quoted Mr. De Gucht as saying. Since 2002, the 27-nation European
bloc has given Zimbabwe nearly $1 billion. But the assistance has been
administered for humanitarian purposes, rather than development projects
controlled by the government.

Mr. Mugabe, a university-trained liberation hero, had expected his improbable
partnership with Mr. Tsvangirai, a working-class former union leader, to bring
the return of reticent international donors. Indeed, the prime minister has
traveled to both Europe and the United States, pleading for billions in aid to
rebuild Zimbabwe's moribund economy.

But donors are caught in a quandary: Should money be given to Zimbabwe while Mr.
Mugabe and his loyalists continue to violate human rights and renege on portions
of the deal made with Mr. Tsvangirai?

During an election season in March and June of last year, ZANU-PF used ruthless
measures to crush its political opposition. Mr. Tsvangirai had bested Mr. Mugabe
in the first vote, though a runoff was required. The opposition leader dropped
out of the second election as hundreds of his followers fell victim to murder,
kidnapping, arson and torture.

While the violence has sharply diminished, the tactics of intimidation continue.
The government has arrested several members of Parliament who represent Mr.
Tsvangirai's party, the Movement for Democratic Change. The M.D.C. holds a
narrow majority in the legislature, and its leaders believe Mr. Mugabe is trying
to deprive them of that numerical edge during negotiations for a new
Constitution.

On Sunday, at a rally celebrating the 10th anniversary of the M.D.C., Mr.
Tsvangirai railed against his supposed partner in unity. He said he would not
stand by while Mr. Mugabe's party ''continues to violate the law, persecutes our
members of Parliament, spreads the language of hate, invades our productive
farms and ignores our international treaties.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai was in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, on
Sunday to celebrate the 10th anniversary of his party.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DESMOND
KWANDE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); EUROPEAN
UNION (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); NEWS REPORTING (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (76%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (73%); GOVERNORS (57%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (89%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (94%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (98%); ZIMBABWE (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (95%);
SWEDEN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             293 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Gaza Boomerang

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 823 words


At a time when Israel is bombing Gaza to try to smash Hamas, it's worth
remembering that Israel itself helped nurture Hamas.

When Hamas was founded in 1987, Israel was mostly concerned with Yasser Arafat's
Fatah movement and figured that a religious Palestinian organization would help
undermine Fatah. Israel calculated that all those Muslim fundamentalists would
spend their time praying in the mosques, so it cracked down on Fatah and allowed
Hamas to rise as a counterforce.

What we're seeing in the Middle East is the Boomerang Syndrome. Arab terrorism
built support for right-wing Israeli politicians, who took harsh actions against
Palestinians, who responded with more terrorism, and so on. Extremists on each
side sustain the other, and the excessive Israeli ground assault in Gaza is
likely to create more terrorists in the long run.

If this pattern continues, we may eventually see Hamas-style Palestinians facing
off against hard-line Israelis, with each side making the others' lives wretched
--  and political moderates in the Middle East politically eviscerated.

I visited Gaza last summer and found many Palestinians ambivalent in a way that
Americans and Israelis often don't appreciate. Many Gazans scorn Fatah as
corrupt and incompetent, and they dislike Hamas's overzealousness and
repression.  But when they are suffering and humiliated, they find it
emotionally satisfying to see Hamas fighting back.

Granted, Israel was profoundly provoked in this case. Israel sought an extension
of its cease-fire with Hamas, and Egypt offered to mediate one  --  but Hamas
refused. When it is shelled by its neighbor, Israel has to do something.

But Israel's right to do something doesn't mean it has the right to do anything.
Since the shelling from Gaza started in 2001, 20 Israeli civilians have been
killed by rockets or mortars, according to a tabulation by Israeli human rights
groups. That doesn't justify an all-out ground invasion that has killed more
than 660 people (it's difficult to know how many are militants and how many are
civilians).

So what could Israel have reasonably done? Bombing the tunnels through which
Gazans smuggle weapons would have been a proportionate response, if Israel had
stopped there, and the same is true of airstrikes on certain Hamas targets. An
even better approach would have been to ease the siege in Gaza, perhaps creating
an environment in which Hamas would have extended the cease-fire. It was
certainly worth trying  --  and almost anything would be better than lashing out
in a way that would create more boomerangs.

''This policy is not strengthening Israel,'' notes Sari Bashi, the executive
director of Gisha,  an Israeli human rights group that works on Gaza issues.
''The trauma that 1.5 million people have been undergoing in Gaza is going to
have long-term effects for our ability to live together.

''My colleague in Gaza works for an Israeli organization. She's learning Hebrew,
and she's just the kind of person we can build a future with. And her 6-year-old
nephew, every time a bomb drops from the air, is at first scared and then says
--  hopefully  --  maybe the Qassam Brigades will now fire rockets at the
Israelis.''

Israel's strategy has been to make ordinary Palestinians suffer in hopes of
creating ill will toward Hamas. That's why, beginning in 2007, Israel cut back
fuel shipments for Gaza utilities -- and why today, in the aftermath of the
bombings, 800,000 Gaza residents lack running water, Ms. Bashi said.

''The Israeli policy on Gaza has been marketed as a policy against Hamas, but in
reality it's a policy against a million-and-a-half people in Gaza,'' she said.

We all know that the most plausible solution to the Middle East mess is a
two-state solution along the lines that former President Bill Clinton has
proposed. It's difficult to tell how we get there from here, but a crucial step
is to strengthen President Mahmoud Abbas and his Palestinian Authority.

Instead, initial reports are that the assault on Gaza is focusing Arab anger on
Mr. Abbas and moderate neighbors like Jordan, undermining the peacemakers.

My courageous Times colleague in Gaza, Taghreed el-Khodary, quoted a 37-year-old
father weeping over the corpse of his 11-year-old daughter: ''From now on, I am
Hamas. I choose resistance.''

Barack Obama has said relatively little about Gaza. At first, given the
provocations by Hamas, that was understandable. But as the ground invasion costs
more lives, he needs to join European leaders in calling for a new cease-fire on
all sides  --  and after he assumes the presidency, he must provide real
leadership that the world craves.

Aaron David Miller, a longtime Middle East peace negotiator for the United
States, suggests in his excellent new book, ''The Much Too Promised Land,'' that
presidents should offer Israel ''love, but tough love.''

So, Mr. Obama, find your voice. Fall in tough love with Israel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); ILLEGAL
WEAPONS (62%); SMUGGLING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (95%); MIDDLE EAST (91%);
UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             294 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

30 Confirmed Dead in Shelling of Gaza Family

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 780 words


The death toll in the shelling of a family compound in Gaza rose to 30, the
United Nations said in a report issued on Friday, as relief workers continued to
comb through wreckage they had been denied access to for days after the attack.

The episode has ignited intense international criticism of the Israeli military
for its failure to allow relief workers to reach the scene in a timely manner.
On Friday, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navanethem
Pillay, also pointed to the deaths in the family compound as cause for an
independent investigation into possible war crimes by Israeli forces in Gaza.

''Incidents such as this must be investigated because they display elements of
what could constitute war crimes,'' she told Reuters.

Initial reports on Monday said 11 members of the extended Samouni family had
been killed and 26 wounded, according to witnesses and hospital officials, with
five children aged 4 and under among the dead.

The new report, by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, was based on eyewitness accounts. It did not give a figure
for the number wounded.

''There was no water, no bread, nothing to eat,'' in the days after the
shelling, 13-year-old Ahmed Ibrahim Samouni, whose mother was among those
killed, told Reuters. ''I got up on my own. I had my wound tied and I got up to
get them water from outside, trying to hide from tanks and planes. I went to our
neighbors and called on them until I almost fainted. I brought a gallon of
water.''

Members of the Samouni family said that they were rounded up late Sunday night
by Israeli soldiers and ordered to gather for their own safety in a single
dwelling in the impoverished Zeitoun district of Gaza city, a Hamas stronghold.
The next morning, they said, the building was shelled.

In its report on Friday, the United Nations agency confirmed the family's
account, saying that 110 people had been forced into the house on Sunday. ''The
next day the house was shelled,'' Allegra Pacheco, an agency spokeswoman, told
BBC television, quoting unidentified witnesses.

Only on Wednesday, the International Committee of the Red Cross said in a
statement on Thursday, did Israel give Red Cross representatives permission to
enter Zeitoun, and what the operatives found there chilled them. Four small
children in the Samouni household, so weak they could not stand unassisted,
cowered next to the corpses of slain mothers, the Red Cross said on Thursday. At
least 12 corpses lay on mattresses and three more bodies were found in another
house.

Surviving family members said they were sure more people remained buried under
the rubble without food or water, and were in danger of dying. Members of
B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, told the Washington Post that soldiers
with the Israeli Defense Forces were in the neighborhood and aware of the
citizens' misery.

''What these family members say consistently is that the I.D.F. was close by,''
said a spokeswoman for the group. ''This wasn't some remote area.''

Family members said they had been trying since last Saturday to contact the Red
Cross to be evacuated but no help came. At the time, Israeli forces were in the
early stages of a ground offensive in Gaza, and relief workers were barred from
the area.

Initial accounts by members of the Samouni family said they believed the house
in which they gathered had been the target of an air-strike at 6 a.m. Monday.
But the Red Cross said Thursday that the building had been ''affected by Israeli
shelling.''

The Zeitoun killings have ignited an international outcry. While Ms. Pacheco
said her organization was reserving judgment for now about who was responsible
for the 30 reported deaths, the Red Cross issued a rare and sharply critical
statement saying it believed ''the Israeli military failed to meet its
obligation under international humanitarian law to care for and evacuate the
wounded.''

Israeli officials said that they were examining all the allegations, that they
did not aim at civilians and that they were not certain that the source of fire
that killed and wounded the United Nations drivers was Israeli.

''We do our utmost to avoid hitting civilians, and many times we don't fire
because we see civilians nearby,'' said Maj. Avital Leibovich, chief army
spokeswoman for the foreign media. ''We are holding meetings with U.N. officials
to try to work out a mechanism so that their work can go forward.''

She said that the army learned of the Red Cross allegations in a media report,
and that the committee had not yet presented the evidence of what she called
''these very serious allegations'' to the army.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%);
CHILDREN (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HAMAS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); TESTIMONY (73%); HOSPITALS (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%); UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS
(55%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Questions for Mrs. Clinton

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1581 words


Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, President-elect Barack Obama's nominee for
secretary of state, appears today before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
The Op-Ed page asked 10 experts to pose the questions they would like to hear
Senator Clinton answer.

1. United States policy has failed with respect to Israeli-Palestinian peace.
The reluctance of any American president to act as an honest broker in the
process, rather than as a strong, unquestioning friend of Israel, has
contributed to this failure. How do you propose to bring success to the peace
process?

2. There is clearly an imbalance of influence and power between the State
Department and the Defense Department. An enormous shift of foreign policy
influence has also occurred, since the era of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger,
from the State Department to the National Security Council staff and its head,
the national security adviser. How do you propose to bring some of that
influence back to the State Department?

-- LAWRENCE B. WILKERSON, chief of staff to Secretary of State Colin Powell from
2002 to 2005

1. Does it benefit American security to have more liberal democracies in the
world? If so, what steps would you take to advance this trend?

2. Do you believe that NATO enlargement has contributed to American security and
moved former Soviet states toward greater democracy and regional cooperation?

-- MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI, the president of Georgia

1. Some say ''war on terror'' is a misnomer that has led our policy astray. They
argue that terrorism is a tactic, not an ideology or a cause, and that a war
against it is bound to be ill focused and inconclusive. Do you think we should
drop the term ''war on terror,'' and describe our policy more precisely as a war
to defeat Al Qaeda and violent Islamic extremism?

2. In the Middle East, we see a paradox: Countries with pro-American governments
like Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia have populations with high levels of
anti-American sentiment. Meanwhile in Iran, whose government is hostile to the
United States, public opinion of America is more favorable. How do you explain
this, and what can we learn from it? Should the United States disentangle itself
from autocratic regimes in Saudi Arabia and Egypt?

3. One of the most damaging legacies of the Iraq war is that it has given
idealism and internationalism a bad name. How will you persuade the American
people, and the world, that the United States can be a force for democracy and
freedom?

-- MICHAEL SANDEL, a professor of government at Harvard

1. Tibet may prove to be the most divisive issue between China and the West.
There is a real possibility that China and the Obama administration will have
friction or even a temporary diplomatic clash over Tibet. How will you treat
this possibility? If Barack Obama is inclined to meet with the Dalai Lama, what
will be your attitude? Might you or other senior members in the State Department
meet with the Dalai Lama or other leaders of the Tibetan exile government?

2. Will you criticize strongly and frequently the status of human rights,
religious freedom and public welfare in China? If so, how do you plan to deal
with the angry reactions of the Chinese government -- and of the Chinese people
themselves? Do you think there is any truth to the argument that China is an
''authoritarian success''?

-- SHI YINHONG, a professor of international relations and the director of the
Center for American Studies at Renmin University in Beijing

1. In 1913, Woodrow Wilson appointed William Jennings Bryan secretary of state
for solely domestic political reasons. He needed but distrusted him, and thus
relied on other advisers to conduct diplomacy. Have you read up on Wilson's
relationship with Bryan, and will it be relevant to your own situation?

2. In the past, you have taken different positions on Iraq. As secretary of
state, which of these foreign policy positions are you likely to adopt? Will you
be the hawk who voted to authorize the war, or the war critic who referred to
reports of progress in Iraq as requiring a ''willing suspension of disbelief?''

3. You speak about the 1990s, President Bill Clinton's era, as a time of peace
and prosperity. Yet the '90s witnessed a steady trail of anti-American terrorism
that emboldened Al Qaeda's leaders. In the Clinton era, terrorism was generally
viewed as a law enforcement problem. Did we really do so well in handling
terrorism in the 1990s?

4. Do you think that you have sufficient knowledge of foreign cultures and
languages to prepare you to lead America's relations with the rest of the world?

-- FOUAD AJAMI, a professor of Middle East studies at the School of Advanced
International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and an adjunct research fellow
at the Hoover Institution at Stanford

1. The gross human-rights violations and mass displacement of citizens in Darfur
has rightly drawn world attention. How would you help end this conflict, which
in its governance and environmental challenges reflects similar situations
throughout Africa?

2. One key way for Africa to mitigate global warming's effects is to conserve
forests, especially in the Congo Basin. How will the United States support
protection of forests as part of its response to climate change?

3. African leadership is seeking closer ties with the East, especially China,
which is willing to do business without conditions like respect for human rights
. How will the United States address Africans' willingness to sacrifice some of
the most important principles of democracy and good governance?

-- WANGARI MAATHAI, 2004 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, founder of the Green Belt
Movement and goodwill ambassador for the Congo Basin Forest Ecosystem

1. The chances of peace between Israel and Gaza seem more remote than ever. Many
of the Palestinians in Gaza are impoverished refugees and the overcrowded Gaza
Strip has few resources. The two-state solution offers little hope for these
people; that is one reason Gaza has historically tended to support radical
Palestinian parties like Hamas. How will you make the two-state solution popular
among the people of Gaza?

2. Which is worse for the United States, an Iran with nuclear weapons or a
military confrontation between the United States and Iran?

3. The Atlantic was the center of world politics in the 20th century. The rise
of Asia means that the Pacific is likely to play that role in the 21st, and
developing countries in many parts of the world are likely to enjoy rising
influence and power. But European countries are still grossly overrepresented on
the Security Council and enjoy disproportionate influence in the Group of 8, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. How will you alter American
foreign policy, reform international institutions and reconfigure the State
Department to adjust to new realities -- without damaging relations with our
European friends and allies?

-- WALTER RUSSELL MEAD, the author of ''God and Gold: Britain, America and the
Making of the Modern World'' and a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations

1. During the Clinton and George W. Bush administrations there were clear signs
of American solidarity with democratic dissidents in Cuba, both on and off the
island. Will the Obama administration maintain its support for these groups and
people? Broadcasts by Radio Marti, for example, are trustworthy sources of
information for the Cuban people. Will President Obama support these broadcasts?

2. It is possible that after Fidel Castro's death, the government of Raul Castro
will try to move toward the Chinese model of capitalism within single-party
rule. Would the Obama administration go along with this type of transition or
would it insist on the establishment of a liberal democracy where human rights
and civil liberties would be respected?

-- CARLOS A. MONTANER, the author of ''Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution''

1. Imagine we see broad demands for truly democratic presidential and
parliamentary elections in Russia. Should the United States join in these calls
for new elections, despite their destabilizing potential? What should the
American reaction be if the opposite scenario takes place, with Vladimir Putin
returning as president in a new ''election'' and further tightening the
authoritarian screws? How would we maintain a functional relationship with
Moscow without condoning the further strangulation of democracy in Russia?

-- CATHY YOUNG, a contributing editor at Reason magazine and the author of
''Growing Up in Moscow: Memories of a Soviet Girlhood''

1. What concrete steps will you take to rebuild America's diplomatic strength?
What can be done immediately and what can be done over the next three to four
years?

2. Foreign policy is not the exclusive purview of the State Department. What
role should the State Department play in foreign policy and how will you
integrate and coordinate the department's objectives and activities with those
of the Defense, Homeland Security and Treasury Departments, the Central
Intelligence Agency and other agencies operating overseas?

3. Negotiations over North Korea's nuclear program, Iran's nuclear program and
Arab-Israeli peace are at a standstill. How will you revitalize these
negotiations and what are your immediate priorities in these areas?

-- LEE HAMILTON, vice chairman of the 9/11 commission and president and director
of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (92%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN
POLICY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); TERRORISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); LIBERALISM (77%); TRENDS (77%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%); IRAQ WAR (72%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); AL-QAEDA (69%); PEACE
PROCESS (56%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (56%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (92%); BARACK OBAMA (89%); RICHARD NIXON (58%);
MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI (58%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (90%); XIZANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); ISRAEL (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); EGYPT (92%); CHINA (90%); TIBET (90%); JORDAN (79%);
IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); GEORGIA (54%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             299 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Remarks on Torture May Force New Administration's Hand

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Just 14 months ago, at his confirmation hearing, Attorney General Michael B.
Mukasey frustrated and angered some senators by refusing to state that
waterboarding, the near-drowning technique used on three prisoners by the
Central Intelligence Agency, is in fact torture.

This week, at his confirmation hearing, Eric H. Holder Jr., the attorney
general-designate, did not hesitate to express a clear view. He noted that
waterboarding had been used to torment prisoners during the Inquisition, by the
Japanese in World War II and in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge.

''We prosecuted our own soldiers for using it in Vietnam,'' Mr. Holder said.
''Waterboarding is torture.''

In the view of many historians and legal authorities, Mr. Holder was merely
admitting the obvious. He was agreeing with the clear position of his
boss-to-be, President-elect Barack Obama, and he was giving an answer that
almost certainly was necessary to win confirmation.

Yet his statement, amounting to an admission that the United States may have
committed war crimes, opens the door to an unpredictable train of legal and
political consequences. It could potentially require a full-scale legal
investigation, complicate prosecutions of individuals suspected of committing
terrorism and mire the new administration in just the kind of backward look that
Mr. Obama has said he would like to avoid.

Mr. Holder's statement came just two days after the Defense Department official
in charge of military commissions at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, said in an interview
with The Washington Post that she had refused to permit a trial for one detainee
there, Mohammed al-Qahtani, because she believed he had been tortured.

Together the statements, from a current and an incoming legal official, cover
both the Central Intelligence Agency, which has acknowledged waterboarding three
captured operatives of Al Qaeda, and the military's detention program.

Legal experts across the political spectrum said the statements would make it
difficult for the incoming administration to avoid a criminal investigation of
torture, even as most also say a successful prosecution might well be
impossible.

Two obvious obstacles stand in the way of a prosecution: legal opinions from the
Justice Department that declared even the harshest interrogation methods to be
legal, and a provision in the Military Commissions Act of 2006 that grants
strong legal protections to government employees who relied on such legal advice
in counterterrorism programs.

Still, Jennifer Daskal, senior counterterrorism counsel at Human Rights Watch,
said, ''It would be contrary to the principles of the criminal justice system
for the attorney general to say he believes a very serious crime has been
committed and then to do nothing about it.''

Charles D. Stimson, who served as the Defense Department's top official on
detainee affairs from 2004 to 2007 and is now a senior legal fellow at the
conservative Heritage Foundation, said the statements ''certainly will increase
the pressure on Holder to mount some kind of investigation.''

In addition to domestic political pressures, the United States appears to have a
legal obligation as a party to the international Convention against Torture to
follow up on the torture statements. That treaty requires signatory states to
conduct a ''prompt and impartial investigation, wherever there is reasonable
ground to believe that an act of torture has been committed in any territory
under its jurisdiction.''

The Bush administration placed its interrogation operations offshore, at the
American base in Cuba and at secret C.I.A. sites, and officials have sometimes
argued that they were not on territory under American jurisdiction. But that
assertion has been eroded by court decisions concerning the Guantanamo detention
center, and it is unlikely that the Obama administration would use such a
loophole to avoid the torture convention's effect.

''There's a moral, legal and practical obligation of the United States to follow
this allegation in good faith wherever it leads,'' said Juan E. Mendez, a
veteran human rights lawyer who is president of the International Center for
Transitional Justice in New York.

Where such an inquiry might lead is an unsettling question for departing Bush
administration officials, who have long worried that aggressive policies could
make them vulnerable to civil or criminal liability.

If rank-and-file interrogators are protected by the Justice Department's
assurance that their actions were legal, what about the lawyers who gave the
assurances? What about the senior officials, including President Bush, who
approved the use of waterboarding and other such tactics?

Such questions are so legally daunting and politically complex that Mr. Obama
has played down, while not ruling out, the possibility of a criminal
investigation or a national commission to examine past policies. In an interview
with ABC last Sunday, he said ''my orientation's going to be to move forward''
rather than looking back.

In recent weeks, Mr. Bush, Vice President Cheney and other officials have
strongly defended their counterterrorism methods and credited them with
preventing attacks on the United States since 2001. Their implicit argument --
that the Obama administration should not question policies that protected
Americans -- was made more explicit and personal by Michael V. Hayden, the
departing C.I.A. director, in a session with reporters on Thursday.

''If I'm going to go to an officer and say, 'I've got a truth commission, or I
want to post all your e-mails, or, well, we've got this guy from the bureau who
wants to talk to you,' '' Mr. Hayden said, it would discourage such a C.I.A.
officer from taking risks on behalf of the new president's policies.

''We have no right to ask this guy to bet his kid's college education on who's
going to win the off-year election,'' Mr. Hayden said, alluding to legal fees
that such a C.I.A. officer might face.

At his confirmation hearing, Mr. Holder was asked by Senator Orrin G. Hatch,
Republican of Utah, whether he would pursue a criminal investigation of the
interrogation programs.

Mr. Holder hedged his response, saying, ''Senator, no one's above the law, and
we will follow the evidence, the facts, the law, and let that take us where it
should.''

But he added, quoting Mr. Obama, that ''we don't want to criminalize policy
differences'' and finally pleaded for time to study the matter.

''One of the things I think I'm going to have to do,'' Mr. Holder said, ''is to
become more familiar with what happened that led to the implementation of these
policies.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); TERRORISM (87%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HISTORY (75%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (72%);
MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (70%); WORLD WAR II (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (66%); AL-QAEDA (66%); CIVIL SERVICES (64%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (54%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (54%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (54%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (54%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (54%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (54%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (54%)

PERSON: ERIC HOLDER (79%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); MICHAEL MUKASEY (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (86%); CAMBODIA (79%); VIET NAM (77%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             301 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Obama Orders Secret Prisons and Detention Camps Closed

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE; William Glaberson contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1637 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Saying that ''our ideals give us the strength and moral high ground'' to combat
terrorism, President Obama signed executive orders Thursday ending the Central
Intelligence Agency's secret overseas prisons, banning coercive interrogation
methods and closing the Guantanamo Bay detention camp within a year.

But even as he reversed the most disputed counterterrorism policies of the Bush
years, Mr. Obama postponed for at least six months difficult decisions on the
details. He ordered a cabinet-level review of the most challenging questions his
administration faces -- what to do with dangerous prisoners who cannot be tried
in American courts; whether some interrogation methods should remain secret to
keep Al Qaeda from training to resist them; and how the United States can make
sure prisoners transferred to other countries will not be tortured.

As Mr. Obama signed three orders in a White House ceremony, 16 retired generals
and admirals who have fought for months for a ban on coercive interrogations
stood behind him and applauded. The group, organized to lobby the Obama
transition team by the group Human Rights First, did not include any career
C.I.A. officers or retirees.

''We intend to win this fight,'' Mr. Obama said, ''We are going to win it on our
own terms.''

One of Mr. Obama's orders requires the C.I.A. to use only the 19 interrogation
methods outlined in the Army Field Manual, ending President Bush's policy of
permitting the agency to use some secret methods that went beyond those allowed
for military interrogators.

''We believe we can abide by a rule that says, we don't torture, but we can
effectively obtain the intelligence we need,'' Mr. Obama said.

The orders, and Mr. Obama's televised statement, marked an abrupt break with the
Bush administration. Critics for years have accused Mr. Bush of permitting
torture and damaging the country's moral standing in the world, while Dick
Cheney, the former president and vice president, insisted that all their
programs were lawful and had prevented a repeat of the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks.

John D. Hutson, a retired admiral and law school dean, was at the signing
ceremony ''He really gets it,'' Mr. Hutson said of Mr. Obama in an interview a
few minutes after the ceremony.  ''He acknowledged that this isn't easy. But he
is absolutely dedicated to getting us back on track as a nation. This is the
right thing to do morally, diplomatically, militarily and Constitutionally. But
it also makes us safer.''

Democrats in Congress and human rights groups largely hailed Mr. Obama's moves,
while some Republicans said they were unrealistic.

Representative Peter Hoekstra of Michigan, the top Republican on the House
Intelligence Committee, said the decision to close Guantanamo by a year from now
''places hope ahead of reality -- it sets an objective without a plan to get
there.''

He said that in briefings for Congress on Wednesday, administration officials
''could not answer questions as to what they will do with any new jihadists or
enemy combatants that we capture.''

''What are we to do with these people, bring them to the very place they hoped
to attack: The United States? What do we do with confessed 9/11 mastermind
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and his fellow terrorist conspirators, offer them jail
cells in American communities?''

By contrast, Sen. John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat and chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said, ''Today is a great day for the rule of
law in the United States of America,'' adding: ''America is ready to lead again
-- not just with our words, but by our example.''

Mr. Obama's order closing Guantanamo assigns the attorney general to lead a
review of what should happen to the remaining detainees and does not rule out
the possibility of trying some of them using military commissions, as has the
Bush administration, though possibly with different procedures.

One task force, with the attorney general and secretary of defense as
co-chairmen, will study detainee policy and report to the president in six
months. A second task force, led by the attorney general, and with the secretary
of defense and director of national intelligence as vice co-chairs, will study
whether the Army Field Manual should remain the only standard for interrogators
and review the practice of extraordinary rendition, in which captured terrorist
suspects are transferred to other countries.

One more order directed a high-level review of the case of Ali Saleh Kahlah
al-Marri, a suspected terrorist -- Mr. Obama called him ''dangerous''  -- who is
currently being held in a military jail in South Carolina.

The new White House counsel, Gregory B. Craig, briefed lawmakers about some
elements of the orders on Wednesday evening. A Congressional official who
attended the session said Mr. Craig acknowledged concerns from intelligence
officials that new restrictions on C.I.A. methods might be unwise and indicated
that the White House might be open to allowing the use of methods other the 19
techniques allowed for the military.

But the executive order on interrogations is certain to be received with some
skepticism at the C.I.A., which for years has maintained that the military's
interrogation rules are insufficient to get information from senior Qaeda
figures like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. The Bush administration asserted that the
harsh interrogation methods were instrumental in gaining valuable intelligence
on Qaeda operations.

The intelligence agency built a network of secret prisons in 2002 to house and
interrogate senior Qaeda figures captured overseas. The exact number of suspects
to have moved through the prisons is unknown, although Michael V. Hayden, the
departing director of the agency, has in the past put the number at ''fewer than
100.''

The secret detentions brought international condemnation, and in September 2006,
Mr. Bush ordered that the remaining 14 detainees in C.I.A. custody be
transferred to Guantanamo Bay and tried by military tribunals.

But Mr. Bush made clear then that he was not shutting down the C.I.A. detention
system, and in the last two years, two Qaeda operatives are believed to have
been detained in agency prisons for several months each before being sent to
Guantanamo.

A government official said Mr. Obama's order on the C.I.A. would still allow its
officers abroad to temporarily detain terrorism suspects and transfer them to
other agencies, but would no longer allow the agency to carry out long-term
detentions.

Since the early days after the 2001 attacks, the intelligence agency's role in
detaining terrorism suspects has been significantly scaled back, as has the
severity of interrogation methods the agency is permitted to use. The most
controversial practice, the simulated drowning technique known as
water-boarding, was used on three suspects but has not been used since 2003,
C.I.A. officials said.

But at the urging of the Bush administration, Congress in 2006 authorized the
agency to continue using harsher interrogation methods than those permitted for
use by other agencies, including the military. Those exact methods remain
classified. The order on Guantanamo says that the camp, which received its first
hooded and chained detainees seven years ago this month, ''shall be closed as
soon as practicable, and no later than one year from the date of this order.''

The order calls for a cabinet-level panel to grapple with issues including where
in the United States prisoners might be moved and what courts they could be
tried in.It also provides for a new diplomatic effort to transfer some of the
remaining men, including more than 60 that the Bush administration had cleared
for release.

The order also directs an immediate assessment of the prison itself to ensure
that the men are held in conditions that meet the humanitarian requirements of
the Geneva Convention. That provision appeared to be a pointed embrace of the
international treaties that the Bush administration often argued did not apply
to detainees captured in the war against terrorism.

The seven years of the detention camp have included four suicides, hunger
strikes by scores of detainees, and accusations of extensive use of solitary
confinement and abusive interrogations, which the Department of Defense has long
denied. Last week a senior Pentagon official said she had concluded that
interrogators at Guantanamo had tortured one detainee, who officials have said
was a would-be ''20th hijacker'' in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

The new administration late Tuesday night ordered an immediate halt to the
military commission proceedings for prosecuting detainees at Guantanamo and
filed a request in Federal District Court in Washington to stay habeas corpus
proceedings there. Government lawyers described both delays as necessary for the
administration to make a broad assessment of detention policy.

The cases immediately affected include those of five detainees charged as the
coordinators of the 2001 attacks, including the case against Mr. Mohammed, the
self-described mastermind.

The decision to stop the commissions was described by the military prosecutors
as a pause in the war-crimes system ''to permit the newly inaugurated president
and his administration time to review the military commission process generally
and the cases currently pending before the military commissions, specifically.''

More than 200 detainees' habeas corpus cases have been filed in federal court,
and lawyers said they expected that all of the cases would be stayed.

Mr. Obama had suggested in the campaign that, in place of military commissions,
he would prefer prosecutions in federal courts or, perhaps, in the existing
military justice system, which provides legal guarantees similar to those of
American civilian courts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(83%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%);
CLOSINGS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%); AL-QAEDA (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS
FIRST (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%); DICK CHENEY (58%); PETER
HOEKSTRA (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             302 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Palestinian Rival Says It Is Under Attack by Hamas in Gaza

BYLINE: By SABRINA TAVERNISE; Nadim Audi contributed reporting from Gaza City
and Bureij.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 987 words


GAZA CITY -- The 27-year-old in a sweatsuit limped to the table, heaved himself
into a chair and began to talk about how he had been shot. Men from Hamas have
begun to assault people they suspect of supporting its chief political rival,
Fatah, he said, and on Sunday, he became one of the victims.

It was impossible to verify the man's account, which he provided on the
condition that he remain anonymous, out of concern for his safety. But it came
during a week in which leaders of Fatah accused Hamas of harassing and harming
its members in the Gaza Strip.

Yasser Abd Rabbo, an ally of the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, said at a
news conference in Ramallah on Thursday that Hamas had ''turned its rifles in
the direction of Fatah members'' after Israel stopped its military offensive on
Sunday. Mr. Rabbo accused Hamas of placing Fatah supporters under house arrest
and shooting some of them in the legs, an intimidation tactic that it used in
the past.

A Hamas spokesman, Fawzi Barhoum, strongly denied the accusation, saying that
Fatah was raising the issue to distract attention from the fact that it remained
on the sidelines and did not challenge Israel during the three weeks of fighting
in Gaza.

Hamas and Fatah have long been bitter rivals. Hamas, a militant Islamic
organization, rejects Israel's right to exist, while Fatah, a more secular group
with backing from Western nations, has been receptive to the creation of a
separate Palestinian state side by side with Israel.

Hamas, which seized control of Gaza during a brief but bloody civil war in 2007,
appears to have emerged from the Israeli offensive with its authority in Gaza
firm and its popularity growing in the West Bank.

But members of Fatah contend that Hamas has begun harassing Fatah supporters to
reassert its authority in Gaza. The hopes of Mr. Abbas and Egypt for the
creation of a unity government that would bring together the two rival groups
could be undermined by reprisals.

Taher al-Nunu, a spokesman for the Hamas-led government in Gaza, said it was
looking into a few reports of attacks by low-level supporters of the party,
which he characterized as score-settling among local clans, actions that were
not sanctioned by Hamas.

''Maybe there are some clashes between families,'' he said. ''We will
investigate these cases. There are not a lot.''

A Palestinian human rights worker, who was granted anonymity because of the
delicacy of the topic and the preliminary nature of his findings, said he had
received reports of about 30 cases of abuse, including as many as five killings.
He said he had not yet been able to verify each case.

Mr. Nunu vehemently denied reports that anyone had been killed. ''There are no
people from Fatah killed by anyone,'' he said. ''Let them give us just one
name.''

The man in the sweatsuit said in an interview that he had been forced into a car
by three men wearing masks while he was walking to his cousin's house at dusk on
Sunday. The men accused him of being happy that Israel had attacked Hamas, and
they took him to the prime minister's palace, which had been destroyed in an
Israeli airstrike, he said. There they shot both of his legs just under the
knee.

''It hurt like fire,'' he said, pulling up the legs of his sweatpants to display
thick bandages soaked with blood. He crawled to the road, he said, and someone
gave him a ride to the hospital.

The motive for the shooting was not clear. The man said that he was a shoemaker
and that he supported Fatah, but was not formally a member. The real target, he
said, may have been his cousin, who is an activist in Fatah.

Some Fatah members said in interviews that some of those being sought had been
singled out for having handed out sweets in celebration of Israel's war on
Hamas.

Nor was it clear how widespread the attacks were. Mr. Rabbo, the ally of the
Palestinian president, said 200 people had been harassed and abused, but the
human rights worker estimated that the number was much lower.

Many Fatah members and supporters said in interviews that Hamas might feel
somewhat weakened by the Israeli offensive and was concerned that its political
rivals not take advantage of the disorder created by the war.

The Palestinian human rights worker shared that view. ''The internal security
department is sending a very clear and strong message to Fatah to be quiet,'' he
said.

The shoemaker's cousin, who actively supports Fatah, said that he had been
moving from house to house after Hamas members searched his home on Sunday while
he was out.

''They're afraid that Fatah will take advantage of the chaos to come back to
power,'' the cousin said. ''The message is: Stay at home. Be afraid. We didn't
lose power.''

A few patterns did seem to be emerging. Those who had Fatah and Hamas political
affiliations within a single family tended not to be targets. And the cousin
said it was not the central Hamas leadership that was looking for him, but only
people from the party's neighborhood branch, confirming, in part, what Mr. Nunu
of the Gaza government said.

Several people said Hamas had given children cellphone credits to keep tabs on
them. They are called ''drones,'' and when they pass, everyone knows to stop
talking, said a man in Bureij, a town south of Gaza City, who said he had been
told by local Hamas supporters to stay inside his house.

Typical of the political divisions here, people in Gaza had varying opinions
about whether Hamas was carrying out reprisals against Fatah members.

''The Fatah people in Ramallah are saying this for a reason,'' said Sami Nasir,
a Fatah supporter who was smoking a cigarette in front of Al Khoznadar
restaurant. ''It's happening. A lot of Fatah sympathizers are hiding at home
these days.''

Maher al-Hawalani, an elegant man with a neatly trimmed beard, who said he was a
Hamas sympathizer, disagreed. ''Does the Fatah have anything to do with the
war?'' he asked. ''No! So why would Hamas go after them?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A member of Hamas directing traffic in Gaza City on Thursday.
Hamas appears to have emerged from the three-week Israeli offensive with its
authority intact.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A5)
Left, a man clearing debris near what was the house of Said Siam, a Hamas
official killed in an Israeli strike. A man cleared dust from a blood stain,
right, in an apartment next to Mr. Siam's house.
 Members of Hamas marched Tuesday to the ruins of the parliament building,
showing solidarity after the Israeli offensive.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (93%); HAMAS (92%); SHOOTINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); CIVIL WAR (73%); ARRESTS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); RELIGION (65%); PRESS CONFERENCES (54%); HOUSE ARREST (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (59%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             303 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Delays, Court Begins Congo Trial In The Hague

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: PARIS


More than six years after opening its doors, the International Criminal Court in
The Hague began its first trial on Monday, as Thomas Lubanga, a former Congolese
warlord, took his seat in the dock facing a crowded court and public gallery.

Supporters of the court have hailed the long-awaited trial as a momentous step
for the tribunal, created to try large-scale human rights violations, while
critics contend it has been far too long in coming. Mr. Lubanga was taken to The
Hague almost three years ago, and his case has moved in fits and starts. Now,
both sides see the trial as the institution's first full-scale test, one that
will be closely watched by lawyers and human rights activists the world over.

Mr. Lubanga, 48, once the leader of a powerful and violent militia, is accused
of war crimes, including commandeering children under the age of 15 and sending
them into war to maim and kill. He pleaded not guilty to the crimes on Monday,
which prosecutors said occurred in 2002 and 2003 during ethnic fighting in the
Ituri region of eastern Congo.

Turf wars within the court, bitter legal squabbles and irritation among the
trial judges had almost torpedoed the case. Last July, as the trial was about to
start, judges put a halt to the proceedings, citing legal and strategic errors
by the prosecution, and said Mr. Lubanga should be set free, though he was
ultimately kept in custody. The judges said the prosecution's handling of
evidence amounted to ''wholesale and serious abuse'' of the process and ruled
that a fair trial was not possible at that point.

Now that the judges have given their green light and errors have been redressed,
Mr. Lubanga is being  tried by three judges -- from Britain, Costa Rica and
Bolivia -- in a process that is expected to last until the end of this year.
Unlike the temporary tribunals set up to try crimes in the former Yugoslavia,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Cambodia, the International Criminal Court is
permanent.

One question now being asked in The Hague is whether the Obama administration
will re-establish links with the court. The Clinton administration signed the
1998 treaty establishing the court on its last days in office, but President
Bush ordered the signature withdrawn, leaving the United States as the only
major Western power not to join.

Operating independently from the United Nations, the court now has 108 member
countries. Its mandate is to try large-scale war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide in countries that are unwilling or unable to punish perpetrators
themselves. Prosecutors will start their case against Mr. Lubanga by calling
more than 30 witnesses, 9  of them young men and women who were themselves
former child soldiers.

At the height of the conflict in Ituri in 2003, as many as 30,000  boys and
girls were believed to be part of the militia forces, prosecutors say. Many were
abducted, while others joined in exchange for food, drugs and weapons.

In his opening statement on Monday, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the chief prosecutor for
the court, said Mr. Lubanga's militia included children, some as young as 9
years old, who were used as cooks, cleaners, spies, scouts and sex slaves. They
were ordered to kill, pillage and rape, he said, and they were often killed and
raped themselves.

Congolese rights groups say that Mr. Lubanga is by no means the most senior
commander responsible for the widespread killing in  Congo's ethnic conflicts,
but that he became available to the court after he was arrested in 2005 during
an investigation into the killing of United Nations peacekeepers in Congo. Two
other Congolese militia leaders, rivals of Mr. Lubanga, are in the court's
custody and awaiting trial. At least one other arrest warrant is still
outstanding. Prosecutors have also filed charges against war crimes suspects in
Sudan, Uganda and the Central African Republic, but they have only four suspects
in custody.

The case is making use of a new step in international law, namely allowing
victims to play a direct role in the trial and to be represented by their own
lawyers. A group of 93 victims is participating in the Lubanga case.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); JUDGES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); CHILDREN IN
ARMED CONFLICT (76%); LAWYERS (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); CHILD SOLDIERS (73%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); CHILDREN (68%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (52%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); RWANDA
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             307 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Chief Says Israel Is Blocking Most Gaza Aid

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 240 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, repeated Tuesday his demand
that Israel allow significantly more humanitarian aid into the beleaguered Gaza
Strip, and he announced that he would send a team to investigate the bombings of
United Nations facilities there.

The human rights organization Amnesty International issued a statement
criticizing Mr. Ban for being too timid on the extent of the inquiry.

Mr. Ban said at a news conference that the United Nations was trying to get
relief supplies to nearly one million people daily, but that Israel was only
allowing one border crossing to open, permitting trucks with supplies for only
about 30,000 people to get through.

''We are experiencing serious difficulty in getting all the materials,
humanitarian assistance, so it is absolutely necessary that they open the
crossings,'' said Mr. Ban, whose previous statements urging Israel to allow more
aid into Gaza have been ignored. ''I will continue to urge that.''

Irene Khan, the secretary general of Amnesty International, said that
researchers had found compelling evidence of war crimes and other violations of
international  law committed during the three weeks of fighting that ended Jan.
18.

''What is needed is a comprehensive international investigation that looks at
all alleged violations of international law -- by Israel, by Hamas and by other
Palestinian armed groups involved in the conflict,'' Ms. Khan said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); HAMAS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EVIDENCE (71%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); HAMAS (54%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (91%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             310 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Trial, a Plea for Rights Of a Khmer Prison Official

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The first trial addressing the Khmer Rouge atrocities of the 1970s opened
Tuesday with a vigorous plea on behalf of the judicial rights of the defendant
-- a man who knows a thing or two about the treatment of prisoners.

After opening formalities before five red-robed justices, a lawyer for the
defendant, Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, raised a strong objection to the
inclusion of a last-minute party to the case, arguing that it violated ''the
human rights of the accused.''

Duch (pronounced doik) -- the first of five top Khmer Rouge figures to face
trial -- was the commandant of Tuol Sleng prison, where at least 14,000 people
were tortured and sent to their deaths.

They were among 1.7 million people who died at the hands of the fanatical Khmer
Rouge government between 1975 and 1979.

In Tuol Sleng, a prisoner was not only presumed guilty but also tortured until
he offered whatever was demanded -- often an admission of simultaneous
membership in the C.I.A., the K.G.B. and sometimes the Vietnamese security
service.

It was a prison where Duch's word was final and an order like ''kill them all''
was a death sentence or ''interrogate four persons, kill the rest'' was one
day's assignment for his staff.

The issue on Tuesday was whether to add a rare child survivor, Norng Chan Phal,
now 38, to a list of civil parties in the case, although he had missed the
filing deadline by two days.

The argument of Duch's lawyer, Francois Roux, amounted to a passionate rationale
for defending people accused of the most terrible crimes, and of the primacy of
legal principles in even the most emotionally charged cases. It was in effect an
indictment of the methods and actions of the man he was defending.

In a judicial proceeding, Mr. Roux said, rules are sacrosanct, the final line of
defense of impartial justice.

''We are defending a man, and although this man has acknowledged responsibility,
he is entitled to a fair trial,'' he said. ''The work we are doing is hard work
but essential, and we can only do our work if we respect the rule of law,
respect the rights of the accused and respect the principle of an adversarial
proceeding.''

Duch, 66, in a crisp blue shirt and a new pair of glasses, leaned forward from
time to time and conferred earnestly with his lawyers, lifting
simultaneous-translation headphones from his ears.

''I repeat that we respect the victims,'' Mr. Roux said. ''We also owe respect
to the accused, and we also must respect the rule of law.''

The child survivor was just discovered and presented to the press on Monday,
adding his name to a very short list of people who through chance or good
fortune had evaded the death sentence that was the first step in the judicial
process of Tuol Sleng.

The  three other known survivors who are still alive attended the hearing, along
with hundreds of diplomats, journalists, human rights workers and other victims
of the Khmer Rouge who had joined the case as civil parties.

''I could not sleep last night,'' said one of the survivors, Vann Nath, 62. ''I
was waiting for the sunrise so that I could see Duch in the dock.''

He added: ''I think he is a very fortunate person, a very lucky person. Because
when I was in jail, I could get three spoons of porridge a day and both my legs
were put in shackles.''

In an attempt to create an agrarian utopia, the Khmer Rouge caused the deaths of
as much as one-fourth of the population through starvation, exhaustion and
disease, as well as torture and execution.

Four other senior officials of the Khmer Rouge are in custody, waiting to follow
Duch into court, perhaps next year. Their supreme leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, center, at his trial on Tuesday
in Phnom Penh, Cambodia.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL PHOTO BY ANDREES LATIF)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (91%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); RULE OF LAW (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             314 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 25, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syria: Court Is Charged With Abuses

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 76 words


The Supreme State Security Court has used sham trials to prosecute activists,
bloggers and citizens accused of ''insulting the Syrian president'' in private
conversations, and it should be abolished, Human Rights Watch said Tuesday. The
group said the court ''criminalizes freedom of expression'' and allows lawyers
to play only a ceremonial role. The court has tried thousands of people since it
was re-established in 1992, after a hiatus during the 1980s.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (87%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS
(85%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (84%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             316 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwe Activist Released, in Victory for Opposition

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


Jestina Mukoko, a prominent human rights campaigner in Zimbabwe who was abducted
at dawn three months ago by state security agents, was freed on bail on Monday
along with four other activists after President Robert Mugabe authorized their
release, the detainees' lawyers said.

The release of Ms. Mukoko and the others in Harare, Zimbabwe's capital,
constitutes an important victory for the opposition leader, Morgan Tsvangirai,
the country's new prime minister, who has publicly pressed Mr. Mugabe to let
them go.

Ms. Mukoko, who headed a civic group that documented state-sponsored acts of
murder and torture committed before Mr. Mugabe's June election runoff against
Mr. Tsvangirai, was held for weeks in secret locations. She testified that she
was beaten on the soles of her feet and forced to kneel on gravel during
interrogations intended to force her to confess to recruiting youths for
military training in Botswana. She wept on the stand as she related how her
family believed she had been killed.

Ms. Mukoko was recently taken to a clinic in Harare, where she was being treated
for high blood pressure and injuries that doctors said were consistent with
torture. She lost a quarter of her weight in custody. On Monday, a prison
official unshackled her right foot from the hospital bed. ''She's a free
person,'' one of her lawyers, Harrison Nkomo, said.

She and the other detainees still face charges of plotting sabotage from
Botswana; another of her lawyers, Andrew Makoni, said the charges were baseless
and would not stick. Ms. Mukoko's harsh incarceration became one of the most
prominent examples of what Western diplomats see as Mr. Mugabe's refusal to
restore human rights in Zimbabwe, and an obstacle to their own countries'
willingness to foot the bill for rebuilding Zimbabwe's collapsed public
services.

Six other activists remain in jail despite having been granted bail on Friday,
because the terms of their release require them to put up the deeds to property
worth $20,000 -- but they have no property, Mr. Makoni said.

Another significant test loomed in the decision expected on Tuesday by a High
Court judge in Harare  on whether Roy Bennett, the treasurer of the opposition
Movement for Democratic Change and Mr. Tsvangirai's nominee as deputy
agriculture minister, would be freed.

Mr. Bennett, who had been living in exile in South Africa, was arrested in
Zimbabwe on Feb. 13 on three-year-old accusations that were tainted by the
torture of the man who implicated him. Mr. Bennett, a combative politician
despised by many in Mr. Mugabe's party, is charged with possessing guns and
intending to use them in acts of sabotage against the state.

The main accuser in the case, Peter Michael Hitschman, who was convicted on a
lesser weapons charge, was burned with cigarettes on his buttocks after his
arrest in 2006 and was told that his wife and son, who were in police custody,
would be harmed if he did not implicate Mr. Bennett, according to George Lock
and Trust Maanda, lawyers who represented Mr. Hitschman and Mr. Bennett.

Rolfe Kitkat, a surgeon who examined Mr. Hitschman, confirmed in a recent
interview that Mr. Hitschman had scars from cigarette burns on his buttocks.

Mr. Lock said that Mr. Hitschman, whom he recently visited in prison, again
described the harrowing night of his arrest  when he was kicked in the genitals
and then forced to lie on a desk, with his feet in leg irons and his pants
pulled down, as burning cigarettes were jabbed in his backside. He passed out,
and when he awoke, he said, he learned that the police were holding his family.
He then wrote a statement implicating Mr. Bennett, which he said was essentially
''dictated to him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jestina Mukoko was unshackled Monday at the hospital where she
was being treated.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAWYERS (89%); BAIL (89%); ARRESTS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (87%); PRISONS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%);
MURDER (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); JUDGES (72%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (72%);
JAIL SENTENCING (71%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (71%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (78%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (93%); JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA (51%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (98%); BOTSWANA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             318 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Upholds Afghan Journalist's 20-Year Jail Term for Blasphemy

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and CARLOTTA GALL; Abdul Waheed Wafa reported from
Kabul, Afghanistan, and Carlotta Gall from Islamabad, Pakistan. Taimoor Shah
contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


The Supreme Court in Afghanistan has upheld a 20-year prison sentence for an
Afghan university student journalist accused of blasphemy. The case has alarmed
news media and rights organizations in the country and abroad.

The student's family and lawyers said Wednesday that they had learned only
recently about the court decision, which was made in secret on Feb. 12, and they
called the procedure illegal.

The student, Parwiz Kambakhsh, 24, from northern Afghanistan, was arrested in
2007 and sentenced to death for blasphemy after accusations that he had written
and distributed an article about the role of women in Islam. Mr. Kambakhsh has
denied having written the article and said he had downloaded it from the
Internet. His family and lawyers say he has been denied a fair trial.

In 2008, an appeals court in Kabul commuted the death sentence to 20 years'
imprisonment, a decision that was upheld by a tribunal of the Supreme Court last
month.

''Unfortunately the Supreme Court has confirmed the 20-year prison sentence for
my brother,'' said Yaqoub Ibrahimi, who is Mr. Kambakhsh's brother. ''We did not
expect it at all.''

The decision came to light only when the attorney general's office issued orders
to the northern province of Balkh to enforce the decision, Afzal Nooristani, a
defense lawyer for Mr. Kambakhsh, said in a telephone interview.

''I was not allowed to talk with the judges and officials, which is a complete
violation of law,'' he said.

Judges at the Supreme Court were reluctant to comment on the case, except to say
that Ghulam Nabi Nawaie, the lead judge of the tribunal that made the decision,
was in India for medical treatment.

Enayatullah Kamal, the deputy attorney general, confirmed that his office had
been notified of the decision, but he said Mr. Kambakhsh still had the right to
appeal the tribunal's decision.

The case has been watched keenly by the independent Afghan news media, which
have felt growing pressure from government, political and religious circles.
Journalists and news organizations flourished in the early post-Taliban years
under President Hamid Karzai, but have increasingly suffered from threats and
attacks from the Taliban and pressure from the government and religious
conservatives.

An Afghan journalist, Javed Ahmad, 23, who worked for the Canadian broadcaster
CTV, was gunned down Tuesday evening in the center of the southern city of
Kandahar, the second killing of an Afghan journalist in southern Afghanistan in
nine months. Abdul Samad Rohani, a journalist in Helmand Province, was shot dead
last year, in a killing thought to be connected to his investigation of police
involvement in the drug trade.

Three other well-established journalists have left Kandahar in recent months
after receiving threats from Taliban insurgents over their coverage of events.

Another journalist, Ghows Zalmai, has been sentenced to 20 years in prison for
blasphemy after publishing a Dari translation of the Koran that hard-line
clerics disputed, said Human Rights Watch, based in New York.

Western diplomats and human rights organizations have expressed concern that
despite Mr. Karzai's assurances of press freedom  and freedom of speech,
journalists and civilians are under an increasing threat from both insurgents
and conservative religious clerics allied with the government. Mr. Karzai, his
critics say, is reluctant to move against the clerics in an election year.

Mr. Kambakhsh's brother and the lawyer, Mr. Nooristani,  said they were dismayed
because they had seen the Supreme Court as their last resort. Mr. Kambakhsh was
originally sentenced after a trial lasting only minutes in which he was not
allowed to defend himself. In the appeals court, an important student witness
against him retracted his statement, but was ignored.

''This is the tragic level of justice in Afghanistan today,'' Mr. Ibrahimi, the
brother, said in a statement. ''It is just a make-believe system of justice and
humanitarianism. The reality is that the Afghan government and judiciary,
although supported by the U.S., the U.N., the E.U. and other democracies
worldwide, is morally bankrupt.''

Human Rights Watch urged the Afghan president to pardon Mr. Kambakhsh. ''The
Supreme Court represented the last hope that Parwiz Kambakhsh would receive a
fair hearing, but once again justice was denied,'' said Brad Adams, the
organization's Asia director. ''Kambakhsh has committed no crime.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Parwiz Kambakhsh, an Afghan student journalist, in court in May
2008 on blasphemy charges. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAFIQ MAQBOOL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (91%); LAWYERS (91%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (91%); PRISONS (90%); RELIGION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); WRITERS
(90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); JOURNALISM (89%);
TALIBAN (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); APPEALS COURTS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); SHOOTINGS (75%); ARRESTS
(73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%); WOMEN (72%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES
(71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (65%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (91%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); INDIA (79%); CANADA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             319 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 25, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China State Newspaper Points to Abuses at Jails

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Inmates in China's 2,700 pretrial detention centers suffer bullying and torture
from fellow prisoners and police officers, and some criminal justice experts
want a neutral body to take over the centers from the police to curb the abuses,
the state-run English-language newspaper, China Daily, said Tuesday.

The newspaper noted that the Communist Party's latest four-year plan for legal
reforms does not include changes in the detention system. The  said that since
Feb. 8, five inmates died under suspicious circumstances while in police
custody. Amnesty International, the human-rights advocacy group, last week
reported two more deaths, which the police said were due to illness. Family
members dispute those explanations.

All seven deaths occurred in police detention centers, where inmates accused of
crimes can be held for months awaiting trial or formal charges. The centers are
officially run by the national Public Security Ministry, but Professor Chen
Ruihua of Peking University Law School was quoted as saying that they are
effectively controlled by local police officials who regard them ''as part of
their turf and the most profitable piece of their territory.''

Another criminal procedure expert, Chen Weidong of Renmin University, was quoted
as saying that officers ''will sometimes have the detained suspects, especially
new ones, tortured so that they can get confessions and complete an
investigation as soon as possible.''

China Daily is distributed mainly to an international audience, including
foreigners living in China. The newspaper sometimes publishes extensive articles
on delicate topics that do not receive similar attention in the Chinese-language
news media.

Detention centers drew widespread attention at home and abroad last month after
an inmate in Yunnan Province, Li Qiaoming, 24, charged with illegal logging,
died of brain injuries. Officials first said he had hit his head while playing a
hide-and-seek game in which the seeker is blindfolded. An investigation revealed
that he had been beaten to death by three other inmates, and six police
officials at the center were dismissed or punished.

Since then, six other inmates have died in custody, including an 18-year-old
from Hunan Province who local Communist Party officials said became unwell while
being interrogated.

Police officials have said that three inmates died of illness. But in one of
those cases, family members say, the body of a Hebei Province inmate said to
have died of pneumonia had bruises and a broken tooth, evidence of beating. The
other two cases remain in dispute.

During its meeting this month, the party-controlled legislature, the National
People's Congress, established a committee to investigate the centers. It
recently conducted surprise inspections in Liaoyuan, a city in Jilin Province,
the newspaper reported.

But in the article, the experts said the only way to sharply reduce abuses was
to remove detention centers from local police control. ''That has always been
strongly resisted by police departments,'' Hou Xinyi, deputy dean of the law
school at Nankai University in Tianjin, was quoted as saying. The police
''complain such a reform will not help their investigations and the crackdown on
crime,'' he said.

Amnesty International contended in a March 20 statement that the problems in the
detention centers were symptoms of a larger lack of accountability and fairness
in the justice system, in part because inmates often had little access to
lawyers or even family visits. Amnesty urged the Chinese government to change
its criminal procedure law to impose an explicit ban on the use of confessions
obtained through torture or ill treatment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL LAW (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); DEATHS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); HEAD INJURIES (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CONTUSIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); LAW SCHOOLS (76%);
LAWYERS (74%); ILLEGAL LOGGING (73%); INSPECTIONS (72%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES
(72%); BRAIN (70%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (70%); PNEUMONIA (69%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (67%); TOOTH
DISORDERS (63%); BRAIN INJURIES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (88%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); JILIN, CHINA (79%);
HEBEI, CHINA (79%); CENTRAL CHINA (79%); YUNNAN, CHINA (79%); NORTHEAST CHINA
(79%); HUNAN, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             320 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Egypt Backs Sudanese President

BYLINE: By NEIL MACFARQUHAR and SHARON OTTERMAN; Jeffrey Gettleman contributed
reporting from Nairobi, Kenya.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 674 words


Egyptian officials welcomed President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan to Cairo on
Wednesday, undeterred by the arrest warrant that has been issued against him for
war crimes and crimes against humanity by an international court.

Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and senior government ministers received Mr.
Bashir at the airport in Cairo, then held a meeting to discuss the arrest
warrant and conflict in Darfur, among other things. It was the second
international visit by Mr. Bashir this week, following a stop in Eritrea on
Monday. Mr. Bashir has also pledged to attend an Arab League summit meeting in
Qatar next week.

President Bashir has been defiant since the arrest warrant was issued on March 4
by the International Criminal Court in The Hague on charges that he directed a
campaign of murder and rape against civilians in the Sudanese province of
Darfur. Under the International Criminal Court's charter, its 108 member states
are obliged to arrest Mr. Bashir if he sets foot on their territory.

While Mr. Bashir, in theory, risks arrest when he leaves Sudan, the I.C.C. has
no enforcement police force, and Egypt, Eritrea and Qatar are not signatories to
the court's founding treaty. In addition, the Arab League and the African Union
have called on the United Nations Security Council to suspend the arrest warrant
against Mr. Bashir, arguing that it would further destabilize Sudan.

''There is an Egyptian, Arab, African position that rejects the way the court
has dealt with the status of the president of Sudan,'' Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Egypt's foreign minister, said at a news conference on Wednesday.

The visit to Egypt, a key American ally in the region, prompted immediate
criticism by Amnesty International, the human rights group. ''Egypt and other
members of the League of Arab States should not shield President Bashir from
international justice,'' said Irene Khan, the organization's secretary general.
''His presence in Egypt today should have been an opportunity to enforce the
arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court.''

The United Nations, meanwhile, warned Tuesday that while a combination of
stopgap measures by United Nations agencies and the Sudanese government has kept
aid flowing in the world's largest relief program in Darfur, the makeshift
effort cannot be sustained.

''These are Band-Aid solutions, not long-term solutions,'' John Holmes, the
United Nations humanitarian coordinator, told reporters Tuesday, summarizing a
joint assessment by the United Nations and Sudan last week after the government
in Khartoum shut down 16 aid organizations.

The decision to expel 13 foreign organizations and disband 3 local ones
immediately followed the International Criminal Court's decision to issue the
arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir. Violent flare-ups have plagued Darfur, an arid
western province, ever since; a Sudanese aid worker was shot dead in front of
his family on Monday night. Mr. Holmes said the shooting was being treated as a
robbery but remained under investigation.

In another development, Ayman al-Zawahri, the No. 2 leader of Al Qaeda, urged
the Sudanese in an audiotape released on Tuesday to undertake jihad against what
he said was a ''crusade'' being organized by the West to manufacture a crisis in
Sudan as an excuse to invade another Islamic land.

Both sides in the Darfur conflict are predominantly Muslim, and Mr. Zawahri said
he was not defending the Bashir government. Indeed, he said that it was
''reaping what it sowed'' and that it should repent for pandering to the West.

Mr. Zawahri questioned why the International Criminal Court had not issued any
arrest warrants for Western leaders. He wondered why the United Nations and the
international community had not reacted to Palestinian suffering the way they
had to suffering in Darfur.

''Why hasn't the United Nations and the international community intervened to
lift the siege from Gaza, while it pretends to cry over the people of Darfur
being deprived of relief and aid?'' he said on the 17-minute tape.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (93%); ARREST WARRANTS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (85%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); FOREIGN POLICY
(75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (83%);
AFRICAN UNION (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (59%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (94%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); EGYPT (99%); ERITREA (92%); QATAR (92%); AFRICA (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             321 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gaza: Inquiry Into Prisoner's Death

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 105 words


Hamas said it was investigating the death of a prisoner after a Palestinian
human rights group said he was tortured during interrogation. The group, the
Independent Commission for Human Rights, said the inmate, Jamil Assaf, was the
second prisoner to die in a Hamas jail in Gaza this month. The group said one of
its researchers had seen marks on Mr. Assaf's hands and legs indicating that he
had been tortured in jail. Mr. Assaf was detained by the police on March 9 and
died in Gaza's main hospital on Tuesday.  Islam Shahwan, a police spokesman in
the Hamas-ruled Gaza Strip, said the police were investigating Mr. Assaf's
death.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TORTURE (90%); PRISONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (83%); POLICE FORCES (83%); RELIGION (51%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); ISRAEL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             322 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Sudanese President Reportedly Visits Libya

BYLINE: By SHARON OTTERMAN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 425 words


President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan continued his  tour of politically
friendly states on Thursday, landing in the Libyan city of Surt for discussions
with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader and current African Union
president, news reports said.

Mr. Bashir is facing an arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court in
The Hague for crimes against humanity and war crimes stemming from the conflict
in Darfur. He has been defiant since the warrant was announced on March 4 and
this week began traveling abroad apparently in an effort to shore up support
among foreign leaders.

On Wednesday, Mr. Bashir met in Cairo with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and
senior government ministers. Mr. Bashir traveled to Eritrea on Monday, where he
met  President Isaias Afewerki. He has also vowed to attend an Arab League
summit meeting in Qatar early next week.

While Mr. Bashir, in theory, risks arrest when he leaves Sudan, the I.C.C. has
no enforcement powers, and Egypt, Eritrea, Libya and Qatar are not among the 108
signatories to the court's founding treaty that are obligated to arrest him.

The Arab League and the African Union have both called on the United Nations
Security Council to suspend the arrest warrant against Mr. Bashir, citing
concerns about regional sovereignty and arguing that his detention would further
destabilize Sudan.

On Wednesday, following Mr. Bashir's visit to Egypt, Foreign Minister Ahmed
Aboul Gheit spoke out against the court's arrest warrant.

''There is an Egyptian, Arab, African position that rejects the way the court
has dealt with the status of the president of Sudan,'' he said at a news
conference.

The visit to Egypt, a key American ally in the region, prompted immediate
criticism by Amnesty International, the human rights group.

''Egypt and other members of the League of Arab States should not shield
President Bashir from international justice,'' said Irene Khan, the
organization's secretary general. ''His presence in Egypt today should have been
an opportunity to enforce the arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court.''

The United Nations estimates that up to 300,000 people have died and 2.7 million
have been displaced in the conflict in Darfur, an arid province in the western
part of Sudan.

Sudan expelled 13 foreign aid organizations and disbanded three local ones
immediately after the I.C.C.'s decision, raising concerns about worsening
conditions among the more than 1 million Darfurians who had relied on assistance
supplied by the groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (92%); ARREST WARRANTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); INTERNATIONAL
TOURISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (77%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%); LABOR UNIONS (72%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(61%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (84%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (83%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (59%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); LIBYA (96%); EGYPT (96%); AFRICA (93%); ERITREA (92%);
QATAR (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             323 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Setting Aside Divisions, Arab Leaders Rally Behind Sudan's President at a
Meeting

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN and ROBERT F. WORTH; Michael Slackman reported from
Cairo, and Robert F. Worth from Beirut, Lebanon. Muhammad al-Milfy contributed
reporting from Doha, Qatar.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


Arab leaders may be divided over which Palestinian faction to support and what
to do about Iran's rising influence, but they have found one cause to rally
around: protecting the president of Sudan from charges that he orchestrated the
rape, killing and widespread pillaging in Darfur.

Arab leaders gathered for their annual summit meeting in Doha, Qatar, on Monday,
hoping to patch over their many differences. But they had little trouble
agreeing to an effusive embrace of Omar Hassan al-Bashir, the president of
Sudan, who was indicted by the International Criminal Court this month for war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The court also issued a warrant for his
arrest.

The emir of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, greeted Mr. Bashir at the
airport with a red carpet treatment, a warm embrace and a kiss on the cheek.
Even before the meeting began, Amr Moussa, the secretary general of the Arab
League, said the member states would ''continue our efforts to halt the
implementation of the warrant.''

Arab leaders have closed ranks around a fellow head of state in the face of
pressure from the West and condemnation from human rights groups around the
world. They have argued that the International Criminal Court compromised
Sudan's sovereignty. Their supporters said the court's action revealed the
West's double standard in dealing with Arabs by indicting Mr. Bashir while
taking no action against what they saw as war crimes committed by Israel during
its offensive in Gaza. They added that the indictment undermined efforts at
bringing about a negotiated settlement by inflaming the situation.

''The leaders reject attempts to politicize the principles of international
justice and using them to undermine the sovereignty, unity and stability of
Sudan,'' read a resolution drafted by foreign ministers before the meeting.

The Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, opened the summit meeting with a speech
calling for Arab leaders to reject the court's action.

''What is happening now with regards to Sudan is a new chapter in the chapters
that consider the Arabs weak and disrespect the sovereignty of their
countries,'' he said.

''As for their weak pretexts about fabricated crimes committed by Sudan, we can
discuss it with them after they bring those who committed the atrocities and
massacres in Palestine, Lebanon and Iraq to the court implicated for the same
crimes, but ones that are not fabricated, but rather proven with documents and
incidents,'' Mr. Assad added.

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, who also attended the
conference, sharply criticized Mr. Bashir for expelling aid agencies in response
to the court's call for his arrest.

''Relief efforts should not become politicized,'' he said. ''People in need must
be helped, irrespective of political differences.''

There was also some criticism of the Arab League's decision to welcome Mr.
Bashir. Some critics said their leaders had embarrassed the Arab world and were
supporting Mr. Bashir not on the strength of their convictions but from a sense
of self-preservation.

''The leaders' position is their own self-defense, because they don't want to
open the door to an international tribunal of any kind that will open the file
of any crimes they committed against humanity or against their own people,''
said Saad al-Ajmi, a former Kuwaiti minister of information. ''Most of those
regimes are actually dictatorships, and most of them have their hands smeared
with the blood of their own people.''

An independent group called the Doha Center for Media Freedom condemned Mr.
Bashir's participation in the summit meeting and said that it was hypocritical
for Arabs to want Israel to be investigated for its actions in Gaza and then
''complain about it if a friendly country is involved.''

When the International Criminal Court issued a warrant for Mr. Bashir's arrest,
it charged that he played an ''essential role'' in the murder, rape, torture,
pillage and displacement of large numbers of civilians in Darfur. The only Arab
states to participate in the court are Jordan, Djibouti and the Comoros. The
United States has also rejected participating in the court.

The court's action against Mr. Bashir came at a time of heightened tension among
Arab states over how to respond to Israel's offensive in Gaza and to relations
with Iran. The defense of Mr. Bashir drew a rare consensus, even among those
hostile to each other, like President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Qatar's emir.
Mr. Mubarak did not attend the summit meeting in Qatar, but he instead invited
Mr. Bashir to visit Cairo before the conference.

The Arab consensus on Mr. Bashir has partly been attributed to a feeling of
resentment in a region that is still sensitive to what it views as Western
colonial arrogance.

''It is as if the court and those who support it think they have the power to
appoint and fire presidents,'' said Faisal Mekdad, the Syrian vice minister of
foreign affairs, during a conversation on the side of the summit meeting in
Doha, Qatar's capital.

Syria may have an additional motive for denouncing the arrest warrant, because
its leadership is said to be concerned that the international investigation into
the killing of a former Lebanese prime minister may implicate or even indict
high-ranking Syrian figures.

Whatever the motives, the pro-Bashir stance is likely to play well with the Arab
public, said Sarkis Naoum, a columnist for the Lebanese newspaper Al Nahar.

''Arabs are happy to see their leaders facing up the Security Council or other
international bodies,'' Mr. Naoum said. ''And this has become a tool for regimes
to try to gain more legitimacy.''

That certainly appeared to be the case for Mr. Bashir, who sat alongside other
Arab leaders  and delivered a rambling diatribe against the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations Security Council.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan in Doha, Qatar, on
Monday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY AHMED JADALLAH/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (76%); LITIGATION (75%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (75%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (56%)

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (79%); BAN KI-MOON (50%)

CITY: DOHA, QATAR (93%); CAIRO, EGYPT (74%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); QATAR (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL
(92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); IRAQ (79%); SYRIA (79%); LEBANON (79%);
EGYPT (74%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             327 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Fighting Intensifies in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


The government of Sri Lanka and ethnic Tamil fighters ignored a call by the
secretary general of the United Nations for a cease-fire in their ongoing war
Monday as soldiers battled guerrillas in hand-to-hand fighting inside a
so-called safety zone that had been set up as a haven for civilians.

The government said on its Defense Ministry Web site  that it had killed more
than 250 Tamil Tigers during weekend fighting and 420 more in foiling an ambush
Monday morning. A pro-rebel site  said that Sri Lankan shelling of the no-fire
zone had killed at least 71 civilians and wounded 143 over the weekend.

Also Monday, President Mahinda Rajapaksa rejected the possibility of a
cease-fire and called on the rebels to surrender.

The government said its troops had taken control of the Puthukkudiyiruppu area,
the rebels' last remaining stronghold at the edge of the safety zone. A general
said Sunday that the rebels had been driven into the safety zone, a small strip
of beachfront jungle in the country's northeast.

The military said the Tamil Tigers, also known as the L.T.T.E., for the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, were now facing ''total annihilation'' as
fighting at close quarters continued in ''the last terror pocket.''

Confirmation of conditions on the ground was not possible because the government
has blocked independent journalists and most international aid workers from
reaching the area.

In his call Sunday for an immediate cease-fire, the U.N. secretary general, Ban
Ki-moon, expressed concern for as many as 190,000 civilians trapped inside the
safety zone, which is now estimated to be smaller than 5.5 square miles.

The U.N. and relief agencies have said the Tigers are using children in the
safety zone as soldiers and laborers while preventing civilians from fleeing the
zone, effectively using them as shields. The government also said the Tigers
have built military fortifications inside the zone.

The Tigers, meanwhile, accuse Sri Lankan artillery units of shelling the no-fire
zone, a charge the government has denied. Human Rights Watch also has reported
on the government's shelling of civilians; the group said last month that more
than 2,700 civilians have reportedly been killed this year.

TamilNet, the pro-rebel site, on Monday quoted a medical staffer in a makeshift
surgical center as saying ''death in most brutal form has become common within
the safety zone. The area littered with mangled bodies, torn limbs, and
blood-soaked soil appears more horrific than what one finds inside a butcher's
shop.''

Six weeks ago, the L.T.T.E. political chief said the Tigers might be willing to
accept an internationally brokered cease-fire although they would not surrender
their weapons as part of any truce. The government quickly rejected that offer.

Ethnic Tamil separatists have been battling the government off and on for
decades, using suicide bombers and other insurgency tactics while developing
conventional military forces including ground troops, an air force and a navy.
In recent months, however, government troops have pressed the attack with
greater confidence and ferocity, steadily backing the rebels into a corner.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS
OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             329 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Says Hamas Killed Foes in Gaza

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Hamas security forces killed at least 32 Palestinian political rivals and those
suspected of collaborating with Israel during and after the Israeli offensive in
the Gaza Strip, Human Rights Watch said in a new report.

The report,  being made public on Monday, said ''unlawful arrests, torture and
killings in detention'' were making a mockery of Hamas's claims to uphold the
law in Gaza, which is ruled by Hamas, an Islamic group.

''Hamas should end its attacks on political opponents and suspected
collaborators in Gaza, which have killed at least 32 Palestinians and maimed
several dozen more during and since the recent Israeli military offensive,'' the
report by Human Rights Watch, an advocacy group, said.

It said that gunmen believed to be from Hamas killed 18 Palestinians, most
suspected of collaborating with Israel,  and that another 14 Palestinians had
been killed by people said to be members of Hamas security forces since Israel
ended its offensive.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); TORTURE (72%); RELIGION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             331 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 24, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fate of Yemeni Detainees Complicates U.S. Plan to Close Guantanamo Bay Prison

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON and ROBERT F. WORTH; William Glaberson reported
from New York, and Robert F. Worth from Beirut, Lebanon. Margot Williams
contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1222 words


The Obama administration's effort to return the largest group of Guantanamo Bay
detainees to Yemen, their home country, has stalled, creating a major new hurdle
for the president's plan to close the prison camp in Cuba by next January,
American and Yemeni officials say.

''We're at a complete impasse,'' said one American official who is involved in
the issue but was speaking without authorization and so requested anonymity. ''I
don't know that there's a viable Plan B.''

The Yemeni government has asked Washington to return its detainees and has said
that it would need substantial aid to rehabilitate the men. But the Obama
administration is increasingly skeptical of Yemen's ability to provide adequate
rehabilitation and security to supervise returned prisoners. In addition,
American officials are wary of sending detainees to Yemen because of growing
indications of activity by Al Qaeda there.

The developments are significant for the Obama administration because the 97
Yemeni detainees make up more than 40 percent of the remaining 241 prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay. The question of what to do with them ''is integral to the
process of closing Guantanamo,'' said Ken Gude, an associate director at the
Center for American Progress who has written about closing the prison camp.

The standoff over the Yemeni detainees comes on top of other difficulties that
have emerged since President Obama announced his intention to close the prison
that has drawn international criticism for years.

Some Republicans in Congress have mounted stiff resistance to closing
Guantanamo, and officials in some American communities, fearing that terrorism
suspects could be tried or held in their courts or prisons, said they would
fight any such plans. Also, while some European governments have promised to
resettle detainees, specific agreements have been slow in coming.

The Yemenis not only are the biggest group of detainees, but also are widely
seen as the most difficult to transfer out of Guantanamo. Other countries are
wary of many of the Yemeni detainees because jihadist groups have long had deep
roots in Yemen, one of the poorest countries in the Arab world and the homeland
of Osama bin Laden's father. If the Yemenis are not sent home, there may be few
other options for many of the 97 men, detainees' lawyers and human rights groups
say.

Still, Muhi al-Deen al-Dhabi, Yemen's deputy foreign affairs minister, said in
an interview that the United States was now trying to persuade other countries
to accept Yemeni detainees and appeared to have rejected Yemen's request to have
its citizens at Guantanamo returned.

''If the United States is going to transfer the Yemeni detainees to a third
party, we cannot stop that,'' Mr. Dhabi said.

Yemen's president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, met last month with Mr. Obama's deputy
national security adviser, John O. Brennan. The State Department said Mr.
Brennan raised ''the U.S. government's concerns about the direct return of
detainees to Yemen.''

The Bush administration also failed to reach a deal with President Saleh, but
the Obama administration had hoped to get increased cooperation from Yemen,
which critics say has a history of coddling Islamic extremists and releasing
convicted terrorists. Complicating the task is the fact that security in Yemen
has been deteriorating for more than a year, with several terrorist attacks,
including a suicide bombing outside the American Embassy compound in September
that killed 13 people.

Among the 97 Yemeni detainees are some men who appear to be candidates for
transfer to other countries, including about a dozen with ties to Saudi Arabia.
American officials have described some of the Yemenis as jihadist foot soldiers
and have suggested that a few, like a student captured while visiting other
Yemenis in Pakistan, may simply have been at the wrong place at the wrong time.

Perhaps a dozen or more Yemeni detainees could face prosecution in the United
States, including Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who was charged in the Bush
administration's military commission system with being a coordinator of the
Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

But with just nine months remaining before Mr. Obama's January 2010 deadline for
closing the prison, some lawyers for the men say they are becoming convinced
that there may be no viable strategy to relocate them.

David H. Remes, a lawyer for 16 Yemeni detainees, said it appeared that many of
the men might remain in American custody. ''Unless President Obama reconsiders
his decision to close Guantanamo,'' Mr. Remes said, ''the Yemeni detainees would
have to be brought to the U.S. and put in some sort of prison.''

Although administration officials would not comment on the talks with Yemen, a
senior administration official said the government was ''working to ensure that
any detainee who is transferred abroad will be appropriately monitored,
rehabilitated, and assimilated back into their society.''

The complexities of the issues surrounding the detainees are a reflection of
Yemen's tangled domestic and international problems. It is a state that often
appears on the verge of chaos. A weak central government is fighting a
persistent insurgency in the north, restive separatists in the south and a
growing Qaeda presence.

Some Yemeni officials say President Saleh, a wily former army officer, has used
the internal threats -- and perhaps even nurtured them -- to press the United
States and Yemen's neighbor Saudi Arabia for more aid.

As a result, people who have discussed the detainee issues with Yemeni officials
say the Obama administration's frustration with the Yemeni government may be
well founded.

Mr. Saleh has publicly demanded the return of the detainees. But Joanne Mariner,
director of Human Rights Watch's terrorism and counterterrorism program, said
that after meeting top Yemeni officials, it appeared that the Saleh government
seemed to see the detainees as a potential source of security and financial
problems.

''Politically, they need to give the impression that they're fighting to get
their people back,'' Ms. Mariner said, but she added that it was not clear
whether the Yemeni officials were working to meet any American requirements.

One senior Yemeni official, she said, seemed to suggest that Yemen would require
a huge payment from the American government to resettle the detainees. A proper
rehabilitation program, the official claimed, could cost as much as $1 million
for each detainee, totaling nearly $100 million.

In the recent interview, Mr. Dhabi, the deputy foreign affairs minister, did not
mention a price tag. But he said that creating a rehabilitation program would be
''long, costly and would require cooperation.'' He said the Americans were
''disappointed'' to hear that.

Every option for the Yemenis at Guantanamo seems to have its roadblocks. There
have long been reports that many Yemeni detainees may go to Saudi Arabia's
rehabilitation program for former jihadists. That program has been widely
praised in the Middle East, despite recent disclosures that some graduates who
are former Guantanamo detainees have returned to terrorism.

But the Saudis have noted that Yemen demands that its citizens be sent home, and
a high-level Saudi official said his country would not take any of the detainees
unless Yemen asked it to.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); POWS & MIAS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); TERRORISM (73%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (52%)

COUNTRY: YEMEN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             333 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Doctor Says 378 Civilians Died in a Day in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By THOMAS FULLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


A government doctor in Sri Lanka's war zone said Sunday that 378 civilians were
killed and more than 1,100  were wounded in the past day during intensive
shelling of the tiny piece of land still controlled by Tamil rebels.

The Sri Lankan military and the Tamil Tiger rebels traded accusations over who
was responsible for the shelling, which the government doctor, V. Shanmugarajah,
said was the worst carnage he had witnessed in the Sri Lankan military's
intensifying campaign to wipe out the rebels.

''We are doing the first aid and some surgeries as quickly as we can,'' Dr.
Shanmugarajah, who works from a field hospital in the combat zone, was quoted by
The Associated Press as having said. ''We are doing what is possible. The
situation is overwhelming; nothing is within our control.''

Civilians trapped in the area have little food or potable water and only
makeshift shelter, according to those who have managed to flee the combat zone.
About 700 civilians escaped on Sunday alone, according to the military.

The  military has on at least two recent occasions declared that it would no
longer use heavy weaponry against the Tigers, who are holding tens of thousands
of civilians as human shields.

But skepticism over the government's assertions has been publicly expressed by
Western diplomats, including a recent high-level European delegation that
unsuccessfully called for a pause in the fighting to allow civilians to escape.

In March, the United States accused the Sri Lankan government of breaking its
promise to stop shelling areas where the civilians were being held. And Human
Rights Watch said Saturday that the  military had ''repeatedly struck hospitals
in the northern Vanni region in indiscriminate artillery and aerial attacks.''

''Patients, medical staff, aid workers and other witnesses have provided Human
Rights Watch with information about at least 30 attacks on permanent and
makeshift hospitals in the combat area since December,'' the group said.

With territory controlled by the Tigers now down to just over 2 square miles,
according to the Sri Lankan military, the government's campaign has become as
much as a propaganda war as a combat operation.

The Tigers, formally known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, declared a
''unilateral cease-fire'' two weeks ago. But they continue to hold civilians and
fight government troops in sea and land battles. The government, for its part,
declared April 27 that combat operations had ''reached their conclusion.'' It
says its military campaign is a hostage rescue operation.

In a statement released Sunday, the military said radar systems had detected
mortar fire coming from areas controlled by the Tigers.

''The L.T.T.E. terrorists carried out those attacks intentionally to tarnish the
image of the security forces in the eyes of public nationally and
internationally,'' the military said.

These and other claims are difficult to verify because the government bans
journalists from the area around the war zone and from refugee camps. On Sunday,
the government deported three television journalists working for Britain's
Channel 4. News services reported from the Sri Lankan capital, Colombo, that the
journalists had been arrested Saturday for their reports on conditions in the
refugee camps.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Civilians outside a makeshift hospital Sunday in a
rebel-controlled area where they are trapped.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (89%); HOSPITALS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (78%);
MILITARY HOSPITALS (78%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (64%); RADAR SYSTEMS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             335 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwe: Human Rights Lawyer Is Arrested

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 109 words


Leading human rights lawyer Alec Muchadehama, who is representing political
activists accused of plotting to overthrow President Robert Mugabe, was arrested
Thursday and charged with obstructing justice. Senior officials close to Mr.
Mugabe have said that officials and workers from the Movement for Democratic
Change, now sharing power with Mr. Mugabe in government, were abducted, tortured
and charged to gain leverage in any amnesty negotiations on behalf of Mr.
Mugabe's inner circle, who fear prosecution for crimes against humanity and
corruption. The M.D.C. denounced Mr. Muchadehama's arrest as a vindictive
attempt to intimidate independent lawyers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CORRUPTION (88%); TORTURE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(86%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (85%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             336 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans Recall Airstrike Horror, and Fault U.S.

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and TAIMOOR SHAH; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1331 words

DATELINE: FARAH, Afghanistan


The number of civilians killed by the American airstrikes in Farah Province last
week may never be fully known. But villagers, including two girls recovering
from burn wounds, described devastation that officials and human rights workers
are calling the worst episode of civilian casualties in eight years of war in
Afghanistan.

''We were very nervous and afraid and my mother said, 'Come quickly, we will go
somewhere and we will be safe,' '' said Tillah, 12, recounting from a hospital
bed how women and children fled the bombing by taking refuge in a large
compound, which was then hit.

The bombs were so powerful that people were ripped to shreds. Survivors said
they collected only pieces of bodies. Several villagers said that they could not
distinguish all of the dead and that they never found some of their relatives.

Government officials have accepted handwritten lists compiled by the villagers
of 147 dead civilians. An independent Afghan human rights group said it had
accounts from interviews of 117 dead. American officials say that even 100 is an
exaggeration but have yet to issue their own count.

The calamity in the village of Granai,  some 18 miles from here, illustrates in
the grimmest terms the test for the Obama administration as it deploys more than
20,000 additional troops here and appoints a new commander, Lt. Gen. Stanley A.
McChrystal, in search of a fresh approach to combat the tenacious Taliban
insurgency.

It is bombings like this one that have turned many Afghans against the
American-backed government and the foreign military presence. The events in
Granai have raised sharp questions once again about the appropriateness and
effectiveness of aerial bombardment in a guerrilla war in which the insurgents
deliberately blend into the civilian population to fight and flee.

Taliban insurgents are well aware of the weakness and are making the most of it,
American and Afghan officials say. Farah, a vast province in the west, contains
only a smattering of foreign special forces and trainers who work among Afghan
police and army units. Exploiting the thin spread of forces, the insurgents
sought to seize control of Granai and provoke a fierce battle over the heads of
the civilian population, Afghan and American officials say.

After hours of fighting and taking a number of casualties, the American forces
called in their heaviest weapon, airstrikes, on at least three targets in the
village.

The rapid mass burial of the victims and the continuing presence of insurgents
in the area have hampered investigations. Journalists were advised against
visiting Granai. Villagers were interviewed here in Farah, the provincial
capital, where they came to collect compensation payments, and in the
neighboring province of Herat, where some were taken for treatment.

Much of the villagers' descriptions matched accounts given by the United States
military spokesman, Col. Greg Julian, and the provincial police chief, Col.
Abdul Ghafar Watandar. But they differed on one important point: whether the
Taliban had already left Granai before the bombing began.

There was particular anger among the villagers that the bombing came after, they
say, the Taliban had already left at dusk, and the fighting had subsided, so
much so that men had gone to evening prayers at 7 p.m. and returned and were
sitting down with their families for dinner.

The police chief said that sporadic fighting continued into the night and that
the Taliban were probably in the village until 1 a.m.

Whatever the case, American planes bombed after 8 p.m. in several waves when
most of the villagers thought the fighting was over; and whatever the actual
number of casualties, it is clear from the villagers' accounts that dozens of
women and children were killed after taking cover.

One group went to a spacious compound owned by a man named Said Naeem, on the
north side of the village, where the two girls were wounded. Only one woman and
six children in the compound survived, one of their fathers said.

Another group gathered in the house of the village imam, or religious leader,
Mullah Manan. That, too, was bombed, causing an equally large number of
casualties, villagers said.  Colonel Julian, the American military spokesman,
said that the airstrikes hit houses from which the Taliban were firing. The
enormous explosions left such devastation that villagers struggled to describe
it. ''There was someone's legs, someone's shoulders, someone's hands,'' said
Said Jamal, an old white-bearded man with rheumy eyes, who lost two sons and a
daughter. ''The dead were so many.''

A joint government and United States military delegation visited Granai last
week but came back sharply divided in their conclusions. The Afghan government
said that 140 civilians were killed and 25 wounded, and that 12 houses were
destroyed.

The United States military said the Afghan numbers were far too high. This week,
a senior military investigator, Brig. Gen. Raymond A. Thomas III of the United
States Army, arrived to conduct an in-depth inquiry for the region's overall
military commander, Gen. David H. Petraeus.

An independent Afghan organization, Afghanistan Rights Monitor, said Wednesday
that at least 117 civilians were killed -- including 26 women and 61 children --
drawing on interviews with 21 villagers and relatives of the dead. The group
criticized both the Taliban for fighting among civilians, and the United States
military for using excessive force.

The police chief, Colonel Watandar, confirmed much of the villagers' accounts of
the fighting. A large group of Taliban fighters, numbering about 400, they
estimated, entered the village and took up positions at dawn on May 4. By
midmorning, the Taliban began attacks on police posts on the main road, just
yards from the village, they said.

The fighting raged all day. The police called in more police officers, Afghan
Army units and an American quick reaction force from the town of Farah as
reinforcements.

By midafternoon, the exchanges escalated sharply and moved deeper into the
village. Taliban fighters were firing from the houses, and at one point a Marine
unit called in airstrikes  to allow Marines to go forward and rescue a wounded
Afghan soldier, said Colonel Julian, the United States military spokesman. After
that, Taliban fire dropped significantly, he said.

A villager named Multan said that one house along the southern edge of the
village was hit by a bomb and that one Taliban fighter was killed there. But
villagers did not report any civilian casualties until the American planes
bombed that night.

Tillah, the 12-year-old girl, whose face bears the scars of a scorching blast,
still twisted in pain from the burning in her leg at the provincial hospital in
Herat, where she and other survivors were taken to a special burn unit. Her two
sisters, Freshta, 5, and Nuria, 7, were barely visible under the bandages
swathing their heads and limbs.

The three girls were visiting their aunt's house with their mother when a plane
bombed the nearby mosque, around 8 p.m., Tillah said. That is when they fled to
Said Naeem's seven-room home.

''When we reached there we felt safe and I fell asleep,'' Tillah said. She said
she heard the buzzing noise of a plane, but then only remembers coming to when
someone pulled her from the rubble the next morning.

A second girl, Nazo, 9, beside her in another hospital bed, said she saw two red
flashes in the courtyard that kicked up dust seconds before the explosion.

''I heard a loud explosion and the compound was burning and the roof fell in,''
she said. Seven members of the family with her died, and four were wounded, her
father, Said Malham, said.

''Why do they target the Taliban inside the village?'' he asked wearily. ''Why
don't they bomb them when they are outside the village?''

''The foreigners are guilty,'' he continued. ''Why don't they bomb their
targets, but instead they come and bomb our houses?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Tillah, 12, recovering from burns in a hospital in Herat after
being wounded during an American strike on the village of Granai.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A1)
Bibi Ghul, who lost her husband and two of her children during the strikes on
Granai, was compensated by officials in Farah.
 Top, a photocopy of the list of names of the villagers killed by the attack on
Granai. Above, Afghan government officials verifying details about a resident,
part of a compensation process.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)(A10) MAP: Civilian deaths in Granai may have been the war's highest. Map
details Granai, Afghanistan.(A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); BOMBINGS (91%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); BURN
INJURIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ARMIES (77%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (77%); POLICE
FORCES (77%); INTERVIEWS (72%); APPOINTMENTS (70%)

PERSON: STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (56%)

CITY: HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             337 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Trapped Civilians Now Able to Flee, Sri Lanka Says

BYLINE: By SHARON OTTERMAN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 688 words


At least 3,000 civilians who had been trapped in Sri Lanka's shrinking war zone
managed to flee Thursday, the country's military said, as its forces claimed to
further squeeze the Tamil Tiger separatists in a drive to end the
quarter-century-long conflict.

Sri Lankan Army units advanced on the two-square-mile coastal strip from the
south, north and west,  forcing the rebels into an ever-smaller sliver of
jungle, palms and sand, the military said. More than 1,000 civilians waded
across a shallow lagoon under rebel fire, the military said in a statement, and
hundreds more fled across land to the north.

If the military's assertion is true, it would be the first time in well over a
week that such a large number of civilians had been able to leave the combat
zone in Sri Lanka, where the civil war, Asia's longest, appears to finally be
reaching a close with a Tamil Tiger defeat despite rebel denials. It has been
impossible for news agencies to independently assess the contradictory claims
from the government and rebels because outside journalists have been banned.

The International Committee of the Red Cross said heavy fighting on Thursday had
prevented them for a third day from ferrying out wounded people and dropping off
relief supplies. Most people are seeking protection in hand-dug bunkers, making
access to scarce food and water even more difficult, and dozens are dying and
being wounded each day, the organization said.

''Our staff are witnessing an unimaginable humanitarian catastrophe,'' the Red
Cross's director of operations, Pierre Krahenbuhl, said in a statement on
Thursday.

The United Nations' acting representative for Sri Lanka, Amin Awad, said that
6,000 civilians had fled Thursday or were trying to flee, but that rebel fire
was preventing them, Reuters reported. The Sri Lankan Defense Ministry said that
4 people were killed and 14 wounded.

A spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, Sulakshani
Perera, said that a total of 196,000 people had fled the conflict zone, most
since April 20. About 50,000 civilians, mostly Tamils, are thought to be caught
there, along with a holdout force of between 200 and 500 rebel fighters.

Human rights organizations say the rebels are trying to keep the civilians in
the conflict zone for use as human shields, and that heavy artillery shelling
from government forces was being conducted without sufficient regard for
civilian safety. The government has denied using heavy artillery, but satellite
images taken May 10 and analyzed independently have found what appear to be new
heavy impact craters in the war zone.

The rebels blame the government's offensive for the civilian casualties. A Web
site used by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or L.T.T.E., said Thursday
that an estimated 1,700 civilians had been killed in the conflict zone since
Tuesday.  About 1,400 patients were left without care at the zone's last
remaining hospital, the rebel-run Web site said, as doctors and staff abandoned
it and fled into bunkers for safety.

Government doctors confirmed that they had left the makeshift hospital after
heavy shelling of it killed some 100 people earlier in the week, news agencies
said.

''The medical staff has stopped our service as we are unable to work without a
safe environment,''  Dr. T. Sathyamoorthy told Reuters by telephone.

The government has resisted pressure by human rights groups, the United Nations,
the United States and other nations for a pause in the fighting to allow more
civilians to flee the war zone.

Washington appeared to be increasing that pressure when Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton told reporters on Thursday that it is ''not an appropriate
time'' for the International Monetary Fund to consider a $1.9 billion loan
request by Sri Lanka.

She suggested the U.S. would effectively block the loan ''until there is a
resolution of the conflict.''

Meanwhile, the chief of staff to U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon was
dispatched to Sri Lanka for talks with the government. Vijay Nambiar was due to
meet with senior government officials beginning Friday in Colombo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ARMIES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); JOURNALISM
(72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (55%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (55%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             338 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Vowing More Rights for Accused, Obama Retains Tribunal System

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1191 words


The White House said Friday that the administration would prosecute some
detainees being held at the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in a military
commission system, a much-criticized centerpiece of the Bush administration's
strategy for fighting terror.

Administration officials said they were making changes in the system to grant
detainees expanded legal rights, but critics said the move was a sharp departure
from the direction President Obama had suggested during the campaign, when he
characterized the commissions as an unnecessary compromise of American values.

In a statement, Mr. Obama noted that the country had a long tradition of using
military commissions, and said the changes would make the tribunals, to be used
along with federal courts, a fairer avenue for prosecution. ''This is the best
way to protect our country, while upholding our deeply held values,'' Mr. Obama
said.

The commissions are run by the Pentagon under a 2006 law passed specifically for
terrorism suspects, in part to make it easier to win convictions than in federal
courts. The Obama administration suspended the military commission system in its
first week in office.

Like Mr. Obama's about-face on Wednesday, when he decided not to release
photographs documenting detainee abuse, the announcement Friday on tribunals
left the administration in the awkward position of being cautiously praised by
some adversaries and harshly rebuked by some usual allies.

The Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who has issued daily
criticisms of the president's plan to close Guantanamo, called the move to
revive the tribunals ''an encouraging development.''

David B. Rivkin Jr., a Washington lawyer who was an official in the Reagan
administration, said the decision suggested that the Obama administration was
coming to accept the Bush administration's thesis that terror suspects should be
viewed as enemy fighters, not as criminal defendants with all the rights
accorded by American courts.

''I give them great credit for coming to their senses after looking at the
dossiers'' of the detainees, Mr. Rivkin said.

The decision benefits the administration politically because it burnishes Mr.
Obama's credentials as a leader who takes a hard line toward terrorism suspects.
Some administration insiders say top officials have appeared surprised by the
ferocity of the largely Republican opposition to Mr. Obama's effort to close
Guantanamo, where 240 detainees remained after an Algerian, Lakhdar Boumediene,
was freed Friday and sent to France. Mr. Boumediene was at the center of a
landmark Supreme Court ruling against the Bush administration's Guantanamo
policies last year.

Guantanamo has become a difficult issue for some Democrats on Capitol Hill
because constituents have expressed anxiety about potentially freeing a small
number of detainees or moving those that the Bush administration called ''the
worst of the worst'' to prisons in the United States.

Some Democrats backed the president Friday. Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of
Michigan, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said the military
commissions could play ''a legitimate role in prosecuting'' detainees.

But given that Democratic leaders in the House this week pulled $80 million from
a war-spending bill that the White House had sought for closing Guantanamo,
saying the president had not presented a plan for the detainees there, it was
not clear whether support for the president's approach on the issue was
weakening among Democrats.

The Obama administration's proposed changes would limit the use of hearsay
evidence against detainees, ban evidence gained from cruel treatment and give
defendants more latitude to pick their own lawyers. Cases against 13 detainees
were suspended in January. The administration said Friday it would seek to
extend the suspension another four months.

Some liberals and human rights groups said they were stunned by the announcement
on Friday, with several calling it a betrayal. They said the image of the new
administration holding military trials at Guantanamo would hurt Mr. Obama's
efforts to improve relationships around the world and would embroil the
administration in years of legal battles.

''Tinkering with the machinery of military commissions will not remove the taint
of Guantanamo from future prosecutions,'' said Elisa Massimino, the executive
director of Human Rights First, an advocacy group.

The executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, Anthony D. Romero,
said he was preparing an advertising campaign that would call the use of what he
considered an inferior legal system to try detainees ''the Bush-Obama
doctrine.''

The added rights proposed by the administration still fall far short of the
protections provided defendants in federal court, lawyers said, predicting that
the administration would encounter vigorous new legal challenges that could end
up in the Supreme Court.

The Washington advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, Tom Malinowski, said
the decision on Friday was mystifying. He said he feared it would leave the
administration with ''the symbolic baggage of the system they inherited from the
Bush administration without the procedural advantages'' intended to assure easy
convictions.

Officials said the decision to proceed with military commissions came partly as
a result of concerns that some detainees might not be successfully prosecuted in
federal courts. They said that questions surrounding confessions made after the
brutal treatment of some detainees had become an obstacle. Though some
detainees, in so-called clean confessions, admitted to terrorist activities in
2007, they were not given the warnings against self-incrimination that are
standard in law enforcement.

Federal courts would likely ban such confessions, lawyers said, and, in some
cases, convictions may be nearly impossible without them. The most prominent of
the military commissions cases seeks the death penalty for five detainees
charged with planning the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, including the self-described
mastermind, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed.

Administration officials said that some detainees would be prosecuted in federal
courts, but did not specify which ones.

During the campaign, Mr. Obama criticized the military commission system as a
failure. ''It's time to better protect the American people and our values,'' he
said, ''by bringing swift and sure justice to terrorists through our courts and
our Uniform Code of Military Justice,'' which is used to prosecute members of
the armed services.

On cable television Friday, Republican loyalists called the decision to revive
the military commissions a ''flip-flop'' by Mr. Obama. But Mr. Obama noted in
his statement that as a senator in 2006, he once voted for military commission
trials for detainees.

The White House press secretary, Robert Gibbs, objected when reporters suggested
that the president was planning to use the Bush administration's system for
prosecuting terror suspects. Mr. Gibbs said it was more like buying a used car
but ''changing the engine and painting it a different color.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); PRISONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); LITIGATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (75%); LAWYERS (73%);
LEGISLATION (73%); SUPREME COURTS (69%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%); CARL LEVIN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (94%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 20, 2009 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

War's End in Sri Lanka: Bloody Family Triumph

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; A reporter for The New York Times contributed from
Colombo, Sri Lanka.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The Sri Lankan president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, on Tuesday savored a victory that
had eluded every Sri Lankan head of state before him: he declared on television
that after more than 25 years, his troops had defeated one of the world's most
enduring guerrilla armies on the battlefield.

Behind that victory speech was a historic and bloody family triumph, guided by
two of the president's brothers: Gotabaya, the influential secretary of defense,
and Basil, a so-called special adviser who devised the political strategy around
the war effort.

Together, the brothers Rajapaksa defied international pressure to stanch
civilian casualties, squelched dissent, blocked independent reporting of the war
and achieved what many had thought all but impossible: they vanquished the Tamil
Tigers, who had waged a pitiless war of terror and once ruled swaths of Sri
Lankan territory as a de facto state.

With Gotabaya Rajapaksa in charge of the defense portfolio, the government
sharply increased defense spending; bought new weapons, primarily from China and
Pakistan; and nearly doubled the size of the armed forces, to roughly 160,000.

The political cunning of Basil and Mahinda Rajapaksa was put to use. The
president asked India for weapons first. Only when it refused because of
domestic sympathy for the Tamil cause did he turn to its rivals.

The military strategy paid off, too. Starting in 2006, the government forces
staged intense air, sea and ground assaults against rebels in the east and the
north, sustaining the attacks even though the two sides were still officially
engaged in cease-fire negotiations. The government also adopted some guerrilla
tactics from the Tamil Tigers, using small groups of troops to penetrate deep
into the jungle and assassinate rebel leaders.

The brothers, who come from upper-caste landed gentry, are not part of the
English-educated elite of Colombo, the capital. Snubbing pressure from the West
did not hurt them; it helped them consolidate their southern Sinhalese
nationalist base.

''There was no vacillation as there has been with previous governments,'' said
Nilan Fernando, the country director for an American nonprofit, the Asia
Foundation. ''Previous governments were always playing for a draw. This time,
they were playing for a win.''

They won.

The victory, like Russia's smothering of Chechnya's separatist rebellion, comes
at a high cost. The United Nations says 7,000 civilians have been killed since
January alone, and more than 265,000 ethnic Tamils who fled the war zone are now
interned in overcrowded camps. Some civilians are missing, including three
government-employed doctors who worked in the rebel-held area and regularly
spoke out about the shelling of hospitals there. Human Rights Watch has
repeatedly said the government shelled civilian areas, even as the rebels held
tens of thousands of ethnic Tamils as civilian shields.

Now, some of Sri Lanka's erstwhile allies, including those that had banned the
Tamil Tigers as a terrorist organization, are calling for an international
commission of inquiry into possible war crimes. Sri Lanka desperately needs
foreign aid for postwar reconstruction.

In prosecuting the war, President Rajapaksa, a lawyer and member of Parliament
who was elected, narrowly, in 2005, cultivated tacit backing from India. Though
India did not supply offensive weapons, it became less active in seeking to stop
the fighting. Sri Lanka's success in intercepting supply ships in the Indian
Ocean is frequently attributed to Indian intelligence.

The chairwoman of India's governing Congress Party is Sonia Gandhi, whose
husband, Rajiv, a former prime minister, was assassinated by a Tamil Tiger
suicide bomber.

The Sri Lankan president dresses in the traditional white tunic and sarong of
the Sinhalese. In the 1980s, when anti-government ethnic Sinhalese activists
were being abducted and killed, he was one of their most vocal champions,
appealing to the United Nations for support.

After his election, however, he put defeating the rebellion ahead of protecting
civil liberties. The Rajapaksas treated dissent as support for the enemy. Some
journalists were jailed under an antiterrorism law; some were mysteriously
killed, including one newspaper editor, Lasantha Wickrematunge, who in a
chilling essay, foretold his death and blamed Mr. Rajapaksa for it.

Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the defense secretary and a former computer systems
administrator in Los Angeles, accused international aid agencies working in
Tiger-held territory of helping the insurgents. Last fall, he ejected nearly all
of them from the area.

In June 2007, the defense secretary was instrumental in ordering the expulsion
of nearly 400 Tamils living in low-cost hotels and boarding houses in Colombo,
on suspicion that they were helping ethnic separatist rebels plot bombings in
the city. Sri Lanka's highest court later overturned the deportation order.

On Tuesday, in his speech to the nation, the president said a new political
solution for minority Tamil rights could not be dictated from abroad. ''We do
not have the time to be experimenting with the solutions suggested by other
countries,'' he said.

He spoke in generalities about forging a peace settlement, but he gave few
details beyond saying it had to be acceptable to everyone in Sri Lanka.

That is, of course, the Rajapaksas' next challenge: reconciliation.

Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu, executive director of the nonpartisan Center for
Policy Alternatives here, said the president had ''struck the right notes by
making the distinction between the Tamil people and the Tamil Tigers.''

''What was missing was more details about the post-conflict phase,'' Mr.
Saravanamuttu said. ''I would have liked to have seen him make a real commitment
to a political settlement and human rights by addressing some of the serious
allegations that have been made against the military.''

The Tamil Tigers' missteps contributed to their downfall.

They helped elect Mr. Rajapaksa by enforcing a boycott of elections in November
2005 in Tamil-majority areas. Almost immediately after he took office, they
provoked his government with deadly strikes on his forces.

Their suicide bombers tried to kill Gotabaya Rajapaksa and his army chief, Gen.
Sarath L. Fonseka. Friends say the attempted assassinations strengthened the
Rajapaksas' resolve.

On Tuesday, Sri Lankan television flashed an image the government had pursued
for three decades: the corpse of a man the military identified as the ethnic
separatist chief Vellupillai Prabhakaran, dressed in battle fatigues, his eyes
wide open, his mouth agape, as though he, too, were in shock. There were no
Tamils left in the homeland he had fought so fiercely to create, only plumes of
smoke, and soldiers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMIES (78%); ASSASSINATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(74%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%); DEFENSE SPENDING
(71%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (56%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ASIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); INDIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             340 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 20, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

End of War on Tamil Separatists in Sri Lanka Is a Bloody Triumph for 3 Brothers

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; A reporter for The New York Times contributed from
Colombo, Sri Lanka.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The Sri Lankan president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, on Tuesday savored a victory that
had eluded every Sri Lankan head of state before him: he declared on television
that after more than 25 years, his troops had defeated one of the world's most
enduring guerrilla armies on the battlefield.

Behind that victory speech was a historic and bloody family triumph, guided by
two of the president's brothers: Gotabaya, the influential secretary of defense,
and Basil, a so-called special adviser who devised the political strategy around
the war effort.

Together, the brothers Rajapaksa defied international pressure to stanch
civilian casualties, squelched dissent, blocked independent reporting of the war
and achieved what many had thought all but impossible: they vanquished the Tamil
Tigers, who had waged a pitiless war of terror and once ruled swaths of Sri
Lankan territory as a de facto state.

With Gotabaya Rajapaksa  in charge of the defense portfolio, the government
sharply increased defense spending; bought new weapons, primarily from China and
Pakistan; and nearly doubled the size of the armed forces, to roughly 160,000.

The political cunning of Basil and Mahinda Rajapaksa was put to use. The
president asked India for weapons first. Only when it refused because of
domestic sympathy for the Tamil cause did he turn to its rivals.

The military strategy paid off, too. Starting in 2006, the government forces
staged intense air, sea and ground assaults against rebels in the east and the
north, sustaining the attacks even though the two sides were still officially
engaged in cease-fire negotiations. The government also adopted some guerrilla
tactics from the Tamil Tigers, using small groups of troops to penetrate deep
into the jungle and assassinate rebel leaders.

The brothers, who come from upper-caste landed gentry, are not part of the
English-educated elite of Colombo, the capital. Snubbing pressure from the West
did not hurt them; it helped them consolidate their southern Sinhalese
nationalist base.

''There was no vacillation as there has been with previous governments,'' said
Nilan Fernando, the country director for an American nonprofit, the Asia
Foundation. ''Previous governments were always playing for a draw. This time,
they were playing for a win.''

They won.

The victory, like Russia's smothering of Chechnya's separatist rebellion, comes
at a high cost. The United Nations says 7,000 civilians have been killed since
January alone, and more than 265,000 ethnic Tamils who fled the war zone are now
interned in overcrowded camps. Some civilians are missing, including three
government-employed doctors who worked in the rebel-held area and regularly
spoke out about the shelling of hospitals there. Human Rights Watch has
repeatedly said the government shelled civilian areas, even as the rebels held
tens of thousands of ethnic Tamils as civilian shields.

Now, some of Sri Lanka's erstwhile allies, including those that had banned the
Tamil Tigers as a terrorist organization, are calling for an international
commission of inquiry into possible war crimes. Sri Lanka desperately needs
foreign aid for postwar reconstruction.

In prosecuting the war, President Rajapaksa, a lawyer and member of Parliament
who was elected, narrowly, in 2005, cultivated tacit backing from India. Though
India did not supply offensive weapons, it became less active in seeking to stop
the fighting. Sri Lanka's  success in intercepting supply ships in the Indian
Ocean is frequently attributed to Indian intelligence.

The chairwoman of India's governing Congress Party is Sonia Gandhi, whose
husband, Rajiv, a former prime minister, was assassinated by a Tamil Tiger
suicide bomber.

The Sri Lankan president dresses in the traditional white tunic and sarong of
the Sinhalese. In the 1980s, when anti-government ethnic Sinhalese activists
were being abducted and killed, he was one of their most vocal champions,
appealing to the United Nations for support.

After his election, however, he put defeating the rebellion ahead of protecting
civil liberties. The Rajapaksas treated dissent as support for the enemy. Some
journalists were jailed under an antiterrorism law; some were mysteriously
killed, including one newspaper editor, Lasantha Wickrematunge, who in a
chilling essay, foretold his death and blamed Mr. Rajapaksa for it.

Gotabaya Rajapaksa,  the defense secretary and a former computer systems
administrator in Los Angeles, accused international aid agencies working in
Tiger-held territory of helping  the insurgents. Last fall, he ejected nearly
all of them from the area.

In June 2007, the defense secretary was instrumental in ordering the expulsion
of nearly 400 Tamils living in low-cost hotels and boarding houses in Colombo,
on suspicion that they were helping ethnic separatist rebels plot bombings in
the city. Sri Lanka's highest court later overturned the deportation order.

On Tuesday, in his speech to the nation, the president said a new political
solution for minority Tamil rights could not be dictated from abroad. ''We do
not have the time to be experimenting with the solutions suggested by other
countries,'' he said.

He spoke in generalities about forging a peace settlement, but he gave few
details beyond saying it had to be acceptable to everyone in Sri Lanka.

That is, of course, the Rajapaksas' next challenge: reconciliation.

Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu, executive director of the nonpartisan Center for
Policy Alternatives here, said the president had ''struck the right notes by
making the distinction between the Tamil people and the Tamil Tigers.''

''What was missing was more details about the post-conflict phase,'' Mr.
Saravanamuttu said. ''I would have liked to have seen him make a real commitment
to a political settlement and human rights by addressing some of the serious
allegations that have been made against the military.''

The Tamil Tigers' missteps contributed to their downfall.

They helped elect Mr. Rajapaksa by enforcing a boycott of elections in November
2005 in Tamil-majority areas. Almost immediately after he took office, they
provoked his government with deadly strikes on his forces.

Their suicide bombers tried to kill Gotabaya Rajapaksa and his army chief, Gen.
Sarath L. Fonseka. Friends say the attempted assassinations strengthened the
Rajapaksas' resolve.

On Tuesday, Sri Lankan television flashed an image the government had pursued
for three decades: the corpse of a man the military identified as the ethnic
separatist chief Vellupillai Prabhakaran, dressed in battle fatigues, his eyes
wide open, his mouth agape, as though he, too, were in shock. There were no
Tamils left in the homeland he had fought so fiercely to create, only plumes of
smoke, and soldiers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Mahinda Rajapaksa of Sri Lanka in Parliament on
Tuesday after his victory speech.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ERANGA JAYAWARDENA/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); ARMIES
(78%); ASSASSINATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
DEFENSE SPENDING (71%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (56%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ASIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); INDIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             341 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

1 in 7 Detainees Rejoined Jihad, Pentagon Finds

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER; Margot Williams contributed reporting from New
York, and David Herszenhorn from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


An unreleased Pentagon report  concludes that about one in seven of the 534
prisoners already transferred abroad from the detention center in Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, has returned to terrorism or militant activity, according to
administration officials.

The conclusion could strengthen the arguments of critics who have warned against
the transfer or release of  any more detainees  as part of President Obama's
plan to shut down the prison by January. Past Pentagon reports on Guantanamo
recidivism have been met with skepticism from civil liberties groups and
criticized for their lack of detail.

The Pentagon promised in January that the latest report would be released soon,
but Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman, said this week that the findings were
still ''under review.''

Two administration officials who spoke on condition of anonymity said the report
was being held up by Defense Department employees fearful of upsetting the White
House, at a time when even Congressional Democrats have begun to show misgivings
over Mr. Obama's plan to close Guantanamo.

At the White House on Wednesday, Mr. Obama ran into a different kind of
resistance when he met with human rights advocates who told him they would
oppose any plan that would hold terrorism suspects without charges.

The White House has said  Mr. Obama will provide further details about his plans
for Guantanamo detainees in a speech Thursday.

To relocate the 240 prisoners now at Guantanamo Bay, administration officials
have said the plan will ultimately rely on some combination of sending some
overseas for release, transferring others to the custody of foreign governments,
and moving the rest to facilities in the United States, either for military or
civilian trials or, in some cases, perhaps, to be held without charges.

But the prospect that detainees might be moved to American soil has run into
strong opposition in Congress. To show its misgivings, the Senate voted on
Wednesday, 90 to 6, to cut from a war-spending bill the $80 million requested by
Mr. Obama to close the prison, and overwhelmingly approved a second amendment
requiring that a threat assessment be prepared for each prisoner now at
Guantanamo to address what might happen on release.

The F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III, said Wednesday  that moving
detainees to American prisons would bring with it risks including ''the
potential for individuals undertaking attacks in the United States.''

But Michele A. Flournoy, the under secretary of defense for policy, said of the
detainees: ''I think there will be some that need to end up in the United
States.''

Pentagon officials said there had been no pressure from the Obama White House to
suppress the report about the Guantanamo detainees who had been transferred
abroad under the Bush administration. The officials said they believed that
Defense Department employees, some of them holdovers from the Bush
administration, were acting to protect their jobs.

The report is the subject of numerous Freedom of Information Act requests from
news media organizations, and Mr. Whitman said he expected it to be released
shortly. The report, a copy of which was made available to The New York Times,
says the Pentagon believes that 74 prisoners released from Guantanamo have
returned to terrorism or militant activity, making for a recidivism rate of
nearly 14 percent.

The report was made available by an  official who said the delay in releasing it
was creating unnecessary ''conspiracy theories'' about the holdup.

A Defense Department official said there was little will at  the Pentagon to
release the report because it had become politically radioactive under Mr.
Obama.

''If we hold it, then everybody claims it's political and you're protecting the
Obama administration,'' said the official, who asked for anonymity because of
the sensitivity of the situation. ''And if we let it go, then everybody says
you're undermining Obama.''

Previous assertions by the Pentagon that substantial numbers of former
Guantanamo prisoners had returned to terrorism were sharply  criticized by civil
liberties and human rights groups who said the information was too vague to be
credible and amounted to propaganda in favor of keeping the prison open. The
Pentagon began making the assertions in 2007 but stopped earlier this year,
shortly before Mr. Obama took office.

Among the 74 former prisoners that the report says are again engaged in
terrorism, 29 have been identified by name by the Pentagon, including 16 named
for the first time in the report. The Pentagon has said that the remaining 45
could not be named because of national security and intelligence-gathering
concerns.

In the report, the Pentagon confirmed that two former Guantanamo prisoners whose
terrorist activities had been previously reported had indeed returned to the
fight. They are Said Ali al-Shihri, a leader of Al Qaeda's Yemeni branch
suspected in a deadly bombing of the United States Embassy in Sana, Yemen's
capital, last year, and Abdullah Ghulam Rasoul, an Afghan Taliban commander, who
also goes by the name Mullah Abdullah Zakir.

The Pentagon has provided no way of authenticating its 45 unnamed recidivists,
and only a few of the 29 people identified by name can be independently verified
as having engaged in terrorism since their release. Many of the 29 are simply
described as associating with terrorists or training with terrorists, with
almost no other details provided.

''It's part of a campaign to win the hearts and minds of history for
Guantanamo,'' said Mark P. Denbeaux, a professor at Seton Hall University School
of Law who has represented Guantanamo detainees and co-written three studies
highly critical of the Pentagon's previous recidivism reports. ''They want to be
able to claim there really were bad people there.''

Mr. Denbeaux acknowledged that some of the named detainees had engaged in
verifiable terrorist acts since their release, but he said his research showed
that their numbers were small.

''We've never said there weren't some people who would return to the fight,''
Mr. Denbeaux said. ''It seems to be unavoidable. Nothing is perfect.''

Terrorism experts said a 14 percent recidivism rate was far lower than the rate
for prisoners in the United States, which, they said, can run as high as 68
percent three years after release. They also said that while Americans might
have a lower level of tolerance for recidivism among Guantanamo detainees, there
was no evidence that any of those released had engaged in elaborate operations
like the Sept. 11 attacks.

In addition to Mr. Shihri and Mr. Rasoul, at least three others among the 29
named have engaged in verifiable terrorist activity or have threatened terrorist
acts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 5, 2009



CORRECTION: A front-page article and headline on May 21 reported findings from
an unreleased Pentagon report about prisoners who have been transferred abroad
from the American detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The article said
that the Pentagon had found about one in seven of former Guantanamo prisoners
had ''returned to terrorism or other militant activity,'' or as the headline put
it, had ''rejoined jihad.''

  Those phrases accepted a premise of the report that all the former prisoners
had been engaged in terrorism before their detention. Because that premise
remains unproved, the day the article appeared in the newspaper, editors changed
the headline and the first paragraph on the Times Web site to refer to prisoners
the report said had engaged in terrorism or militant activity since their
release.

The article and headline also conflated two categories of former prisoners. In
the Pentagon report, 27 former Guantanamo prisoners were described as having
been confirmed as engaging in terrorism, with another 47 suspected of doing so
without substantiation. The article should have distinguished between the two
categories, to say that about one in 20 of former Guantanamo prisoners described
in the Pentagon report were now said to be engaging in terrorism. (The larger
share  --  about one in seven  --applies to the total number described in the
report as confirmed or suspected of engaging in terrorism.)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Senator James M. Inhofe, at lectern, talked to reporters after
the Senate blocked the transfer of prisoners from Cuba to the United States.
With him, from left, Senators Pat Roberts, Saxby Chambliss, Sam Brownback, Jim
DeMint and Jeff Sessions. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
(pg.A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); PRISONS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); RELOCATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY
(73%); LEGISLATION (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); APPROVALS (72%);
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (71%); APPROPRIATIONS (68%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); JIM DEMINT (72%); JIM INHOFE (72%); ROBERT MUELLER
(67%); JEFF SESSIONS (57%); PAT ROBERTS (57%); SAXBY CHAMBLISS (57%); SAMUEL
BROWNBACK (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             342 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 21, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Witch Hunts and Foul Potions Heighten Fear of Leader in Gambia

BYLINE: By ADAM NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: JAMBUR, Gambia


This tiny West African nation's citizens have grown familiar with the
unpredictable exploits of its absolute ruler, who insists on being called His
Excellency President Professor Dr. Al-Haji Yahya Jammeh: his herbs-and-banana
cure for AIDS, his threat to behead gays, his mandate that only he can drive
through the giant arch commemorating his coup in the moldering capital, Banjul,
and his ubiquitous grinning portrait posted along roadsides.

Not to mention the documented disappearances, torture and imprisonment of dozens
of journalists and political opponents.

But then came a campaign so confounding and strange that the citizens are still
reeling and sickened from it, literally, weeks after it apparently ended.

The president, it seems, had become concerned about witches in this country of
mango trees, tropical scrub, dirt roads, innumerable police checkpoints and
Atlantic coastline frequented by sun-seeking European tourists mostly unaware of
the activities at nearby Mile 2 State Central Prison, where many opponents of
the regime are taken.

To the accompaniment of drums, and directed by men in red tunics bedecked with
mirrors and cowrie shells, dozens, perhaps hundreds, of Gambians were taken from
their villages and driven by bus to secret locations. There they were forced to
drink a foul-smelling concoction that made them hallucinate, gave them severe
stomach pains, induced some to try digging a hole in a tiled floor, made others
try climbing up a wall and in some cases killed them, according to the villagers
themselves and Amnesty International.

The objective was to root out witches, evil sorcerers who were harming the
country, the villagers were told. Terrified, dozens of other people fled into
the bush or across the border into Senegal to escape the dragnet, villagers
said, leaving whole regions deserted. Amnesty estimates that at least six people
died after being forced to drink the potion, whose composition is unknown.

The roundups occurred from late January through March, according to people here.
But even in recent weeks, the same witch doctors in red, accompanied by others
identified as government agents, have circulated in the dirt-poor countryside --
Gambia was ranked 195th of 209 countries by the World Bank in 2007, with a per
capita income of $270 a year -- demanding that villagers make animal sacrifices,
of a red he-goat and a red rooster, to root out the sorcery supposedly in their
midst.

Gambian government officials did not respond to e-mail messages and phone calls,
and the government has not commented on articles recounting the anti-witch
campaign in the opposition newspaper Foroyaa (''Freedom,'' in the local Mandinka
language), according to the paper's editor, Sam Sarr. Amnesty International says
it received a press release from the country's attorney general declaring such
witch-hunting activities ''inconceivable.''

Yet the testimonies are numerous, and experts on this former British colony have
little doubt that the witch hunts occurred, and on the scale described.

The roundups were guided by the president's ''Green Boys,'' villagers say. The
Green Boys are Mr. Jammeh's most militant supporters, ''vigilante die-hards,''
said Abdoulaye Saine, a political scientist at Miami University of Ohio. They
dress in green and sometimes paint their faces green, the color of Mr. Jammeh's
political party, the Alliance for Patriotic Re-Orientation and Construction. The
roundups were conducted with force, guns in evidence  and directed largely at
the elderly, witnesses and local journalists said.

Even in the often brutal context of his 15-year dictatorship, this year's
roundups stand out, the president's few open critics in Gambia say. Since the
1994 coup that brought him to power, at least 27 journalists have fled the
country. One was  murdered and another has not been seen since his arrest by the
dreaded National Intelligence Agency. Others have described prolonged torture by
electric shock and the use of knives and lighted cigarettes in Mr. Jammeh's
jails.

But this time, it was not critical journalists or political opponents who were
singled out. ''There's a feeling that if this can happen, anything can happen,''
said the opposition leader Halifah Sallah, the minority leader in Parliament
from 2002 to 2007, who has himself been arrested four times, most recently for
speaking out against the witch hunts.

''People no longer have the protection of the laws,'' Mr. Sallah said. During
the witch hunts, ''people were in a state of panic'' throughout Gambia, a
country of 1.7 million, he said.

On the teeming streets of Serrekunda, a suburb of Banjul, people expressed fear.
''All of them are opposition, but they are not talking, because if you are
talking, you are going to the police,'' said Lalo Jaiteh, a building contractor,
gesturing nervously at a bustling row of vendors.

The anxiety has persisted. The witchcraft accusation brings shame in a society
where belief in sorcery ''was pervasive and still is pervasive,'' according to
Lamin Sanneh, a Gambian-born history professor at Yale University. Beyond that
is the trauma of being uprooted and the illnesses that people say linger from
the bitter potion.

''This stigma will follow us into our grave,'' said Dembo Jariatou Bojang, the
village development committee chairman in Jambur, a dusty town 15 miles from the
capital. ''We will never forget this.''

He said he was taken, along with about 60 others, after being assembled in the
village square, attracted by the beating of the drums. Driven by bus to a place
they did not recognize, Mr. Jariatou Bojang was made to drink and bathe in the
foul liquid.

''My head is still paining sometimes,'' Mr. Jariatou Bojang said.

As he spoke, an elderly man sitting on the floor of the village imam's house
shook his head uncontrollably from side to side. The men in the room said the
symptom developed after the man, said to be in his 80s, was forced to drink the
liquid.

Omar Bojang, the son of the imam, Karamo Bojang, recalled being told to undress,
and ordered to drink ''filthy water from a tin.''

''Once you drink that, you become unconscious, you can't think,'' he said.

Forty miles away in the village of Bintang, Mamadou Kanteh, a fisherman,
recounted the visit of the men in red several weeks ago. '' 'It's the president
who sent us,' '' Mr. Kanteh recalled their saying. '' 'There are witches in the
country who are hurting people, and killing people,' '' they said.

They demanded the sacrifice of a red goat and a rooster. The imam of Bintang
recalled drawing about $40 from the village treasury to pay for the animals,
which were slaughtered at the graveyard beyond the town's unlighted dirt
streets.

Back in Serrekunda, pedestrians hastened away when asked about the president.
Mr. Jaiteh, the contractor, ducked inside a darkened shack, hidden from the
street by two towering stacks of tires, to talk about the government with a
friend.

''Human rights is not here right now,'' the friend, Yaya Gasam, said in halting
English. ''Human rights is ... pop.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Karamo Bojang, left, shown with his wife, is an imam in the
village of Jambur, where about 60 people were rounded up and forced to drink a
noxious liquid.
 Billboards depicting President Yahya Jammeh are ubiquitous in Gambia, where his
unpredictable dictatorship inspires fear.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JANE HAHN FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES) MAP: Residents of Jambur say they were accused of sorcery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WITCHCRAFT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); COUPS (76%); JOURNALISM (75%);
WRITERS (75%); AIDS & HIV TREATMENT (57%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

CITY: BANJUL, GAMBIA (92%)

STATE: ATLANTIC OCEAN (71%)

COUNTRY: GAMBIA (95%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             343 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Would Move Some Terror Detainees to U.S.

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1210 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Despite stiff resistance from Congress, President Obama said Thursday that he
intended to transfer some detainees from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to highly secure
facilities inside the United States. He also proposed ''prolonged detention''
for terrorism suspects who cannot be tried, a problem he called ''the toughest
issue we face.''

In a speech at the National Archives here, Mr. Obama gave a full-throated
defense of his antiterrorism policies and his commitment to closing the
Guantanamo prison. With Republicans painting him as weak on terror, and
Democrats increasingly nervous about transferring terrorism suspects to the
United States, the White House sought to reclaim a debate over which even some
of his allies said he had lost control.

''We are not going to release anyone if it would endanger our national
security,'' Mr. Obama declared, adding, ''As we make these decisions, bear in
mind the following fact: Nobody has ever escaped from one of our federal
supermax prisons, which hold hundreds of convicted terrorists.''

In describing his plans for the roughly 240 terrorism suspects still held at
Guantanamo Bay, Mr. Obama accused his  predecessor, George W. Bush, of having
embarked on ''a misguided experiment'' that resulted in ''a mess.''

He said there would be no danger in transferring detainees to ''highly secure
prisons'' in this country, and pledged to seek trials for many in civilian or
military courts. But he also said he would move to ''construct a legitimate
legal framework'' to justify the detention of dangerous terrorism suspects who
could not be tried or released, a proposal that is creating unease among human
rights advocates who are among his staunchest backers.

Mr. Obama did not deliver his message in a vacuum. Just minutes after his
speech, cable news programs turned their focus to a competing address being
delivered by his staunchest Republican foe, former Vice President Dick Cheney.

The dueling appearances amounted to real-time philosophical combat between
competing national security visions, the debate Americans might have witnessed
had Mr. Cheney run for president.

The setting of Mr. Obama's address -- the soaring marble and limestone rotunda
of the Archives, where the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the
Bill of Rights are kept -- was intended to underscore his main theme: that as
commander in chief he can uphold American values while also protecting the
nation's security.

''I believe with every fiber of my being,'' Mr. Obama said,  ''that in the long
run we cannot also keep this country safe unless we enlist the power of our most
fundamental values.''

But Mr. Cheney, speaking at the American Enterprise Institute, a bastion of
conservative thought, put forth another worldview, in which security is
paramount.

''In the fight against terrorism,'' the former vice president said,  ''there is
no middle ground, and half measures keep you half exposed.''

The back-to-back speeches brought to life the broad and very difficult questions
facing Mr. Obama as he tries to live up to his pledge to shut the Guantanamo
prison by January and at the same time rewrite the legal framework established
by Mr. Bush for imprisoning and trying terrorism suspects.

Among those questions is whether bringing to the United States those Guantanamo
detainees who could not be released to their home countries would make Americans
less secure. Mr. Obama quoted Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South
Carolina, in saying that ''the idea that we cannot find a place to securely
house 250-plus detainees within the United States is not rational.''

But critics warn that housing dangerous terrorism suspects in United States
prisons would make those facilities, and the communities surrounding them,
vulnerable to attack; could allow militants a chance to plot strategy on
American soil; and could open the way for militants to stay in the country, if
they were acquitted at trial.

''I think the president will find, upon reflection,'' Mr. Cheney warned
Thursday, ''that to bring the worst of the worst terrorists inside the United
States would be cause for great danger and regret in the years to come.''

A second issue is whether to try the detainees in American courts. Mr. Obama
said Thursday that he would do so ''whenever feasible,'' citing the cases of two
other terrorists -- Ramzi Yousef, who tried to blow up the World Trade Center in
1993, and Zacarias Moussaoui, identified as the 20th Sept. 11 hijacker -- who
are serving life sentences in prison after being convicted in the United States.

But critics say there is a risk that classified information would be made public
in such criminal trials, a danger that David B. Rivkin, an official in the
Reagan Justice Department, calls ''the conviction price.'' Mr. Obama said that
military commissions, which allow defendants fewer rights, would be the
''appropriate venue'' for the trials of at least some detainees.

Yet another question is what to do with the most problematic group of Guantanamo
detainees: those who pose a national security threat but cannot be prosecuted,
either for lack of evidence or because evidence is tainted.

The answer proposed by Mr. Obama would write an entirely new chapter in American
law to permit ''prolonged detention'' -- just as at Guantanamo, but with
oversight by the courts and Congress. Human rights advocates express outrage at
that approach, however, saying it would violate the very civil liberties Mr.
Obama, a former lecturer on constitutional law, has vowed to protect.

''It is very troubling that he is intent on codifying in legislation the Bush
policies of indefinite detention without charge,'' Anthony D. Romero, executive
director of the American Civil Liberties Union, said after the speech. ''That
simply flies in the face of established American legal principle.''

As he moves ahead, Mr. Obama must still persuade lawmakers to release the $80
million he has requested to close the Guantanamo prison. On a vote of 86 to 3
Thursday night, the Senate, like the House earlier, passed a war financing bill
without that $80 million, which Congress has said it will not give him until he
provides a more detailed plan. Thursday's speech did not appear to change that.

''We've received today a broad vision from President Obama, and it's important
that he did that,'' said the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada.
''We're all awaiting the details of this plan, and he's going to come up with
one.''

Mr. Obama ran for office on a promise of restoring America's moral standing in
the world by rejecting Mr. Bush's policies. But as president he has found that
doing so is fraught with political peril. He used Thursday's speech to explain a
string of controversial national security decisions, including the apparent
contradiction between withholding photos showing abuse of detainees and the
release of classified memorandums about interrogation.

The president said he was trying to strike a balance between transparency and
national security.

''I ran for president promising transparency, and I meant what I said,'' he
declared, adding, ''But I have never argued -- and I never will -- that our most
sensitive national security matters are an open book.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: ''We are not going to release anyone,'' President Obama
declared Thursday, ''if it would endanger our national security.'' (PHOTOGRAPH
BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
PHOTO(A1)
 A search of prisoners at the Guantanamo Bay detention center, which President
Obama has vowed to close by next January.(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENNAN
LINSLEY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CONSERVATISM (75%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (71%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (64%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (50%)

COMPANY: AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY RESEARCH (50%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8733 NONCOMMERCIAL RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%); DICK CHENEY (78%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             344 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka: Inquiry Sought On Atrocities

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 90 words


The United Nations' top human rights official demanded an independent
investigation on Tuesday into allegations of atrocities committed by both sides
in Sri Lanka's civil war. Navi Pillay, left, the high commissioner for human
rights, said tens of thousands of civilians were killed or wounded in intense
fighting between the government and Tamil rebels beginning in December.  But a
majority of the 47 countries at the United Nations' Geneva-based Human Rights
Council appeared unwilling to accept her appeal for a war crimes investigation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (85%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (57%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             348 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gaza: U.N. War Crimes Inquiry Starts

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 93 words


Richard Goldstone, a South African jurist, led a 15-member team into Gaza on
Monday to investigate possible war crimes and human rights violations by Israel
and Hamas during Israel's three-week assault, which ended in January. The team
arrived from Egypt because Israel turned down requests to cooperate. Mr.
Goldstone, above, a former chief prosecutor for tribunals on Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, expressed disappointment at Israel's position. Israeli
officials say his mandate, from the United Nations Human Rights Council, is
biased against Israel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HAMAS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); HAMAS (84%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); RWANDA (92%); EGYPT (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             349 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Rights Investigation Team Enters Gaza

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Richard Goldstone, a South African jurist, led a 15-member team into Gaza on
Monday for a one-week investigation of possible war crimes and human rights
violations by both Israel and Hamas during Israel's  three-week assault  that
ended in January. The team arrived from Egypt because Israel turned down
requests to cooperate. Mr. Goldstone, a former chief prosecutor for tribunals on
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda as well as head of a commission of inquiry into
his native South Africa, expressed disappointment at Israel's position. Israeli
officials say his mandate, from the United Nations Human Rights Council, is
biased against Israel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HAMAS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (91%); RWANDA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             350 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia's Knotty Policies On Islam, Mirrored in Trial

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; KAZAN JOURNAL; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: KAZAN, Russia


Almaz Khasanov stood up to a microphone in the green-painted cage where he and
his co-defendants sit and made a statement that sent a wave of anxiety through
the cramped courtroom here.

''I am a member of the political party, Hizbut Tahrir,'' he said in prepared
testimony. ''The goal of this organization is the creation of an Islamic way of
life, including the creation of an Islamic Caliphate.''

Mr. Khasanov is a self-styled religious revolutionary who has vowed to challenge
the longstanding way of life here in Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, an ancient
Muslim region deep in Russia's heartland.

He is on trial along with 11 others, accused of membership in a terrorist
organization and of fomenting plots to violently overthrow the government. Most
of the men deny belonging to the group, and their friends and human rights
advocates say that the Russian police and intelligence agents used torture to
extract false evidence in the case.

By contrast, Mr. Khasanov freely admits to being a member of Hizbut Tahrir and
insists that it should be his right. While Hizbut Tahrir has been banned as a
terrorist organization in Russia and most of the other countries of the former
Soviet Union, it has sworn off violence as a means of achieving its goals. It is
allowed to operate in the United States and most of the European Union, though
typically under intense scrutiny.

Nevertheless, many people here,  Muslim and Russian Orthodox alike, are
unsettled by the unabashed fundamentalism of Hizbut Tahrir, which preaches a
pre-modern theology that is generally incompatible with Western notions of civil
society. In that sense, the trial has underscored the country's broader
ambivalence toward its Muslim minority.

Though historically Muslim, Kazan, a city on the Volga River about 500 miles
east of Moscow, has been shaped more by its confluence of cultures than by any
one social current. Crescent-topped minarets compete with gilt Orthodox cupolas
and bland Soviet high-rises for prominence in the city's skyline, though
shopping malls, boutique hotels, bars and nightclubs also appear striking.

The Tatar Muslims here, who have lived under Moscow's control since Ivan the
Terrible wrested the region from the Mongol Empire in the 16th century, appear
little different from their Russian neighbors in their secular dress and
penchant for chilled vodka.

Yet an influx of conservative ideas from abroad, officials and religious leaders
say, is beginning to undermine local traditions and could even threaten the
stability of the region.

But all the defendants on trial, their relatives and many experts on Islam in
Russia deny this.

It is still unclear what level of involvement, if any, each of the other men had
in Hizbut Tahrir. Many of their relatives denied that they were members at all.
Rather, they said the men, mostly students, were being persecuted for studying
and proselytizing Islam outside official religious structures.

''These are educated people -- some have two degrees -- and they were interested
in different currents of Islam,'' said Gulnaza Faisulina, whose husband is on
trial. ''They are seeking philosophical thoughts, and not all the religious
leaders are capable of providing this.''

Valiulla Yakupov, a deputy mufti of the government-backed Muslim Religious Board
of the Republic of Tatarstan, agreed that the Muslim establishment had not
responded to the interests and desires of young Muslims.

''These people have been jailed for their ideas, not for their actions,'' he
said. ''If I and other religious figures worked with them more actively and
explained things to them, this most likely would not have happened.''

Inevitably, the trial has reflected Russia's often contradictory policies toward
Muslims, who number between 15 million and 20 million out of an overall
population of 140 million. The authorities have promoted the construction of
mosques and religious schools, and Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, while
president, lobbied the government of Saudi Arabia to increase quotas on Russian
Muslims permitted to take part in the annual hajj, or pilgrimage, to Mecca.

But the government has also embarked on a concerted campaign of intimidation and
persecution of free-thinking Muslims that has at times failed to adhere to the
contours of human rights law, said Yelena Ryabinina, an expert on Muslim affairs
in Russia.

Dmitry Afanasov, a Russian convert to Islam and a friend of many of the men on
trial in Kazan, said he was beaten badly and lost consciousness several times at
the hands of the police, who he said tortured him into giving false testimony
incriminating his friends in terrorist plots in exchange for his freedom.

''They said they were given the green light to beat Muslims,'' he said.

It is a campaign shaped in large part by Russia's decade-and-a-half struggle
against violent Muslim-backed separatist movements in the North Caucasus. Two
bloody wars in Chechnya alone caused thousands of deaths.

Religious violence, however, is practically unheard of in Tatarstan, where the
powerful president, Mintimer Shaimiev, has managed to preserve broad autonomy
from Moscow in exchange for keeping separatist sentiments at bay.

The religious revival here, while broad, has been largely benign. About 50
mosques have been built since the fall of the Soviet Union. Madrasas and halal
meat shops have opened, and more and more women, many of them young, walk the
ornate pedestrian avenues wearing colorful head scarves.

Ruslan Kurbanov, a senior research fellow at the Russian Academy of Sciences
Institute for Oriental Studies, accused the authorities of stifling a new
generation of Muslim thinkers seeking to rejuvenate the religion. Clamping a lid
on religious innovation, he said, will only drive more Muslims to extremism.

''Only through acceptance of these new ideas,'' he said, ''and through
permitting pluralism of opinion within official religious structures can the
growing tensions and inclination of Muslims to extremism be eliminated.''

Before the recent hearing, Farida Rafikov, the mother of Dias Rafikov, one of
the defendants, was adamant about her son's innocence, saying he was
passionately involved in his religion and nothing else.

Following Mr. Khasanov's testimony, however, she appeared shaken.

''I just don't know if he will admit to it or not,'' she said. ''I'm afraid to
think about it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Some of the 12 men accused of membership in a terrorist group
and of fomenting plots to violently overthrow the government.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
VASILY ALEXANDROV/ITAR-TASS)  MAP: Kazan is the capital of Tatarstan, an ancient
Muslim region in Russia's heartland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (88%); EVIDENCE (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%);
CONSERVATISM (77%); FUNDAMENTALISM (76%); COUPS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); RETAILERS (61%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HIZB UT-TAHRIR AL-ISLAMI (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (87%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             356 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Toughens Airstrike Policy In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By DEXTER FILKINS; Thom Shanker contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


The new American commander in Afghanistan said he would sharply restrict the use
of airstrikes here, in an effort to reduce the civilian deaths that he said were
undermining the American-led mission.

In interviews over the past few days, the commander, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal,
said the use of airstrikes during firefights would in most cases be allowed only
to prevent American and other coalition troops from being overrun.

Even in the cases of active firefights with Taliban forces, he said, airstrikes
will be limited if the combat is taking place in populated areas -- the very
circumstances in which most Afghan civilian deaths have occurred. The
restrictions will be especially tight in attacking houses and compounds where
insurgents are believed to have taken cover.

''Air power contains the seeds of our own destruction if we do not use it
responsibly,'' General McChrystal told a group of his senior officers during a
video conference last week. ''We can lose this fight.''

''When we shoot into a compound, that should only be for the protection of our
forces,'' he said. ''I want everyone to understand that.''

The statements by General McChrystal signaled the latest tightening of the rules
for using airstrikes, which, while considered indispensable for protecting
troops, have killed hundreds of civilians.

They have also angered the Afghan government, which has repeatedly criticized
American and NATO forces for not taking enough care with civilian lives.

In December, the American commander at the time, Gen. David D. McKiernan, issued
guidelines ordering his soldiers to use force that was proportional to the
provocation and that minimized the risk of civilian casualties.

General McChrystal's new guidelines follow a deadly episode last month in the
Afghan village of Granai, where American airstrikes killed dozens of civilians.

The episode highlighted the difficulties facing American officers under fire, as
they are forced to balance using lethal force to protect their troops with rules
restricting the use of firepower to prevent civilian deaths.

The episode, on May 4, began when a large group of Taliban fighters attacked a
group of about 200 Afghan soldiers and police officers and American advisers.
During the firefight, which began just after noon and carried on into the night,
the Americans on the ground called for air support.

American fighter jets, and then bombers, came to the scene, dropping a number of
500- and 2,000-pound bombs. The bombs succeeded in ending the attack, but they
did much more damage as well.

A Pentagon report estimated that at least 26 civilians had been killed in the
airstrikes. It concluded that American personnel had made significant errors,
including violating procedures, that led to those deaths. Among those errors,
the report said, was a failure by the American personnel to discern whether
Afghan civilians were in the compound before they attacked.

Other credible estimates of civilian deaths in Granai ranged much higher. An
investigation by a Kabul-based group, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, said that at least 86 women and children had been killed, and as
many as 97 civilians altogether. The Afghan government said 140 civilians had
been killed.

The Pentagon report did not dispute the conclusions reached by the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, and referred to its ''balanced, thorough
investigation.''

The deaths in Granai make up part of the huge rise in civilian casualties that
are characterizing the war in Afghanistan.

A United Nations report found that the number of Afghan civilians killed in 2008
was 40 percent higher than in 2007. The Taliban and other insurgents caused the
majority of the civilian deaths, primarily through suicide bombers and roadside
bombs.

The changes highlighted by General McChrystal go to the heart of what went wrong
in Granai. In that case, there were  at least four airstrikes: the first by F-18
fighters and the other three by a B-1B bomber. The report found that it was the
last two airstrikes that probably caused the civilian deaths.

In those cases, the report found, the bomber's crew tracked suspected Taliban
fighters as they entered a building, and then attacked without determining
whether civilians were inside. The report said there were probably civilians
inside those buildings when they were destroyed.

Under the rules that General McChrystal outlined, those strikes would almost
certainly be prohibited. They would  be prohibited, the general said, even if it
meant letting some Taliban get away.

Referring to airstrikes, General McChrystal said, ''If it is just to defeat the
enemy, then we are not going to do it, even if it means we are going to step
away from that firefight and fight another time.''

According to the Pentagon report, the B-1B dropped five 500-pound bombs and two
2,000-pound bombs. The initial airstrikes, carried out by four F-18
fighters-bombers, the report said, killed insurgents but no civilians.

Ahmad Nader Nadery, the director of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, said Sunday that the American response in Granai was
''disproportionate.'' And he said he was pleased by the changes outlined by
General McChrystal.

''We are looking forward to seeing the new guidelines, and actually seeing how
they would be translated into practice,'' he said.

Last September,  Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates ordered new rules
specifically to defuse tensions over Afghan civilian deaths.

During a recent visit to Kabul, Mr. Gates said the American military would
quickly apologize and offer compensation to survivors in cases of civilian
deaths, even in advance of formal investigations to determine exactly what had
happened.

''I think the key for us is, on those rare occasions when we do make a mistake,
when there is an error, to apologize quickly, to compensate the victims quickly,
and then carry out the investigation,'' Mr. Gates said after a meeting with
President Hamid Karzai.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Residents of Granai, where airstrikes killed civilians in May,
waited to get compensation. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
(pg.A9) MAP: Policy changes go to the heart of what went wrong in Granai.
(pg.A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); BOMBINGS
(89%); TALIBAN (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(76%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (79%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             357 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 68 words


An article on May 30 about aid organizations being given freer access to
civilians displaced by the recently ended fighting between Tamil rebels and the
government in Sri Lanka referred incorrectly at one point to the United Nations
body that was considering an investigation of possible war crimes there. As the
article correctly noted elsewhere, it is the Human Rights Council, not the Human
Rights Commission.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (87%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); INVESTIGATIONS (83%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (82%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             362 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 16, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gunfight Wounds 2 Police Officers at U.S.-Operated Gold Mine in Indonesia

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


At least two police officers were wounded Wednesday in a skirmish with gunmen
near a gold mine operated by an American company in eastern Indonesia, officials
said.

The firefight followed several days of violence, including three deaths,
directed at the mining operations of Freeport-McMoran in Papua, an impoverished
province under military control. It came just after Freeport ordered a group of
employees to avoid traveling along a road linking a nearby town and the gold
mine.

''Because of the violence, we told a couple of hundred of our workers to stay
home this morning,'' said Mindo Pangaribuan, a spokesman for Freeport.

Mr. Mindo said that it was not clear who the gunmen were, and that the
authorities had yet to make any arrests in the recent deadly ambushes. Two
Freeport workers, an Australian mining expert and an Indonesian security guard,
were killed in skirmishes over the weekend; and a police officer fleeing from an
ambush  died after falling down a ravine.

Despite a decade of democratization, the Indonesian government still severely
restricts access to Papua, especially for journalists. More than 10,000 troops
and police officers, most of them non-Papuan, are based  in Papua, and the
forces have been accused by rights advocates of frequently committing human
rights abuses against the local population.

It is in that environment that Freeport, which is based in Phoenix, operates the
world's largest gold mine and employs 20,000 workers. The company  has enjoyed
close ties to the Indonesian government for four decades.

''To many Papuans, Freeport is a symbol of imperialism,'' said Andreas Harsono,
who is an analyst for the Human Rights Watch office here in Jakarta and recently
completed a report on abuses committed in Papua by Indonesia's special forces.

The authorities blamed separatists in the Free Papua Movement for the past
week's violence. But Papuan officials quoted in the Indonesian news media have
denied the accusations, saying the movement lacked the kind of sophisticated
weapons used in the ambushes.

The Indonesian news outlets have speculated that military or police officials,
who are paid by Freeport for protection, may have directed the ambushes to
secure their business.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GOLD MINING (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); POLICE FORCES (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%);
ARMED FORCES (77%); MINES & MINING (73%); JOURNALISM (72%); ACCIDENTAL
FATALITIES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%)

COMPANY: FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC (58%)

TICKER: FCX (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS331410 NONFERROUS METAL (EXCEPT ALUMINUM) SMELTING & REFINING
(58%); NAICS213114 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR METAL MINING (58%); NAICS212234 COPPER
ORE & NICKEL ORE MINING (58%); NAICS212222 SILVER ORE MINING (58%); NAICS212221
GOLD ORE MINING (58%); SIC3341 SECONDARY SMELTING & REFINING OF NONFERROUS
METALS (58%); SIC3331 PRIMARY SMELTING & REFINING OF COPPER (58%); SIC1081 METAL
MINING SERVICES (58%); SIC1044 SILVER ORES (58%); SIC1041 GOLD ORES (58%);
SIC1021 COPPER ORES (58%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); AUSTRALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             363 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 17, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Speedboats, Legal Again, Albania's Illicit Sex Trade Flares

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1352 words

DATELINE: VLORE, Albania


It was only after her trafficker sealed her mouth with electrical tape, drugged
her and threatened to kill her family that the childlike woman, now 27, says she
realized that the man she had planned to marry had seduced her with a terrible
lie.

Her journey at age 18 from an Albanian village to a London brothel, where she
said she spent five years working as a prostitute, began with a gold engagement
ring, the promise of a better life abroad and -- like many before her -- a
speedboat trip to Italy under the cover of night.

So many women, men and children had been trafficked abroad to work as
prostitutes, forced laborers or beggars that the Albanian government three years
ago barred all Albanian citizens from using speedboats, the favored
transportation used by traffickers to get people out of the country.

This drastic measure, coupled with stricter border controls and revenge killings
of traffickers by victims' families, had a significant effect, reducing
trafficking by more than half and all but ending Albania's role as a major
transit point for people trafficked to Western Europe from eastern and southern
parts of the Continent, say experts who follow trafficking.

But the ban prompted loud protests from fishermen and people in the tourism
industry, and in May it was reversed. Law enforcement and human rights officials
are concerned that as a result, human trafficking may explode anew -- at an
especially difficult time.

The financial crisis, many experts said, could increase human trafficking around
the world. A United States State Department report in June warned of the
potential risk, saying that the crisis is causing ''a shrinking demand for labor
and a growing supply of workers willing to take ever greater risks for economic
opportunities.''

In the case of Albania, a poor, southern Balkan country that joined NATO in
April and seeks to join the European Union, the government's ability to fight
trafficking is viewed as a critical test.

For victims like the woman from the small village, ensnared by the false
promises of her trafficker, that fight is a matter of survival.

''I was in love with him, I dreamed of living my life with him, but it was all a
big lie,'' she said in a recent interview at a shelter for trafficking victims.
''I wanted to run away, but in the eyes of the law, I was a prostitute with fake
documents. Where was I to go?''

She said the man who abducted her had gained her trust over months, then locked
her in a room and took her passport and cellphone. She said he beat her and cut
her with a penknife, a warning of what he would do if she tried to escape. She
said she was forced to be a prostitute in London and in Antwerp, Belgium. To
cover their tracks, the man's family had called her parents and said that the
couple had moved to neighboring Kosovo.

The woman would not provide her name for fear of retribution from the
trafficker, making it impossible to corroborate her story with the police report
she said she had filed against the man.  But the coordinator and director of the
shelter where she is staying have reviewed the details of her case and vouched
for her credibility.

At the height of the trafficking, experts estimate, thousands of women, men and
children were taken to nearby Greece and Italy and elsewhere for sexual
exploitation or forced labor.

The United Nations estimates that 12.3 million people globally are employed in
sexual servitude or forced labor.  Many are lured by fake engagements, real
marriages or false job offers. In some cases, victims have been sold by their
families. Others go voluntarily.

Even with the speedboat ban last year, the State Department said in its June
report that in 2008, Albania did not comply with ''the minimum standards for the
elimination of trafficking,'' although it made ''significant efforts to do so.''
The report said corruption remained pervasive.

In June 2007, the Ministry of Interior arrested 12 police officers accused of
human trafficking in three cases, including six officers with direct
responsibility for anti-trafficking enforcement.

Albanian law enforcement officials say that help from other countries in getting
evidence to convict traffickers is often lacking. Iva Zajmi, the
anti-trafficking coordinator at the Ministry of Interior, stressed that as a
result of legal or tolerated prostitution in countries like Belgium, Germany and
the Netherlands, many trafficked women were not identified as victims in those
countries.

''The legalization of prostitution has created a wall behind which traffickers
can hide and repress victims,'' she said.

Trafficking took root in Albania in 1991, in the aftermath of the fall of
Communism, and for nearly 10 years, traffickers worked with impunity in the
absence of trafficking laws. The problem peaked in 1997 as a financial pyramid
scheme shook Albania and pushed the country to the brink of civil war.

''Albanians were selling their sisters for money,'' said Ilir Yzeiri, an
Albanian writer who made a documentary on human trafficking.

In 2004, the government created courts to try trafficking cases and passed tough
trafficking laws, including prison sentences of up to 15 years for traffickers.

But human rights experts say prosecutions are too rare, partly because many
victims are afraid to testify. Last year, 22 trafficking cases were prosecuted,
according to the State Department report, fewer than half the number prosecuted
in 2007.

Brikena Puka, the executive director of Vatra, an outreach group that has helped
trafficking victims, said prosecutions were scarce partly because many victims
were being tried for prostitution. In some cases, women are jailed after having
been deported from other countries.

''Trafficked women are being victimized twice,'' she said. ''First by the
traffickers, then by the Albanian justice system.''

Even if they want to press charges, trafficked women who were interviewed say it
is extremely difficult to escape from their captors, who are part of an
organized international network.

The trafficking victim who shared her tale recalled that her trafficker had
contacts in each city they visited.  She said the trafficker also employed a
forger, who provided fake documents.

She thought she would finally be freed when her trafficker was arrested in
London in 2006 and deported to Albania. Instead, she said, his brothers and
their wives, who were in London, put her back to work in the sex trade. She said
at times she would make more than 1,000 euros daily, about $1,400, but was never
allowed to keep it.

Within weeks, she said, she called the British police, who soon afterward
deported her to Albania, where she filed a complaint with Albanian police
accusing the trafficker of abuse.

She said that when she finally told her family, they rejected her. Within weeks,
she said, she was again abducted by her trafficker, who had been released. He
threatened to kill her if she did not retract her statement to the police, she
said, so she told the police she had ''lied because of jealousy.''

The coordinator of the shelter where she is staying said the woman's original
statement of her story was so detailed -- and she showed so many signs of
physical and psychological abuse -- that the police rejected her retraction. She
was referred to the shelter, which encouraged her to file formal charges against
the trafficker. She did, and the man was jailed for one month before being
released a second time, said the coordinator, who requested anonymity because of
security concerns.

The former prostitute no longer faces the daily terror of her trafficker, but
she is forced to live under constant police surveillance in the maximum security
shelter, which she has not left in three years. She spends her time watching
television and is learning to be a hairdresser at the shelter's makeshift salon.

''You expect your own country to protect its citizens,'' she said. ''You expect
the laws not to make a victim into a criminal. Outside Albania, I was on my own,
but here I am in my own country, and I am still being abused.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An abandoned fishing boat on a beach in Vlore, Albania, a city
known for being a hub for human trafficking across Europe.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT
LUTTON/THE INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (90%); MARINE VESSELS (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (89%); LABOR
TRAFFICKING (89%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (89%); FORCED
LABOR (78%); FAMILY (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%);
WORKFORCE DEMAND (74%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%);
WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (69%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (69%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (69%); BORDER CONTROL
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (65%); COUNTERFEITING (60%);
INTERVIEWS (60%); TOURISM (52%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (99%); EUROPE (93%); BELGIUM (90%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (79%);
WESTERN EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (77%)

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             366 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 1, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Photos

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 202 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Other End of the Abu Ghraib Camera'' (Op-Ed, July 25):

William Quinn argues that photographs of American personnel abusing prisoners
should be suppressed because the prisoners' rights to privacy trump the need for
transparency. This is a dangerous argument.

If accepted, photographic evidence of human rights abuses -- which has
historically been used to advance the rights of victims -- would rarely come to
light.

As the courts have recognized, both transparency and privacy can be served by
releasing the photographs after redacting identifying features. The American
Civil Liberties Union has sought release of the photos in precisely this form.

The Justice Department has recently signaled that it might investigate
interrogators who used torture but not high-level officials who authorized it.
Especially when the Justice Department is implicitly perpetuating the myth that
torture was committed by a few bad apples, it is crucial that the public have
access to all of the facts. The photos would underscore that torture and abuse
were widespread and systemic.  Alexander Abdo

New York, July 27, 2009

The writer is a legal fellow with the A.C.L.U. National Security Project.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); PRIVACY RIGHTS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%);
WRITERS (73%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (72%); PRISONS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             374 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 26, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban in Pakistan Confirm That Their Leader Is Dead

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 525 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Pakistani Taliban leaders acknowledged for the first time on Tuesday that their
leader, Baitullah Mehsud, was dead, confirming claims of American and Pakistani
officials.

The acknowledgment of Mr. Mehsud's death came as rights groups were demanding an
inquiry into reports of extrajudicial killings in the Swat Valley, where dozens
of bodies have surfaced in execution-style killings in areas where the Pakistani
military has conducted operations to push out Taliban militants.

The Pakistan Army denies any involvement in extrajudicial killings and says the
deaths could be acts of revenge by local residents who suffered when the Taliban
controlled the area.

American and Pakistani officials had said they were all but certain that Mr.
Mehsud, who had accepted responsibility for a string of deadly terrorist attacks
across the country in recent years, had been killed in a missile strike by an
American drone on Aug. 5.

Pakistani intelligence officials also said there were indications of violent
infighting over who would succeed him, and reported briefly that one of his
possible successors, Hakimullah Mehsud, had been killed.

But on Tuesday, Taliban leaders tried to dispel reports of Hakimullah Mehsud's
death or the impression of a rift in their leadership.

Two men claiming to be Hakimullah Mehsud and Waliur Rahman, another Taliban
commander, contacted several media outlets to confirm Baitullah Mehsud's death
and put up a unified front. They also announced that Hakimullah Mehsud would
take over leadership of the Pakistani Taliban, while Mr. Rahman would lead the
Taliban in South Waziristan, the rugged tribal region that had been Baitullah
Mehsud's stronghold.

But Pakistani officials immediately cast doubt on the claims and about whether
Hakimullah Mehsud was alive or dead. The Pakistani interior minister, Rehman
Malik, contends that Hakimullah Mehsud is dead. Analysts said the public
admission of Baitullah Mehsud's death came after it became increasingly
difficult for the Taliban to continue denying it.

Rahimullah Yousafzai, an analyst and journalist based in Peshawar, speaking to
the Geo television network, said the Taliban initially thought they could hide
Mr. Mehsud's killing. ''It wasn't possible for them to hide it and eventually
they have admitted now,'' he said.

Meanwhile, in the northern Swat Valley, villagers and district officials have
found dozens of bodies of suspected militants in the past two weeks. Three
bodies were found in the Danagram area on the outskirts of Swat's central town
of Mingora on Tuesday morning, the BBC reported.

Most of the dead had multiple gunshot wounds and were found dumped in fields and
alleys while blindfolded with their hands tied behind their backs.

Last week the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, an independent rights group,
put out a statement rebutting the military's denial of involvement.

''The commission reiterates that it has come across credible accounts of
extrajudicial killings and complaints of reprisal attacks by the security forces
during the operation in Swat,'' Asma Jahangir, the chairwoman of the commission,
said in the statement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Waliur Rahman, a Taliban official, center and seen from rear,
Saturday in the Pakistani tribal region along the Afghan border. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); ARMIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
JOURNALISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); SHOOTINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (61%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (50%)

PERSON: BAITULLAH MEHSUD (89%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (74%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             375 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 28, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Far Should a Torture Inquiry Go?

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1002 words


To the Editor:

''Records Show Strict Rules for C.I.A. Interrogations'' (front page, Aug. 26)
highlights the fact that torture was deliberately proposed, authorized and used
as an instrument of policy by top-level government officials and legal and
medical professionals. The limited inquiry recently sanctioned by the attorney
general therefore plainly does not go far enough.

I have not been professionally involved in this matter, and I am expressing my
personal views based solely on the public record. While any inquiry into the
previous administration's lawless and brutal torture policies and practices
constitutes progress, this long-overdue investigation should not be limited to
''rogue'' C.I.A. personnel and others who merely went too far in carrying out
approved tactics in the field.

Instead, it should focus first and foremost on those at the highest levels of
the United States government who authorized the use of waterboarding and other
forms of torture, as well as the senior political appointees -- including many
lawyers -- who did their superiors' bidding by providing specious legal
justification for the use of abusive interrogation methods, thereby enabling
criminal conduct.

These officials should finally have to answer for their disgraceful actions
through a full-fledged criminal inquiry conducted by a respected, nonpartisan
special prosecutor chosen from outside the ranks of the department. This
much-needed investigation should not be just about the little fish.

John S. Koppel Bethesda, Md., Aug. 26, 2009

The writer is a career attorney with the Appellate Staff of the Justice
Department's Civil Division.

To the Editor:

Re ''Report Provides New Details on C.I.A. Prisoner Abuse'' (news article, Aug.
23): Now that the Justice Department has documented these crimes committed in
our name, a special prosecutor must go after not only the actual torturers but
also those who ordered or excused the torture if we are to stop those in power
from continuing to put themselves above the law.

As for the president's avowed desire not to prosecute, that is not for him to
choose. The only way the Constitution allows him to exempt criminals from paying
for their crimes is by pardoning them after they have been convicted.

Jonathan J. Dobkin New York, Aug. 24, 2009

To the Editor:

For too long, the Obama administration has viewed the torture issue as a
backward-looking distraction from its forward-looking foreign policy goals. To
compartmentalize thus is to ignore the power of our example in the world.

As long as it is perceived that the United States tortures or countenances
torture, we will never win the allies we need to establish a free and sovereign
Afghanistan. Without those allies, we're stuck in a quagmire.

Our foreign policy is hostage to how we are perceived, and how we are perceived
rests on seeing that our laws are faithfully executed. Prosecuting torturers
seems a fine place to start.

Barry Levine Lafayette, Calif., Aug. 24, 2009

To the Editor:

Your article suggests that there is a partisan divide over the question of
whether abusive Bush-era interrogation methods, including waterboarding,
constitute torture. But it is not only Democrats who have denounced
waterboarding. In fact, leading Senate Republicans, including John McCain and
Lindsey Graham, have repeatedly described waterboarding and other abusive
methods as torture, and have been among the most persistent Congressional
opponents of these practices.

With the release of the inspector general's report, it is time for a similar
bipartisan consensus on the need to investigate and prosecute such crimes.

Joanne Mariner Director, Terrorism and  Counterterrorism Program Human Rights
Watch New York, Aug. 23, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''The Torture Papers'' (editorial, Aug. 26):

You write of Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.: ''Mr. Holder displayed real
courage and integrity in ordering the investigation. But he stressed that it was
limited to the specific interrogations outlined in the C.I.A. report, and did
not amount to a full-blown criminal investigation of the Bush-era detention
policies.''

There has not been a terrorist attack on the United States mainland since Sept.
11, and much of the reason can be credited to the policies of the Bush
administration and specifically Dick Cheney. The terrorists who attacked us on
Sept. 11 were not directed to do so by any country but by Osama bin Laden and
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed.

If a poll were taken of the American people, I think that the overwhelming
majority would strongly disapprove of this decision. It also sends a message to
terrorists worldwide that the United States is a soft-belly adversary.

But the real threat is that such an investigation could result in tying the
hands of the C.I.A., which could prove devastating to our security.

Paul Schoenbaum Williamsburg, Va., Aug. 26, 2009

To the Editor:

The C.I.A. inspector general's report confirms that doctors played the same role
in C.I.A. interrogations as they did under Gen. Augusto Pinochet's regime in
Chile: assuring that men would stay alive while tortured. The new documents
shatter the pretense that physicians and psychologists safeguarded detainees;
instead, they acted as enablers of brutality.

No military, C.I.A. or contract physicians or psychologists have been held
accountable for such staggering ethical breaches. Federal agencies that employed
them and state licensing bodies have a responsibility to discipline them.

The New York State Assembly is considering a bill sponsored by Richard N.
Gottfried that would prohibit licensed health professionals from abetting
torture. Such a bill would restore the role of health professionals as healers
rather than as cogs in the machinery of torture.

Leonard S. Rubenstein Baltimore, Aug. 26, 2009

The writer, former president of Physicians for Human Rights, is a visiting
scholar at the Center for Public Health and Human Rights at the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY STEPHEN SAVAGE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(87%); MISCONDUCT (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (77%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (76%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%);
US PRESIDENTS (73%); WRITERS (73%); CORRECTIONS (71%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(71%); APPOINTMENTS (69%); PARDONS (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (60%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (54%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             378 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suicide Bomber Kills 15 Police Recruits in Pakistan's Swat Valley

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ and PIR ZUBAIR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: PESHAWAR, Pakistan


A suicide bomber blew himself up on Sunday at a central police station in the
largest town in the Swat Valley, killing 15 police recruits and shattering the
semblance of normality that the army had tried to enforce in the troubled area.

A group of new police officers, recently hired to patrol local communities, was
performing training exercises when the suicide bomber struck at the police
station in Mingora, the information minister for the North-West Frontier
Province, Mian Iftikhar Hussain, said.

The attack came as the Pakistani Army has asserted that it now controls most of
the Swat Valley and that the Taliban militants who held sway there for nearly
two years have been beaten back to only a few enclaves. On Saturday, the army
said it had destroyed a suicide bomber training camp in Charbagh, six miles from
Mingora, strafing it with helicopter gunships.

The bomber disguised himself as a police recruit and walked into the walled
compound, officials said.

The police station was hit so many times by the Taliban in the previous two
years that the regular police of Mingora had abandoned the compound and handed
it over for training exercises, local officials said.

The medical superintendent of the main hospital in Mingora, Lal Noor Afridi,
said 13 officers had died at the police station and two more had died at the
hospital. About 20 recruits were reported to have been wounded.

Muhammed Qasim, 28, a college student, said he had been preparing to drive to
Peshawar when the bomb went off. ''I was standing outside and heard a huge
blast, followed by firing,'' Mr. Qasim said. Soldiers fired their weapons to
signal that the military was imposing an immediate curfew on the town, he said.

The brazen nature of the attack right in the center of Mingora showed the high
cost of the army's failure to capture or kill top Taliban commanders and
strategists. The attack was the fourth by militants against security forces in a
month, and it was by far the most devastating.

Making community police recruits the targets of the attack appeared to be a
carefully considered strategic choice, striking at one of the main elements of
the government's plan to provide improved security against militants.

The new police officers were vetted and hired last month under a program
introduced by the provincial government to provide local law enforcement
officers who could identify militants and protect the public.

The new community officers are paid the equivalent of $120 a month, more than
regular police officers receive, but do not get a pension or other benefits.

The killing of so many recruits at the beginning of the program will discourage
good candidates in the future, said Sher Mohammed, a lawyer from Mingora.

The attack may also have been retaliation against the military for what local
residents and human rights advocates say have been extrajudicial killings by the
military of suspected militants.

The Pakistani Army has denied that soldiers have arrested such suspects, killed
them and left their bodies in the streets.

The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan has called the accusations credible and
said it had gathered ''complaints of reprisal attacks by the security forces
during the operation in Swat.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The central police station in Mingora, Pakistan, was hit so
many times by the Taliban that the regular police abandoned it and handed it
over for training exercises. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAVEED ALI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 One of 20 police recruits reported to have been wounded, at a hospital in Swat.
The attack in Mingora, the district's largest town, came as the army said that
it controlled most of the area. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FAISAL MAHMOOD/REUTERS)  MAP

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (95%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (94%); ARMIES (91%); BOMBINGS
(90%); MILITARY TRAINING (90%); TALIBAN (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%);
MILITARY HELICOPTERS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%);
HELICOPTERS (53%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 5, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Is Not Well in Darfur

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 186 words


To the Editor:

''As Darfur Fighting Diminishes, U.N. Officials Focus on the South of Sudan''
(news article, Aug. 28) quotes the departing commander of the United
Nations-African Union peacekeeping force in Darfur as saying there is no longer
a war there.

Khartoum's leaders will be delighted to use these words to convince the world
that ''all is well'' in Darfur. But Human Rights Watch researchers have found
few positive changes there. Violence against civilians and relief workers is
rife, aid delivery suffers from Khartoum's expulsion of relief agencies in
March, and impunity for war crimes continues.

No one should take comfort from the current rainy-season lull in fighting
between Khartoum and the rebels. Their war machinery remains in place.

Until there is genuine progress in peace talks and those responsible for
atrocities are held to account, few Darfuris, including the millions in camps,
will agree that the war is over or risk returning home. Until then, the United
Nations should do more to protect them.

Georgette Gagnon

Director, Africa Division

Human Rights Watch

New York, Aug. 28, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);
PEACE PROCESS (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); AFRICAN UNION
(58%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); AFRICA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             388 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A Gay Ambassador

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 160 words


President Obama plans to name an openly gay lawyer to serve as ambassador to New
Zealand and Samoa, administration officials said Wednesday evening.

If confirmed by the Senate, the lawyer, David Huebner, would become the first
openly gay ambassador in the Obama administration.

Mr. Huebner is the general counsel for the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against
Discrimination. His nomination is timed to coincide with a speech Mr. Obama is
giving Saturday night to the Human Rights Campaign, which also advocates equal
rights for gay men and lesbians.

Mr. Obama is facing continuing criticism from gay leaders that he is not living
up to his campaign promises, including repealing the Clinton-era ''don't ask,
don't tell'' policy, which bars openly gay men and lesbians from serving in the
military. The president's press secretary, Robert Gibbs, told reporters on
Wednesday that the president was ''intent on making progress'' on the issue.
SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 9, 2009



CORRECTION: NATIONAL

  A report in The Caucus column on Thursday about the naming of David Huebner,
an openly gay lawyer, as ambassador to New Zealand and Samoa misstated part of
the name of the advocacy group for which he is general counsel. It is the Gay
and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation -- not Against ''Discrimination.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(88%); LGBT RIGHTS (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(87%); GENDER EQUALITY (87%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); LAWYERS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%)

COUNTRY: NEW ZEALAND (92%); SAMOA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             392 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 20, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Painful Truth in Mideast Talks: Force Has Trumped Diplomacy

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1210 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


As the Obama administration tries to broker a resolution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, there is a dark truth lurking: force has produced
clearer results in this dispute than talk.

The results of the violence may prove short-lived -- and possibly
counterproductive; condemnation of Israel and Hamas is likely to grow after the
United Nations Human Rights Council voted Friday to endorse a report detailing
evidence of war crimes in Gaza.

But the reality that war can work is playing a crucial role in the region's
festering conflicts. Some Palestinians are talking again about armed struggle.
And Israeli officials, who say their censured military operations have been
highly successful, are keeping track of a series of ticking clocks as they
ponder still another military endeavor -- against Iran.

The payoff from the use of force in the struggle between Israel and the
Palestinians is evident. It was only after the first Palestinian uprising in the
late 1980s that Israel recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization and
started to consider a two-state solution, and after the second -- and very
bloody -- uprising that it left Gaza in 2005.

Meanwhile for many Israelis, the past decade looks like a model of the primacy
of military action over diplomacy.

Through relentless commando operations and numerous checkpoints, the Israeli
Army ended suicide bombings and other terrorist acts from the West Bank; since
its 2006 war with the Lebanese militia Hezbollah, widely dismissed as a failure
at the time, the group has not fired one rocket at Israel; and Israel's
operation against Gaza last December has greatly curtailed years of Hamas rocket
fire, returning a semblance of normality to the Israeli south.

Two years ago, Israeli fighter planes destroyed what Israel and the United
States say was a budding Syrian nuclear reactor; and last year in Syria, Israeli
agents assassinated Imad Mugniyah, the top military operative for Hezbollah and
a crucial link to its Iranian sponsors, a severe blow to both Hezbollah and
Iran.

Diplomatic efforts, whether the Oslo peace talks of the 1990s or the
Turkish-mediated negotiations with Syria last year have, by contrast, produced
little. Every Israeli military operation of recent years -- including the
December invasion of Gaza that was condemned Friday by the United Nations Human
Rights Council by a vote of 25 to 6 and referred to the Security Council
following a report by a committee led by Richard Goldstone -- has come under
international censure.

Today all are viewed here as having been judged prematurely and unfairly but
having delivered the goods -- keeping Israel safe through deterrence.

Of course the military successes may be of limited value -- a battle won but a
war lost. The Palestinians may have driven Israel out of Gaza, but they ended up
living in a vast network of barriers and military outposts of Israeli occupation
in the West Bank and under harsh siege in Gaza.

And for Israel, while the country is safer today, quieter and more prosperous
than ever, it is facing a severe diplomatic crisis. As the storm over the United
Nations report on Israel's attack on Gaza shows, not only are the country's
tactics under assault but so is its very legitimacy as calls for boycott and
criminal prosecution grow. Its important relationship with Turkey, a moderate
Muslim country, is under threat.

Ari Shavit, a columnist for the liberal newspaper Haaretz, wrote on Thursday
that both Britain in 1917 and the United Nations in 1947 recognized the Jewish
people's right to establish a Jewish state. Yet ''as Israel gets stronger, its
legitimacy is melting away,'' he wrote. ''A national movement that began as
'legitimacy without an entity' is becoming 'an entity without legitimacy' before
our very eyes.''

Many Israelis respond that their self-preservation comes ahead of their
reputation, that the swiftness and harshness with which their actions are
condemned show that the world judges them by a double standard. Others say the
isolation looks worse abroad than here.

Maj. Gen. Gadi Eisenkot, who leads Israel's northern command, said in an
interview that the border with Lebanon was ''more peaceful than it has been
since the 1960s.'' Still, Israel's enemies ''want us gone, so they have pursued
a two-part strategy -- terror and delegitimization.''

He added that Hezbollah had more than 30,000 rockets in dozens of villages in
southern Lebanon being held in reserve for retaliation against Israel should it
attack Iran.

Israeli officials say no decision to attack Iran has been made, and they hope
Iran's nuclear program will be stopped by other means, like international
sanctions.

But they say they believe that if Iran acquires nuclear weapons, the region will
grow far more dangerous for Israel, spurring an arms race and offering immunity
to Hezbollah and Hamas. And for Israel, whose unofficial motto is ''Never
Again,'' denial of the Nazi Holocaust by Iran's leaders and their rejection of
Israel's right to exist add up to an existential risk.

Israel is trying to determine the moment beyond which an attack on Iran would be
ineffective. It knows an attack cannot end Iran's nuclear program, only delay it
by several years. And if Washington opposes taking military action, it will be
very hard to do.

The first ticking clock Israel is watching is Iran's enrichment of uranium.
Although the process creates low-enriched uranium for electricity but not for
weapons, the more low-enriched uranium Iran produces, the less time it will need
to turn it into enough high-enriched uranium for a weapon. Israeli analysts say
that if Iran were to decide to build a bomb, it would need about 10 months. But
after another year of low enrichment, it would need half that time, and after a
third year, even less.

Israel is also watching several other indicators of how long it can delay
action. That list includes whether Iran bolsters its ability to withstand an
attack by building and acquiring antiaircraft systems and whether Israel's own
scientists can design a missile defense system that could shield the country
from retaliation in the form of Hezbollah and Hamas rockets.

The other ticking clocks focus on internal Iranian politics -- whether
antigovernment sentiment after June's election will lead to a slowing or an end
to the nuclear program -- and on the American-led diplomatic process aimed at
getting Iran to abandon the program. Those talks resumed on Monday.

How fast any of the clocks are ticking is a matter of intense study here. If
Iran's program is stopped, Israel says, it will be far easier for it to make
concessions that would lead to a Palestinian state on its border.

But many of its leaders add something else -- over the long term, only the
Israeli military's presence on its borders can ensure the country's survival.
Diplomacy, they say, can go only so far, and the Palestinian state will have to
submit to severe restrictions on its military activities and pacts with foreign
states.

For their part, the Palestinians reject such restrictions but have similar
sentiments about the importance of force. Armed struggle remains central to
Hamas doctrine; the rival Fatah movement says it remains an important option.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Palestinians on the way from Bethlehem, in the West Bank, to
attend prayers at Al Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem crossing an Israeli checkpoint.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ODED BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Hezbollah fighters carried the coffin of Imad Mugniyah, their top military
operative, through Beirut in 2008. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HUSSEIN MALLA/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (89%); HAMAS (89%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (78%); WAR
CRIMES (78%); ARMIES (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); BOMBINGS (77%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); ARMED
FORCES (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%); HAMAS (58%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); PALESTINE
LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (88%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); SYRIA (93%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); TURKEY (79%); LEBANON (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             393 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karadzic Trial Resumes Without Defendant

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


The judges had given Radovan Karadzic an extra 24 hours to come to court, but
when he did not appear on Tuesday they ordered the start of proceedings against
the former Bosnian Serb leader, who faced charges of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and two counts of genocide.

As his blue seat remained empty, the panel of international judges quickly
ordered the prosecution to begin its case and warned once again that Mr.
Karadzic risked losing his right to defend himself.

It was a scene now familiar in modern war crimes cases: a former wartime leader,
often used to wielding absolute power, trying even while imprisoned to dominate
events in court.

Mr. Karadzic's demand for more time to prepare his defense and his refusal to
come to court has reminded observers here of the trials of Saddam Hussein of
Iraq, Charles Taylor of Liberia and Mr. Karadzic's former ally, the Serbian
president Slobodan Milosevic.

''You have accused people with large egos wanting to defend themselves,'' said
Param-Preet Singh, a lawyer for Human Rights Watch. ''Defiant behavior is not
very surprising, although Karadzic had cooperated until now.''

Some lawyers watching the session at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague said
they believed that Mr. Karadzic's boycott of the proceedings was a way to
deflect attention from the atrocities being presented in court.

During Tuesday's session, Alan Tieger, an American lawyer and the lead
prosecutor, frequently used Mr. Karadzic's own hateful speeches and intercepted
phone calls -- full of expletives and threats -- to present the case against
him.

Mr. Karadzic has said his absence from the court is not a boycott. He and his
lawyers say he needs more time to plow through an overwhelming number of
documents, exhibits and videos, and they want at least eight more months to
prepare.

As the judges ordered the trial to proceed on Tuesday, they warned that if Mr.
Karadzic continued to stay away they could assign a team of lawyers to act on
his behalf against his will.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LAWYERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); GENOCIDE (72%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (68%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); IRAQ (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%); LIBERIA (79%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (68%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             394 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 31, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Recall Stalin's Horrors, Medvedev Says

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Russia's president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, warned Friday that Russians had lost
their sense of horror over Stalin's purges, and called for the construction of
museums and memorial centers devoted to the atrocities, as well as further
efforts to unearth and identify the dead.

Mr. Medvedev made the comments on his video blog, on the occasion of a holiday
devoted to the memory of victims of repression. He warned that revisionist
historians risked glossing over the darker passages of the Soviet past, citing a
poll that showed that 90 percent of young people could not name victims of the
purges.

''Even now we can hear voices saying that these numerous deaths were justified
by some supreme goals of the state,'' Mr. Medvedev said. ''Nothing can be valued
above human life, and there is no excuse for repressions.''

Millions of people were killed under Stalin as a result of forced
collectivization, deportation of ethnic groups, imprisonment in the Gulag and
party purges, among other tactics.

Though he reiterated his worry that Russia was demonized in contemporary
histories of World War II, Mr. Medvedev added, ''It is just as important to
prevent the justification, under the pretext of putting historical records
straight, of those who killed their own people.''

Russia's leaders have long sought to shape the teaching of Soviet-era history,
but Mr. Medvedev did something unusual by focusing attention on its crimes.

Under Mr. Medvedev's predecessor, Vladimir V. Putin, Russian opinions of Stalin
became far rosier. Government-endorsed textbooks now balance Stalin's atrocities
with praise for his achievements -- especially victory over Hitler -- and recent
polls show that most Russians believe Stalin did more good than bad. Meanwhile,
leaders have railed against Eastern European historians who paint Soviet forces
as occupiers, and in May Mr. Medvedev created a commission to prevent such
attempts to ''falsify history.''

Arseny Roginsky, chairman of the human rights organization Memorial, said Mr.
Medvedev's speech struck directly at ''the center of the contemporary discussion
of Stalin and Stalinism -- the question about victory and the price of
victory.''

Though Mr. Putin spoke with compassion of Stalin's victims on the same holiday
in 2007, Mr. Medvedev went much further by offering concrete proposals about
museums and the search for mass graves, Mr. Roginsky said.

Whether those proposals are realized ''depends entirely on Mr. Medvedev and the
current authorities,'' he added.

''What we are waiting to see is whether he has the power to realize even part of
our expectations,'' he said. ''I have serious doubts about that. But of course,
I am waiting.''

The president's remarks came as good news to Roman V. Romanov, the deputy
director of the State Museum of the History of the Gulag, a cluster of five
rooms whose entrance is in a courtyard off Petrovka, one of Moscow's most
upscale shopping streets. The signage is so poor, Mr. Romanov complained, ''that
people walk down Petrovka and don't even know we're here,'' and he gently
criticized the exhibits as ''a bit provincial.''

There is, as well, a generational problem. At 27, Mr. Romanov is younger than
his co-workers by 30 or 40 years. When he took the job, he said, people his age
did not understand, and a friend tried to talk him out of it.

''He told me not to do it,'' Mr. Romanov said. ''He said it was too depressing,
and I needed to be more positive. He thought this was all about criminals. I
told him, 'Now I understand I am doing the right thing.' ''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Russians laid flowers at a monument in Moscow on Friday in a
tribute to victims of political repression by the Soviet Union. The monument is
a slab of stone from a Soviet labor camp. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKHAIL
METZEL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRUCTION (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); POLLS & SURVEYS (76%); WORLD WAR II (73%); GENOCIDE (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%);
DEPORTATION (67%); ETHNICITY (53%); ETHNIC GROUPS (53%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (59%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); EUROPE (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (59%)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             397 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Lawyer's Call for a Greater Black Presence in Agencies

BYLINE: By STUART ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; ADVERTISING; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1258 words


THE inability of the advertising industry to fill its desks, cubicles and
offices with a diverse work force is coming under fire again, this time from a
lawyer with a track record of extracting large settlements on behalf of
employees of giant corporations like Coca-Cola, Morgan Stanley and Texaco who
believed they had been the victims of racial discrimination.

The lawyer, Cyrus Mehri,  joined the N.A.A.C.P. at a news conference on Thursday
in Midtown Manhattan to release a report on race and employment in advertising.
The 100-page report, addressing subjects like hiring, compensation, assignments
and promotions, is part of what the N.A.A.C.P. and Mr. Mehri, of the Washington
law firm of Mehri & Skalet, are calling the Madison Avenue Project.

''The N.A.A.C.P. and my firm are joining forces to take on the advertising
industry and end the era of purposeful discrimination,'' Mr. Mehri said.

''Forty-five years after the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, it's still
a closed society,'' he added, where ''favoritism rules and merit is cast
aside.''

The goal of the project is nothing short of finally ending what Mr. Mehri and
the other participants described as decades of systemic and pervasive bias
against agency employees and would-be employees who are black, which they said
makes the ad business far more unfair than most other major American industries.

One way to achieve that would be to enlist agency clients  --  the marketers
that hire Madison Avenue to sell their wares to consumers  --  in the quest for
diversity.

''They will be a very persuasive voice to the advertising industry to change,''
said Angela Ciccolo,  interim general counsel of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People, particularly because many of them have
already diversified their executive suites.

Mr. Mehri shied away from listing legal action as another way for the project to
achieve its goals. He said he preferred a ''collaborative process'' rather than
confrontation.

However, Mr. Mehri said  that industry employees  have already been coming
forward to talk with his firm about ''charges of racial discrimination.''

Blacks remain underrepresented on Madison Avenue, according to the report,
''Research Perspectives on Race and Employment in the Advertising Industry,''
which concluded that only 5.3 percent of managers and professionals at agencies
in 2008 were black.

And those blacks who do manage to land jobs on Madison Avenue are significantly
underpaid, the report said, earning  80 cents for each dollar earned by their
white counterparts.

The economy worsens  the problem, Ms. Ciccolo said, because ''many training,
recruitment and antidiscrimination programs come to a complete halt'' in hard
times.

Even so, ''recession is no excuse for discrimination,'' she added. ''Although
African-Americans have found a place on Pennsylvania Avenue, they must have a
place to work on Madison Avenue.''

The ad industry has been the subject of criticism for the diversity of its
hiring practices since the 1960s. Most recently, the New York City Human Rights
Commission reached settlements in 2006 with nearly a dozen major agencies that
required them to set and meet numerical goals for adding blacks to the ranks of
their creative and managerial staffs.

The involvement of Mr. Mehri, however, has the potential to intensify the
pressure on Madison Avenue because of his success in handling class-action
lawsuits against corporate America as well as the National Football League.

The class-action lawsuit he handled against Coca-Cola, for instance, was settled
for $193 million, along with stipulations for improvements in hiring practices.

And after Mr. Mehri and the lawyer Johnnie L. Cochran Jr.  presented a report on
the lack of opportunities for blacks to become coaches of N.F.L. teams, the
league adopted a rule requiring that at least one member of a minority group be
interviewed for openings.

A sign of how seriously the ad industry is taking the Madison Avenue Project was
the presence at the news conference of Nancy Hill,   chief executive of the
industry's leading trade organization, the American Association of Advertising
Agencies.

Asked after the news conference for her reaction to the report, Ms. Hill said
she wanted to read it first, then added: ''The numbers speak for themselves.
It's disappointing and discouraging. More has to be done.''

Some members of the association also responded to the report.

''Inclusion has been a top priority for us for a number of years now, and we
agree that change can only be achieved through systematically addressing the
company's culture,'' said Heide Gardner,  senior vice president and chief
diversity and inclusion officer at the Interpublic Group of Companies in New
York, which owns agencies like Campbell-Ewald, Deutsch and McCann Erickson
Worldwide.

''We've put in place a wide range of diversity initiatives,'' she added, ''but
we're always open to dialogue with anyone that comes to the table with new
solutions.'' Ms. Gardner, who took her post at Interpublic in 2003, listed
efforts there that include ''linking diversity goals and compensation'' for
senior executives.

Pat Sloan,  a spokeswoman for the Omnicom Group in New York, which owns agencies
like BBDO Worldwide, DDB Worldwide and TBWA Worldwide, said that executives
there wanted ''to go through the report before we comment.''

On Wednesday, the day before the news conference, Omnicom announced the hiring
of its first chief diversity officer, Tiffany R. Warren,  who worked at Arnold
Worldwide in Boston, a Havas agency, as vice president for multicultural
programs and community outreach.

The timing of that announcement came in for some ribbing by Mr. Mehri, who
referred to it as taking place ''between our press advisory and our press
conference.'' (Ms. Warren's hiring was about four months in the making.)

Owen J. Dougherty,  a spokesman for the Grey Group in New York, part of WPP,
referred to his agency's progress in achieving diversity goals as outlined in
April in a preliminary report card from the city human rights commission.  Two
Grey agencies exceeded both sets of goals set for them, he said, and worked hard
to recruit minority candidates for mid-  and senior-level posts.

Another major focus of the report  -- written by Marc Bendick Jr.  and Mary Lou
Egan  of Bendick & Egan Economic Consultants in Washington  -- was to dismiss
the effectiveness of efforts long popular in the ad industry to improve work
force diversity like internships, scholarships and entry-level hiring programs.

''We need to adopt a different approach,'' Mr. Bendick said at the news
conference, ''not on changing the behavior of the African-American applicant but
changing the behavior'' of industry executives.

''The playing field in the industry is not level and has never been level,'' he
added. ''At the current rate of improvement, we're not going to get to equal
representation of African-Americans for another 71 years.''

The most provocative criticism at the news conference of the lack of diversity
at agencies came from Sanford Moore,  an activist and talk-show host who is a
former employee of BBDO. He has worked with city officials to change the
employment practices at New York agencies.

Speaking quietly but forcefully, Mr. Moore took issue with what he called ''the
cotton curtain of discrimination'' as perpetuated by ''the men in the gray
flannel sheets'' and declared that ''it is time for the last corporate bastion
of Jim Crow to fall.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Cyrus Mehri, a lawyer who has sued corporations over racial
discrimination, said that ''favoritism rules and merit is cast aside'' in the
advertising industry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARKETING & ADVERTISING (92%); LABOR FORCE (90%); WORKPLACE DIVERSITY
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); LAWYERS
(89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS
(78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); LEGAL SERVICES (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); LEGISLATION (74%); CORPORATE
COUNSEL (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

COMPANY: COCA-COLA CO (58%); MORGAN STANLEY (58%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (91%)

TICKER: KO (NYSE) (58%); MS (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED
SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (58%); NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (58%);
SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             400 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 15, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Bush Years: Truth and the Law

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 947 words


To the Editor:

In ''History's Verdict'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 11), Charles Fried condemns the Bush
administration's torture and abuse of detainees but cautions against efforts to
prosecute the perpetrators. He urges President-elect Barack Obama to avoid the
''politics of hate and revenge.''

His idiosyncratic survey of international examples cites Zimbabwe, whose
government never prosecuted past abuses, and ignores countries like Argentina,
in which trials of the previous government's crimes strengthened democracy and
reaffirmed the rule of law.

The establishment of the International Criminal Court is part of a clearly
emerging international norm of prosecuting government officials responsible for
serious crimes. To allow impunity in the United States would undermine that
trend and encourage future abuses.

Fair public trials in accordance with established standards of due process would
not be an ''embarrassment,'' as Mr. Fried suggests. Instead, they would be
welcome and salutary proof that senior American officials are not above the law.
Joanne Mariner

New York, Jan. 12, 2009

The writer is the terrorism and counterterrorism program director at Human
Rights Watch.

To the Editor:

Charles Fried should call on President Bush to pardon the court-martialed
soldiers who, while following implicit orders from superiors, engaged in torture
at Abu Ghraib. Otherwise, his arguments are spurious at best.

Herman Kolender

Brooklyn, Jan. 12, 2009

To the Editor:

I take Charles Fried's point that actions by elected or appointed officials
doing their best but unfortunately getting it wrong on our behalf do not compare
with the likes of Stalin, Hitler or Mao.

But what if it was more than that?

To this day, I've never heard an argument for starting the war in Iraq by
President Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney or anyone else in the Bush
administration that is compelling. The claim that Iraq had weapons of mass
destruction was a stretch at the time, and when it was debunked after we
invaded, the administration's spin shifted to arguing that Saddam Hussein was
evil and then to Iraq's subconscious longing for democracy.

I believe that the American people never heard the real reason we went to war in
Iraq, and we may never know it.

But taking us to war and developing the reasons as we went, getting thousands of
Americans and hundreds of thousands of Iraqis killed, all the while torturing
people and throwing them into gulags like Guantanamo Bay sound very similar to
what we didn't like about Stalin and the others.  James P. Pehl

Marlborough, Mass., Jan. 11, 2009

To the Editor:

The Jan. 11 Op-Ed articles in the ''Transitions'' series by Charles Fried
(''History's Verdict''), Dahlia Lithwick (''Forgive Not'') and Jack M. Balkin
(''A Body of Inquiries'') all speak with measured voices around the issue of
culpability for possible crimes committed by those in the Bush administration.

Each misses the biggest reason to pursue accountability: the morale of current
and future career employees of the very agencies so poorly served by most
government officials for most of the last eight years.

For all the fickle revolving-door political appointments that Justice, the
F.B.I., the C.I.A., Homeland Security and other departments have had to endure
at the hands of a do-nothing Congress and a do-too-much executive branch,
nothing so demeans worthy men and women as the abrogation of trust.

People of character will not choose to subject themselves to personal and
professional debasement when they have no faith in the integrity of the offices
we ask them to serve. Incompetence is with us always, and we can generally
survive that. Moral idiocy is another matter.

Contrary to the sentiments of Mr. Fried, good intentions are not nearly enough
to forgive criminality. As James Boswell quotes Samuel Johnson, ''Hell is paved
with good intentions.'' We have all walked down that road too long.

Richard Gonci

Cambridge, Mass., Jan. 13, 2009

To the Editor:

Jack M. Balkin asks, ''Do we punish wrongdoing or discover the truth?'' It
should not be an either-or question. We can both discover the truth and punish
wrongdoing.

If we discover the truth that there was wrongdoing of gigantic proportions by
the Bush administration, and then just proclaim, ''Let bygones be bygones,''
this will do away with the backbone of our law enforcement and judicial systems.

Proven wrongdoers, whatever the altitude of their positions, should be brought
to justice.

Norman Balabanian

Gainesville, Fla., Jan. 11, 2009

To the Editor:

Jack M. Balkin wisely advocates a policy of truth-telling with regard to the
illegalities, corruption and incompetence of the last eight years. In that vein,
he puts forward as a model the successful South African Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, led by Archbishop Desmond Tutu.

But we have an equally successful model right here -- in Greensboro, N.C. There,
such a commission has been at work seeking truth and healing regarding the 1979
Ku Klux Klan killings of peaceful civil rights demonstrators.

We can and should draw on the experience of both to make the coming years a time
of hope and progress.

Chester Hartman

Washington, Jan. 11, 2009

The writer is director of research for the Poverty & Race Research Action
Council.

To the Editor:

Regarding the three ''Transitions'' Op-Ed articles on Jan. 11 about the legal
legacy of the Bush administration's war on terrorism:

Having good intentions is not a legal defense.

If there are no consequences for the Bush administration's breaking of the law,
how can we ever prevent it from happening again?  John Robison

Westfield, N.J., Jan. 12, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY PADDY MOLLOY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); IRAQ WAR (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); VIOLENT CRIME (77%); DUE PROCESS
(76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); TRENDS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); MILITARY OFFENSES (75%); MILITARY COURTS (75%); WRITERS
(73%); TERRORISM (71%); PARDONS (70%); WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (66%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (72%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%); DICK
CHENEY (57%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             403 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Reverses Key Bush Policy, but Questions on Detainees Remain

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE, MARK MAZZETTI and HELENE COOPER; Adam Liptak contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1457 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Obama reversed the most disputed counterterrorism policies of the Bush
administration on Thursday, declaring that ''our ideals give us the strength and
moral high ground'' in the fight against Al Qaeda. But Mr. Obama postponed for
months decisions on complex questions the United States has been grappling with
since the terrorist attacks of 2001.

Mr. Obama signed executive orders closing the detention camp at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, within a year; ending the Central Intelligence Agency's secret prisons;
and requiring all interrogations to follow the noncoercive methods of the Army
Field Manual.

''We intend to win this fight,'' he said. ''We are going to win it on our own
terms.''

His actions on the second full day of his presidency won praise from human
rights groups and Democrats in Congress, who said the new policies would help
restore the United States' moral authority. Mr. Obama invited to the signing
ceremony 16 retired generals and admirals who had spoken out against what they
called torture. Their passionate appeal to end harsh interrogations ''made an
extraordinary impression on me,'' he said.

Mr. Obama's orders struck a powerful new tone and represented an important first
step toward rewriting American rules for dealing with terrorism suspects. But
only his decision to halt for now the military trials under way at Guantanamo
Bay seemed likely to have immediate practical significance, with other critical
policy choices to be resolved by task forces set up within the administration.

Among the questions that the White House did not resolve on Thursday were these:
What should be done with terrorists who cannot be tried in American courts,
either because evidence against them was obtained by torture or because
intelligence is too sensitive to use in court? Should some interrogation methods
remain secret to keep Al Qaeda from training to resist them? How can the United
States make sure prisoners transferred to other countries will not be tortured?

Members of Mr. Obama's national security team have expressed a wide variety of
views on interrogation and detention policy, and there is likely to be robust
internal debate before the questions are resolved.

John D. Hutson, a retired admiral and law school dean who attended the signing
ceremony, said he had confidence that the Obama administration would come up
with thoughtful, practical answers to such questions.

Closing the Guantanamo prison and banning coercive interrogation ''is the right
thing to do morally, diplomatically, militarily and constitutionally,'' Mr.
Hutson said, ''but it also makes us safer.''

Mr. Obama, he added, ''really gets it.''

But Representative Peter Hoekstra of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the
House Intelligence Committee, said the decision to close the prison within a
year ''places hope ahead of reality -- it sets an objective without a plan to
get there.''

In offering a warning that was also sounded by other Republicans, Mr. Hoekstra
noted that in briefings for Congress, administration officials ''could not
answer questions as to what they will do with any new jihadists or enemy
combatants that we capture.''

Veterans of Foreign Wars, the influential veterans' advocacy group, said in a
statement that it was ''not prudent'' to close the Guantanamo prison while the
nation remained at war. Glen M. Gardner Jr., a Vietnam veteran and the group's
national commander, said the camp in Cuba ''keeps our enemies off the
battlefield'' and called it ''professionally run and respectful of human rights.
''

Mr. Obama's order closing the prison assigns the attorney general to lead a
review of what should happen to the remaining 245 detainees there and does not
rule out the possibility of trying some using military commissions, as the Bush
administration had begun to do, though possibly with different procedures.

One new task force, headed by the attorney general and the secretary of defense,
will study detainee policy and report to the president in six months. A second,
led by the attorney general, and with the secretary of defense and director of
national intelligence as vice co-chairmen, will study whether the Army Field
Manual should remain the only standard for interrogators and review the practice
of extraordinary rendition, in which captured terrorism suspects are transferred
to other countries.

In a separate directive, Mr. Obama asked for a high-level review of the case of
Ali al-Marri -- Mr. Obama called him ''clearly a dangerous individual'' -- who
is being held without charges as an ''enemy combatant'' in a military jail in
South Carolina. The Justice Department asked the Supreme Court for a 30-day stay
in Mr. Marri's civil case challenging his detention until the new administration
decided on its position.

Mr. Obama sought otherwise to send a signal to the world that he was breaking
with Bush administration policies, which he often called wrong and
counterproductive during his presidential campaign. In one move, he ordered his
government not to rely on any legal opinions concerning interrogation produced
by the Justice Department or other agencies between Sept. 11, 2001, and Tuesday,
when he assumed the presidency.

''We believe we can abide by a rule that says, We don't torture, but we can
effectively obtain the intelligence we need,'' Mr. Obama said in his televised
statement.

The immediate practical impact of the orders was limited, in part because the
most aggressive Bush policies were scaled back long ago. Military interrogators
have been required by law to abide by the Army Field Manual since 2005, and
since 2003 the C.I.A. has not used waterboarding, the near-drowning technique
described as torture by Mr. Obama's choice as attorney general, Eric H. Holder
Jr. Only a handful of prisoners have passed through the C.I.A.'s secret overseas
detention program since 2005.

As the new executive orders were being signed, Mr. Obama's choice to become
director of national intelligence faced questions from a Senate panel about
whether the administration might create a loophole giving more latitude to
C.I.A. interrogators.

Dennis C. Blair, a retired admiral and former C.I.A. official who is expected to
be easily confirmed as the intelligence director by the Senate Intelligence
Committee, insisted that military and intelligence interrogators would follow
the same rules, but he left open the possibility that techniques beyond the 19
currently approved for military interrogators could be authorized.

Mr. Blair also suggested that some interrogation procedures would need to remain
secret so potential adversaries could not train to resist them.

''We don't want to provide open intelligence support for those who are coming
after us,'' he told members of the Intelligence Committee.

The response puzzled some Democratic senators, who long have maintained that
secret interrogation rules only raise suspicions that the United States might be
abusing prisoners.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California and chairwoman of the
committee, said that despite the executive orders she still planned to press for
legislation mandating a single standard for military and C.I.A. interrogators.
Such a law would be harder to reverse than Mr. Obama's executive order, which he
could alter or cancel at any time by issuing a new order.

''I think that ultimately the government is well served by codifying it, by
having it in law,'' Mrs. Feinstein said.

Some liberal groups, while praising the Obama orders,said they supported
legislation like Mrs. Feinstein's because they were concerned about what his
task forces might propose. They also said they would continue to press for a
full investigation of detention and interrogation programs under President
George W. Bush.

The National Religious Campaign Against Torture, a coalition of 240 religious
groups, said that Mr. Obama's statement ''allowed the United States to again
find its moral bearing,'' but added that it was concerned that the panel on
interrogation might allow the C.I.A. to resume using abusive methods.

Geneve Mantri, who tracks counterterrorism programs at Amnesty International,
called the orders ''a giant leap forward'' but added, ''We view with concern
some of the outstanding questions.''

Mr. Obama's moves drew praise from a former Bush administration official, John
B. Bellinger III, who was the top legal adviser in  that administration's
National Security Council and State Department. Mr. Bellinger said executive
orders were ''measured and do not take any rash actions.''

''Although the Gitmo order is primarily symbolic,'' he said, ''it is very
important. It accomplishes what we could never accomplish during the Bush
administration.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama was joined by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
and 16 retired generals and admirals in the Oval Office as he signed the
executive orders.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); US PRESIDENTS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (89%); PRISONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(77%); CLOSINGS (76%); ARMIES (76%); MILITARY COURTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); LAWYERS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); PETER HOEKSTRA (58%); JOE BIDEN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             408 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

How '07 ABC Interview Tilted a Torture Debate

BYLINE: By BRIAN STELTER; Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1202 words


In late 2007, there was the first crack of daylight into the government's use of
waterboarding during interrogations of Al Qaeda detainees. On Dec. 10, John
Kiriakou, a former C.I.A. officer who had participated in the capture of the
suspected terrorist Abu Zubaydah in Pakistan in 2002, appeared on ABC News to
say that while he considered waterboarding a form of torture, the technique
worked and yielded results very quickly.

Mr. Zubaydah started to cooperate after being waterboarded for ''probably 30, 35
seconds,'' Mr. Kiriakou told the ABC reporter Brian Ross. ''From that day on he
answered every question.''

His claims -- unverified at the time, but repeated by dozens of broadcasts,
blogs and newspapers -- have been sharply contradicted by a newly declassified
Justice Department memo that said waterboarding had been used on Mr. Zubaydah
''at least 83 times.''

Some critics say that the now-discredited information shared by Mr. Kiriakou and
other sources heightened the public perception of waterboarding as an effective
interrogation technique. ''I think it was sanitized by the way it was
described'' in press accounts, said John Sifton, a former lawyer for Human
Rights Watch, an advocacy group.

During the heated debate in 2007 over the use of waterboarding and other
techniques, Mr. Kiriakou's comments quickly ricocheted around the media. But
lost in much of the coverage was the fact that Mr. Kiriakou had no firsthand
knowledge of the waterboarding: He was not actually in the secret prison in
Thailand where Mr. Zubaydah had been interrogated but in the C.I.A. headquarters
in Northern Virginia. He learned about it only by reading accounts from the
field.

On ''World News,'' ABC included only a caveat that Mr. Kiriakou himself ''never
carried out any of the waterboarding.'' Still, he told ABC that the actions had
''disrupted a number of attacks, maybe dozens of attacks.'' A video of the
interview was no longer on ABC's website.

''It works, is the bottom line,'' Rush Limbaugh exclaimed on his radio show the
next day. ''Thirty to 35 seconds, and it works.''

Mr. Kiriakou subsequently granted interviews to The Washington Post, The New
York Times, National Public Radio, CBS, CNN, MSNBC and other media
organizations. A CNN anchor called him ''the man of the hour.''

Eight months after the interview, Mr. Kiriakou was hired as a paid consultant
for ABC News. He resigned last month and now works for the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations.

His ABC interview came at an especially delicate juncture in the debate over the
use of torture. Weeks earlier, the nomination of Michael Mukasey as attorney
general was nearly derailed by his refusal to comment on the legality of
waterboarding, and one day later, the C.I.A. director testified about the
destruction of interrogation videotapes. Mr. Kiriakou told MSNBC that he was
willing to talk in part because he thought the C.I.A. had ''gotten a bum rap on
waterboarding.''

At the time, Mr. Kiriakou appeared to lend credibility to the prior press
reports that quoted anonymous former government employees who had implied that
waterboarding was used sparingly. In late 2007, Mr. Ross began pursuing Mr.
Kiriakou for an interview, ''leaning on him pretty hard,'' he recounted.

On Dec. 10, in the subsequent interview, Mr. Kiriakou told Mr. Ross that he
believed the waterboarding was necessary in the months after the 9/11 attacks.
''At the time I was so angry,'' he told Mr. Ross. ''I wanted so much to help
disrupt future attacks on the United States that I felt it was the only thing we
could do.''

Mr. Kiriakou was the only on-the-record source cited by ABC. In the televised
portion of the interview, Mr. Ross did not ask Mr. Kiriakou specifically about
what kind of reports he was privy to or how long he had access to the
information. ''It didn't even occur to me that they'd keep doing'' the
waterboarding, Mr. Ross said last week. ''It doesn't make any sense to me.''

He added, ''I didn't give enough credit to the fiendishness of the C.I.A.''

Mr. Kiriakou refused an interview request last week. In a statement to ABC, he
said he was aware only of Mr. Zubaydah's being waterboarded ''on one occasion.''

The C.I.A., which considered legal action against Mr. Kiriakou for divulging
classified information, said last week that he ''was not -- and is not --
authorized to speak on behalf of the CIA.''

Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman, said: ''This agency did not publicly
disclose the frequency with which the waterboard was used, noting only that it
was employed with three detainees. If reporters got that wrong, they weren't
misled from here.''

In the days after Mr. Kiriakou's media blitz, his claims were repeated by an
array of other outlets. For instance, the Fox News anchor Chris Wallace cited
the 35 seconds claim to ask a congressman whether the interrogation program was
''really so bad.''

Months later the claims continued to be amplified; the National Review editor
Jonah Goldberg used Mr. Kiriakou's assertions in a column last year to argue
that the waterboarding was ''right and certainly defensible.''

Mark Danner, a journalist who has written extensively about the covert program
for The New York Review of Books, said the news reports had fed the idea that
brutal interrogations could instantly glean information about terrorist plans.

''There was a completely mistaken impression put about that this technique was
not cruel because it could break detainees so quickly,'' he said.

(An article in The New York Times on Dec. 13, 2007 described his comments to ABC
and added a quotation from Mr. Kiriakou: ''I think the second-guessing of 2002
decisions is unfair. What I think is fair is having a national debate over
whether we should be waterboarding.'')

When Mr. Kiriakou was later hired by ABC to provide commentary on terrorism
cases, Mr. Ross said that network officials had been concerned about the
appearance of a tie between the interview and the job. For that reason, ''I felt
that we should sort of wait,'' he said. ''I didn't want anyone to think that he
was promised something for the interview. He was not.''

Mr. Ross, who received a George Polk Award for a series on interrogation,
expressed no regret about the Kiriakou interview and praised him for speaking
publicly. He said ABC was preparing a story that would address the previous
reporting.

''Kiriakou stepped up and helped shine some light on what has happening,'' Mr.
Ross said. ''It wasn't the huge spotlight that was needed, but it was some
light.''

As talk continues about possible prosecutions of people involved in the
interrogations, waterboarding is once again a hot topic. Last week, Sean
Hannity, a conservative Fox News host, said he would agree to be waterboarded
(for charity) when a guest proposed that he experience it.

But the recent Justice Department memo has led some commentators to revisit
their earlier impressions about the technique.

''I've always been on the fence about whether waterboarding constituted
torture,'' Mr. Goldberg of the National Review wrote last week, but if the
figures are true, ''then I think the threshold has been met.''

He added: ''Debating whether it was worth it still seems open to debate,
depending on the facts.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: John Kiriakou is a former C.I.A. officer.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABC)
(A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
AL-QAEDA (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (78%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (74%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (74%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); LAWYERS (71%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (69%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(65%); PUBLIC RADIO (60%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (50%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (51%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (51%); NATIONAL PUBLIC
RADIO INC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (51%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (51%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (51%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (51%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (51%); NAICS515111 RADIO NETWORKS (51%); SIC4832 RADIO
BROADCASTING STATIONS (51%)

PERSON: MICHAEL MUKASEY (58%); RUSH LIMBAUGH (50%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); THAILAND (54%)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             415 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

U.N.'s Gaza Refugee Director Criticizes Israel and Hamas

BYLINE: By NEIL MACFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


John Ging, the director of operations for the United Nations refugee agency in
Gaza, said Thursday that Israel's blockade was creating growing misery there by
choking off basic humanitarian supplies like food, medicine, clothes and
blankets as well as school supplies.

He also criticized the leadership of Hamas for letting its police force run
wild, attacking a distribution center for the needy to cart off supplies.

''We are neither getting in the volume nor the range of supplies that we need
here,'' Mr. Ging told reporters at the United Nations, speaking via video
link-up from Gaza. ''This is creating a lot of misery among the people.''

In one example, Mr. Ging said that the teachers in the schools run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency had worked throughout the three-week Israeli
bombardment that ended Jan. 18 to create a new human rights curriculum. But
because Israel was blocking paper supplies, the textbooks and workbooks could
not be printed, so some 60 percent of the children in United Nations schools
lack books.

The human rights curriculum was designed to combat extremism, he said, a growing
problem in the wake of the Israeli bombardment. Ordinary Gazans are particularly
frustrated, he said, because they have seen news reports about generous
donations from around the world stuck just outside the enclave. It is premature
to talk about Gaza's reconstruction until the issue of access for basic
humanitarian supplies is fixed, Mr. Ging said.

Israel has maintained a strict blockade of Gaza since Hamas took power there in
a brief civil war with its secular rival, Fatah, in June 2007.

As to Hamas, Mr. Ging called on its leadership to rein in its rank and file
after armed policemen looted blankets and food from a United Nations compound.
While senior Hamas leaders remained in hiding, ''those above the ground seem
bent on acting in a reckless manner,'' he said. It was the first such incident,
he said, and the agency will halt all distributions if it continues.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); AL FATAH (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
TEXTBOOKS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); DISTRIBUTION
CENTERS (71%); POLICE FORCES (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HAMAS (91%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (91%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             416 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinians Press International Court for Inquiry on Possible Gaza War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


The Palestinian Authority is pressing the International Criminal Court in The
Hague to investigate accusations of war crimes committed by Israeli commanders
during the recent war in Gaza.

The Palestinian minister of justice, Ali Kashan, first raised the issue during a
visit to the court's chief prosecutor late last month, and he and other
officials are due back again in The Hague this week, court officials said.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor, had initially said he lacked the legal basis
to examine the case. But since the Palestinian Authority signed a commitment on
Jan. 22 recognizing the court's authority, the prosecutor has appeared more open
to studying the Palestinian claim.

''The prosecutor has agreed to explore if he could have jurisdiction in the
case,'' said Beatrice Le Fraper, the director of jurisdiction for the
prosecution. She cautioned that accepting jurisdiction would not automatically
set off a criminal investigation. ''We are still very far from any decision;
this is just the beginning of a long process,'' she said.

The prosecutor has received more than 200 requests to look into allegations of
war crimes during the recent fighting between Israel and Hamas militants. They
include accusations from individuals and organizations that Israel violated the
rules of war by singling out civilians and nonmilitary buildings, and by using
weapons like white phosphorus illegally.

''Quite a few groups have sent experts to the region, people doing forensic
work, studying explosives and other weapons,'' she said. ''The prosecutor can
look at all open sources at this stage.''

Should a criminal investigation begin, the prosecution would send its own
investigators, who would look into possible violations by both sides. Hamas's
practice of sending rockets into southern Israel, which often landed in civilian
areas, might be viewed as a violation. Israeli officials justified their
offensive by saying they were trying to stop the rocket attacks.

But even as envisioned by the Palestinian Authority, the case faces numerous
hurdles, specialists say.

The court here is the world's first permanent international criminal court,
created to examine war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. It can
prosecute any citizen from the 108 countries that are currently members of the
court. Individuals, governments, the United Nations Security Council or the
prosecutor can initiate cases.

Israel is not a member of the court, and the Palestinian territories, not being
recognized as a sovereign nation, appear not to fulfill the requirements. But as
a remedy, the Palestinian Authority has taken a first step by presenting a
declaration to the court, formally accepting jurisdiction for ''an indeterminate
duration'' over acts ''committed on the territory of Palestine'' since July 1,
2002, when the court's authority began.

Lawyers say such a declaration allows for joining the court on an ad hoc basis,
and has been allowed before, in the case of Sierra Leone, which is not a member.
But while the Palestinian declaration has been recorded at the court, its
validity is far from settled. The big question, lawyers at the court say, is
whether the Palestinian Authority can grant jurisdiction in any form, and if so,
how that will be defined.

The issue has raised the question of whether Palestinian officials hope to
obtain an implicit recognition of statehood through the court.

The court ''will not use the term statehood,'' said a legal expert close to the
case who spoke on condition of anonymity because the issue was still being
decided. ''The court will avoid defining whether Palestine is a state. The
decision will be only if Palestine can be admitted for the purposes of the court
statute.''

The Palestinian officials visiting The Hague in the coming days are expected to
try to demonstrate that they have been allowed to sign other international
treaties and conventions, and can therefore be accepted as a party to the 1998
Rome treaty that founded the court.

Ms. Le Fraper, the director of jurisdiction, said her office would call on
international experts to help settle such questions.

Another unknown is whether the Palestinian Authority can bring a case involving
jurisdiction in Gaza. The authority is run by Fatah, but its rival faction,
Hamas, has declared itself the only authority in Gaza and ousted Fatah from the
territory.

More than 1,300 Palestinians died in the recent war in Gaza, many of them women
and children. Israeli officials have insisted that Israel respected
international law during the fighting. Israel has also said that it will
investigate its attacks on United Nations schools and headquarters and the use
of unlawful weapons in urban areas, including the use of white phosphorus.

Human rights groups and a number of United Nations officials have called for an
independent international inquiry into actions by both sides. Human Rights Watch
said such an independent effort was essential because of ''Israel's poor record
of investigating and prosecuting serious violations by its forces, and the
absence of any such effort by Hamas or other Palestinian groups.''

Western politicians and other critics of Israel's recent conduct in Gaza have
also said that Hamas has violated the rules of war and committed war crimes with
indiscriminate rocket attacks on Israeli civilians and the use of its own
civilians as human shields.

Depending on what happens at the court, Hamas's rocket attacks and other acts
viewed by some as crimes could also become part of any criminal investigation.
By accepting the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court on its
territory, the Palestinian Authority has also accepted jurisdiction over any war
crimes by its own residents.

''That's the way jurisdiction works,'' said a court lawyer. ''The Palestinians
know that and have taken that risk.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A mosque in El Atatra, Gaza, that was destroyed by the Israeli
military. Israel said the mosque had been used by militants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); JURISDICTION
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HAMAS (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); BOMBINGS
(78%); LAWYERS (75%); FORENSICS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); HAMAS (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); NETHERLANDS (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             418 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Near Sri Lanka's War Zone, Wounded Civilians Struggle to Cope

BYLINE: By THOMAS FULLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: TRINCOMALEE, Sri Lanka


The ravages of Sri Lanka's civil war were on full display on Thursday in the
crowded wards of the municipal hospital in this eastern port city, 40 miles from
the front line. Catholic nuns with bullet and shrapnel wounds, infants as young
as a week old, and men with amputated legs were arrayed on beds or lay on the
floor.

A total of 368 injured civilians were being treated in the hospital, and more
were on the way. A boatload of 160 patients chartered by the Red Cross was
scheduled to dock here late on Thursday.

''We don't know what happened to our family,'' said Mohan Raj, 22, whose arm was
shattered by shelling on Feb. 8. ''I don't know who attacked us,'' he said. His
mother and two siblings disappeared after a loud explosion, he said. His father
stood at his bedside on the verge of tears.

The Sri Lankan government has barred reporters and most foreigners from the
conflict zone, so the accounts of the injured here in government-controlled
territory provided a rare glimpse into the predicament of at least 100,000
civilians trapped behind the front lines.

After intense fighting over the past several weeks, government troops have
cornered separatist rebels from the minority Tamil ethnic group on a narrow
strip of land in the northeastern corner of the country.

S. G. Muhunthan, chairman of the Trincomalee municipal council, estimated that
as many as 350,000 civilians could be trapped in the war zone. ''They have been
squeezed by both sides,'' he said. Human rights organizations put the number at
around 200,000; the government says the figure is half that.

Mr. Muhunthan is bracing for an influx of wounded civilians.

''A lot more people are expected to come,'' he said. ''We can't say how many.
But a lot.''

Crossing over to government-controlled territory exposes civilians to gunfire
and shelling. The jungles are mined in many areas; on Monday, at least eight
civilians seeking to reach the government side were killed when a woman exploded
her bomb-laden vest at a checkpoint.

Patients said the Tamil Tigers, who are formally known as the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam, tried to bar civilians from leaving the war zone. That is
consistent with United Nations accusations that the Tamil Tigers have refused to
let some of its staff members  leave the conflict area.

People here appeared to have wounds inflicted by both the government and the
Tigers.

The wife and child of Sellathora Thavakumar, 22, were killed by bombs from what
he said was a Sri Lankan Air Force jet. Mr. Thavakumar's leg was cracked in half
by the blast -- an X-ray at his bedside showed his femur in two pieces. He
answered a question about his leg by unraveling a ball of gauze he kept by his
bedside and showing a reporter the large bomb fragment removed from his leg.

A Catholic nun interviewed by Reuters  said she was shot in the leg by Tamil
Tiger rebels when she was trying to escape with civilians.

Another nun, Sister Mary Colostica, said the rebels fought in close quarters
with civilians despite their objections.

''At least 10 to 15 people die a day, and no one is there to bury them,'' she
told Reuters.

The army has tried to block access to refugees in camps and the wounded at
hospitals. Officials reluctantly allowed this reporter access to the hospital,
which is heavily guarded by the police, on condition that he not take photos or
video.

Patients arrived here after being transferred Tuesday from a field hospital
close to the fighting.

''All the wounds were infected,'' said one doctor, who declined to be identified
because he was not authorized to talk to a reporter.

The government, which has rejected calls by foreign governments for a
cease-fire, said Thursday that it had set up a seven-mile no-fire zone along the
coast to help channel ''humanitarian aid and medical supplies for the people
stranded.'' The new zone replaces a similar zone farther inland.

The government also said its troops advanced farther into rebel territory on
Thursday, capturing a facility that it described as a factory that made roadside
bombs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In the town of Vavuniya on Thursday, ethnic Tamils in Sri Lanka
buried relatives who were killed by Tamil Tiger rebels while trying to escape
rebel-held territory.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 The names of the wounded were listed in Trincomalee.(PHOTOGRAPH BY THOMAS
FULLER/I.H.T.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (93%); CIVIL WAR (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); AIR FORCES (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); SHOOTINGS (77%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%); DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUPS (72%); ETHNIC GROUPS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (50%); ETHNICITY (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (59%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             431 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 19, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Prison of Words

BYLINE: By NOAH FELDMAN.

Noah Feldman is a law professor at Harvard, a fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations and a contributing writer to The Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: Cambridge, Mass.


HAS the Obama administration changed the legal rules for detaining suspects in
the war on terrorism, or is it continuing in the footsteps of the Bush
administration?

We got a clue last week when the Justice Department filed an important document
''refining'' the government's position in lawsuits over those held at Guantanamo
Bay. Hailed by supporters as a leap forward, yet criticized by human rights
groups as being little different from what came before, the filing reveals a
distinctive approach to constitutional law. Cautious and modest where George W.
Bush was ambitious and brash, Mr. Obama still claims the authority necessary to
sustain almost everything his predecessor did.

Perhaps what's most important here is what Mr. Obama's lawyers do not say. The
Bush White House long insisted that the president had inherent power as
commander in chief to do whatever it took to defend the country -- including
overriding American and international law. The Obama filing, however, is silent
on the topic of inherent executive power. Indeed, the magic words ''commander in
chief'' never even appear.

Technically, the Obama lawyers have not abandoned the argument for broad
presidential power,  just implied that such authority is unnecessary to get them
what they want.

Yet omitting the claim to unfettered executive authority shows  respect for
Congress and international standards. In effect, the Obama administration is
saying to the courts that if the detainees cannot be held as a matter of federal
or international law, judges should release them. This approach is brave -- so
brave it might even prove foolhardy if the courts, sick of nearly a decade of
detention, decide to clear the decks.

The filing argues that the authorization for the use of military force passed by
Congress after 9/11 -- the contemporary equivalent of a declaration of war --
gives the president the powers any sovereign would have under the general
principles of the international law of war. Relying on international law to make
sense of Congress's grant of power has deep roots in our constitutional
tradition.

In the context of America's present global military posture, however,  the
rediscovery of this notion is little short of astonishing. The laws of war,
mostly designed for old-fashioned struggles between sovereign states, often do
not fit today's circumstances. The Bush administration saw this mismatch as an
occasion to treat the Geneva conventions as ''quaint'' (in the words of Alberto
Gonzales, the former White House counsel).

The Obama lawyers, however, seem to believe that the international law of war is
flexible enough to serve their interests -- and even to expand the president's
power to detain suspects beyond the strict language used by Congress when it
gave President Bush authority to carry out his war on terrorism.

Here is where the law gets complicated: In 2001, Congress told the president he
could make war on anyone who had ''planned, authorized, committed or aided'' the
Sept. 11 attacks. The Bush administration, though, went further; it claimed the
power to detain any ''enemy combatant,'' defined to include ''anyone who is part
of or supporting Taliban or Al Qaeda forces or associated forces.'' In an
unfortunate legal overreach, one administration lawyer said the government
could detain a ''little old lady in Switzerland'' whose donation to an Afghan
orphanage ended up in the hands of Al Qaeda.

In place of the ''enemy combatant'' definition, the Obama administration now
claims the right to detain anyone who ''substantially supported'' terrorists.
Thankfully, the Obama standard would free the little old Swiss lady. But the
words ''substantial support'' do not come from international law any more than
Bush's ''enemy combatant'' did.

The administration lawyers suggest in their brief that ''substantial support''
of terrorists could be defined by some unspecified analogy to the laws of
detention in traditional armed conflict. Yet the details are left to the
imagination; and when push comes to shove, this language might well include all
the Guantanamo detainees, including those who never belonged to a terrorist
group.

The upshot is that the Obama approach is potentially broad enough to continue
detaining everyone whom the Bush administration put in Guantanamo in the first
place. The legal theories are subtler, and the reliance on international law may
prove more attractive to our allies. But President Obama is stuck with the
detainees Mr. Bush left him, and some may pose a real danger. Faced with this
conundrum, and pressed for answers by judges who are rightfully impatient, the
administration is hurrying to reframe existing powers in new legal doctrines.

The true test of whether Mr. Obama has improved on the Bush era lies in how his
administration justifies its decisions on the 241 remaining Guantanamo
detainees, whose cases will now be evaluated internally and reviewed by the
courts. If the new legal arguments actually affect who goes free and who stays
in custody, then they will amount to meaningful change. Without real-world
effects, though, even the most elegant new legal arguments are nothing but
words.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY GRAY318)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); LAW OF WAR (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAWYERS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%);
LITIGATION (77%); ARMED FORCES (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); JUDGES (72%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             434 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Build a Strong Afghan Judicial System

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 211 words


To the Editor:

Re ''How to Surge the Taliban,'' by Max Boot, Frederick Kagan and Kimberly Kagan
(Op-Ed, March 13):

Expanding American detention authority in Afghanistan would be counterproductive
in neutralizing the Taliban's recruiting efforts. Historically, overly broad
detention policies have only bred enemies within the communities whose
cooperation we seek.

Instead, the international community should invest its resources in building a
strong and effective Afghan judicial system. A system capable of prosecuting
insurgents under fair trial standards would reduce the risk of having to release
people because of the inadequacy of the evidence.

Toward this end, the United States should train military personnel in
evidence-collection techniques, as it did in Iraq. Such measures would guard
against the detention of innocent people and provide a firmer legal ground for
detention and prosecution.

It's time to ensure that detention practices comply with our international legal
obligations and deny our enemies any further reasons to expand their support
base.

Sahr MuhammedAlly  New York, March 13, 2009

The writer, a senior associate at Human Rights First, is the author of a report
about the trials of Bagram and Guantanamo detainees in Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); ARMED FORCES (53%); RESEARCH
REPORTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (90%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             440 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Help for Torture Victims

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 208 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Foreign Ways and War Scars Test Hospital'' (''Remade in America'' series,
front page, March 29):

Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis is to be commended for generous,
comprehensive and sensitive treatment of its immigrant neighbors.

Unfortunately, for other immigrants who have experienced the horrific physical
and emotional suffering of torture, health care remains out of reach. Many of
the 500,000 torture survivors estimated to be in the United States are not here
legally, or are in the midst of applying for asylum.

An increasing number of asylum applicants are held in detention centers, a
confinement that places them even further from much-needed care.

For these immigrants, the first health intervention they require is a doctor to
document physical and emotional scars left by torture, corroborate their claims,
and get them out of detention and into a caring community like the one in
Hennepin County.

To address the health needs of these immigrants, we must improve access to care
-- beginning in detention, during the asylum process and after.

Tom Dougherty  New York, March 31, 2009

The writer is executive director of HealthRight International, a global health
and human rights organization.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (91%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (76%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(71%)

CITY: MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (90%)

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             443 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 9, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Young Cambodians Are Oblivious of Khmer Rouge Horrors

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1116 words

DATELINE: TRAPAENG SVA, Cambodia


Sum Touch has stopped trying to tell her grandchildren about the killings,
starvation and terror she lived through when a Communist Khmer Rouge regime
ravaged Cambodia 30 years ago.

''It seems that even if I tell them they don't believe what I say,'' said Mrs.
Sum Touch, 71, who lost many members of her family. ''It hurts my heart that
they don't know what happened.''

There is a former killing field nearby and a shed filled with the skulls and
bones of some of the victims. But many of the young people here, it seems, have
no idea why or how they got there.

As it struggles to leave its past behind, Cambodia today suffers from a
particularly painful generation gap: those who survived the brutal Khmer Rouge
regime, and their children and grandchildren, who know very little about it.

''I don't like it, but what can you do?'' said Ty Leap, 52, who sells noodles
and fruit drinks from a roadside stall. ''It really is unbelievable that those
things happened.''

For nearly four years, from 1975 to 1979, the Khmer Rouge caused the deaths of
1.7 million people from starvation, overwork and disease as well as torture and
execution as they tried to construct a harsh peasant utopia.

Almost everyone here of a certain age has stories to tell of terror, abuse,
hunger and the loss of family members. But those stories often fall on the deaf
ears of a new generation that either cannot conceive of such brutality or seems
unwilling to learn about it.

''Some older people get so upset at their children for not believing that they
say, 'I wish the Khmer Rouge time would happen again; then you'd believe it,' ''
Mr. Ty Leap said.

As much as 70 percent of Cambodia's population is under the age of 30, and four
out of five members of this young generation know little or nothing about the
Khmer Rouge years, according to a survey last fall by the Human Rights Center at
the University of California, Berkeley.

That ignorance -- among both young and older -- seems also to embrace the trials
of five major Khmer Rouge figures that began last month, a process that is
meant, in part, to begin a process of healing and closure.

Parts of the trial sessions are being broadcast, and newspapers are carrying
reports, but even in this village at the edge of a former killing field 25 miles
south of the capital, Phnom Penh, many people said they were not aware that they
were under way.

''I miss some programs so I don't know about that,'' said Khieu Hong, 36, who
was listening to a small transistor radio. ''If you want to know about the
trials you should ask the police or the old people.''

Hun Ret, 36, a cattle trader who lives nearby, said he strongly supported a
trial in order to punish Khmer Rouge perpetrators. But he was surprised when he
was told that the trial had already started.

Again the Berkeley study seemed to support the perception of widespread
ignorance. It found that only 15 percent of the people it surveyed said they
knew much at all about the trials, although that number is likely to have risen
since the hearings began. The study was based on personal interviews with 1,000
people during the last three weeks of September.

Beyond the question of age, ignorance about the past appears to be a combination
of culture and policy and perhaps also the passivity of a people too exhausted
by history to confront its traumas.

The trials are being held under pressure from the United Nations and Western
governments in a nation that might have preferred the approach of its prime
minister, Hun Sen, who once proposed that Cambodia ''dig a hole and bury the
past.''

Mr. Hun Sen was a mid-level Khmer Rouge commander, though there is apparently no
evidence that he committed major crimes. Several ranking members of his ruling
party and the military are also former members of Khmer Rouge.

Because of these cross-currents in recent Cambodian history, the Khmer Rouge
period has not been taught in school, causing some teachers who are survivors to
feel orphaned by their students.

A new high school text book that discusses the Khmer Rouge years has been
prepared, but it will reach only a portion of the country's students.

''I talk to them, but they don't always believe what I tell them,'' said Kann
Sunthara, 57, a chemistry teacher. ''My father and husband and brother and
sisters and many others died. Sometimes when I'm telling about them I have to
turn my back and cry.''

Another teacher, Eam Mary, 41, who was severely tortured as a boy under the
Khmer Rouge, said he can only catch the attention of his class when he tells
weird stories, like the times he was forced by hunger to eat baby mice or
lizards or worse.

''They say 'Ew, disgusting!' '' he said. ''And at the same time some of the kids
in the back of the class are playing and not paying attention.''

The generation gap seems evident here at the former killing field where dozens
of skulls and bones have been preserved in a makeshift memorial -- one of
hundreds around the country -- as evidence that the massacres really did happen.

Some older people say they still hear the cries of wandering ghosts whose bodies
have not been properly laid to rest.

''They come out at night and frighten people,'' said Mr. Khieu Hong, the man
with the radio. ''They cry 'Whoo, whoo!' It sounds like somebody is being
tortured and crying out.''

But the children who graze cattle nearby seem deaf to the moans of ghosts.

For some of them, the bones are playthings. Sometimes they stick their fingers
into the eyes of the skulls, like bowling balls. Sometimes they put them on
their heads like scary caps, the children say. Sometimes they kick them.

But they seemed confused when they were asked whose skulls these were.

''They are the skulls of ghosts!'' said Prok Poeuv, 11, standing near the small
stupa that houses the bones. But he said he did not know whose ghosts these
were, and he said he had never heard of the Khmer Rouge.

Sok Dane, 12, said she knew a little more. ''My grandmother tells me that in the
Khmer Rouge time some people hit other people,'' she said. But that was all she
knew, and the meaning of ''Khmer Rouge time'' was unclear to her.

Chhun Sam Ath 42, a mother of six who lives in a shanty beside the collection of
skulls, is one of the better informed villagers. She has a glossy handout about
the tribunal although she does not read very well.

She said some children here, deep in their souls, may know more about the past
than they seem to.

''I think some of my children are reborn from the victims in the killing
field,'' she said. ''When people come and leave offerings for the skulls, my
daughter always runs to get the food, as if they were bringing it for her.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: So Mei, 5, and So Sei, 12, at the Tuol Sleng Museum in Phnom
Penh. A survey found that few Cambodians under 30 were aware of the current
Khmer Rouge trials. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARANTXA CEDILLO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAP:
Children play in the killing field near Trapaeng Sva.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STARVATION (90%); GRANDCHILDREN (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (76%); POPULATION SIZE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); TORTURE (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); FRUIT & JUICE DRINKS
(52%); BEVERAGE PRODUCTS (52%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (72%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (72%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%); UNITED STATES (72%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             444 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 10, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. to Close Secret Overseas Prisons for Terrorism Suspects

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Central Intelligence Agency said Thursday that it would decommission the
secret overseas prisons where it subjected Al Qaeda prisoners to brutal
interrogation methods, bringing to a symbolic close the most controversial
counterterrorism program of the Bush administration.

But in a statement to employees, the agency's director, Leon E. Panetta, said
agency officers who worked in the program ''should not be investigated, let
alone punished'' because the Justice Department under President George W. Bush
had declared their actions legal.

Mr. Panetta and other top Obama administration officials have said they believe
that waterboarding, the near-drowning method used in 2002 and 2003 on three
prisoners, is torture, which is illegal under American and international law.
The International Committee of the Red Cross, which interviewed 14 prisoners,
said in a report made public this week that prisoners were also repeatedly
slammed into walls, forced to stand for days with their arms handcuffed to the
ceiling, confined in small boxes and held in frigid cells.

Mr. Panetta said the secret detention facilities were no longer in operation,
but he suggested that security and maintenance had been continuing at the sites
at the taxpayers' expense since they were emptied under Mr. Bush in 2006.
Terminating security contracts at the sites would save ''at least $4 million,''
Mr. Panetta said.

The C.I.A. has never revealed the location of its so-called black sites
overseas, but intelligence officials, aviation records and news reports have
placed them in Afghanistan, Thailand, Poland, Romania and Jordan, among other
countries. Agency officials have said that fewer than 100 prisoners have been
held since the program was created in 2002, and about 30 were subjected to what
the C.I.A. called ''enhanced'' interrogation techniques.

Mr. Bush transferred the remaining 14 prisoners to Guantanamo Bay in Cuba in
2006 but ordered some sites maintained for future use; only two Qaeda prisoners
are known to have been held for several months since then.

In his first week in office, President Obama banned coercive interrogations and
ordered the C.I.A. program closed. Mr. Panetta said that the C.I.A. had not
detained any terrorism suspects since he took office in February and added that
any suspects captured in the future would be quickly turned over to the American
military or to a suspect's home country.

Joanne Mariner, the director of the terrorism and counterterrorism program at
Human Rights Watch, said the closing of the C.I.A. prisons was ''incredibly
heartening and important.'' But she said that a criminal investigation of the
C.I.A. interrogation program was nonetheless necessary, and she expressed
concern that Mr. Panetta had not made clear what evidence the C.I.A. would need
to detain a suspect.

Mr. Panetta's statement, along with a classified letter about interrogation
policy that he sent Thursday to the Senate and House intelligence oversight
committees, underscored the new administration's sharp break with policies that
Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney often credited with preventing a repeat
of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

By contrast, President Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. insist that
the use of techniques they describe as torture betrayed American values,
alienated allies and became a recruiting tool for Al Qaeda. A task force is now
studying what interrogation methods should be permitted and how to ensure that
prisoners turned over to other countries will not be mistreated.

In his statement, Mr. Panetta vowed to continue the ''global pursuit'' of Al
Qaeda and its allies but said interrogators would use traditional methods and
not physical force.

''C.I.A. officers, whose knowledge of terrorist organizations is second to none,
will continue to conduct debriefings using a dialogue style of questioning,''
Mr. Panetta wrote. He said C.I.A. officers were required to report abuse, even
if it were carried out by a cooperating foreign intelligence service.

Mr. Panetta also said the agency would no longer use contractors to conduct
interrogations. Former military psychologists working under contract for the
C.I.A. helped devise and conduct the previous harsh interrogations, according to
former agency officials. Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California and
the chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, had proposed legislation
barring contractors from conducting interrogations, saying the job was too
important to outsource.

The Senate committee recently began an investigation of the C.I.A. detention and
interrogation program, and senior Senate and House members have called for a
broader and more public ''truth commission'' to investigate past
counterterrorism programs.

Mr. Panetta said that the agency would cooperate with Congressional reviews but
said that ''fairness and wisdom'' should dictate against a criminal
investigation or other sanctions.

The C.I.A. statement comes at a time of continuing debate inside the Obama
administration over which classified documents related to the agency's
interrogation program should be made public. After several delays, the Justice
Department now has until April 16 to decide whether to make public legal
opinions justifying the C.I.A.'s harsh methods.

Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. has argued for the release of the opinions
and related documents, but some current and former C.I.A. officials say they
believe that wholesale disclosures could harm counterterrorism efforts and hurt
morale at the agency.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); AL-QAEDA (84%); INTERNATIONAL
COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT
MOVEMENT (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); LEON E PANETTA (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (86%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); THAILAND (54%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             448 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 13, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Orders Halt To Fighting Circled Rebels

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Having rebuffed international appeals to protect civilians trapped in a war zone
in its northeast, the Sri Lankan government on Sunday ordered a two-day
''pause'' in fighting.

An estimated 100,000 ethnic Tamils are trapped in a deadly and shrinking
five-square-mile wedge of land in northeastern Sri Lanka, where the separatist
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or Tamil Tigers, fighting for an ethnic
homeland for 25 years, have effectively held them hostage as a civilian shield.
Human Rights Watch estimates that 3,000 people have been killed since January
alone, making the area what the group calls ''one of the most dangerous places
in the world.''

The Sri Lankan government, in what it says is    its final push to defeat the
rebels, also known   as the L.T.T.E., has been under pressure to stop shelling
areas where it knows civilians are trapped. On Sunday, a statement from
President Mahinda Rajapaksa's office announced a 48-hour halt to gunfire to
allow civilians to leave the region. It coincides with the ethnic Tamil and
Sinhala New Year.

''It is timely for the L.T.T.E. to acknowledge its military defeat and lay down
its weapons and surrender,'' the president said in a statement posted on the
government Web site.

The United Nations and the United States have repeatedly called on Sri Lanka not
to shell the area.

The Security Council has been briefed about the humanitarian situation in Sri
Lanka, but it stopped short of taking up a formal discussion on the conflict.
China, one of Sri Lanka's central backers, is not eager for United Nations
involvement.

Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, described the government
cease-fire as a ''useful first step'' but said he hoped for a longer halt in
fighting. He called on the rebels to let civilians leave the war zone and on the
government to treat the displaced in accordance with international law. The
United Nations wants the government to let camps of displaced people be run by
civilians, not military officials, and to allow humanitarian agencies free
access to the displaced.

The Tamil Tigers have insisted on a cease-fire, and their supporters in the
vocal Tamil diaspora have protested in cities around the world in recent days,
storming the Sri Lankan Embassy in Oslo on Sunday.

The Tamil Tigers and their supporters have maintained that Tamils are remaining
behind the front line voluntarily, although pictures and testimonies emerging
from the war zone suggest otherwise. The Sri Lankan government does not allow
journalists to go anywhere near the conflict zone.

The rebels did not respond Sunday to the government's unilateral offer of a
temporary stop to the fighting.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS (89%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(72%); HOSTAGE TAKING (71%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (50%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             450 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spain's Attorney General Opposes Prosecutions of 6 Bush Officials on Allowing
Torture

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Victoria Burnett contributed reporting from Madrid.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Spain's attorney general on Thursday strongly criticized steps to open a
criminal investigation in Madrid into allegations that six former Bush
administration officials authorized the torture of detainees at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.

Candido Conde-Pumpido, the attorney general, said at a breakfast meeting with
journalists in Madrid that he would oppose any legal action in Spain because the
proper forum would be an American court and that any investigation should focus
on those who actually mistreated detainees.

But in Spain, the attorney general does not have the last word; an investigating
judge decides whether a case will proceed. Lawyers familiar with the case said
that the stage had now apparently been set for a struggle between judges and
politicians.

The judge handling the complaint against the Americans is Baltasar Garzon, the
crusading magistrate who ordered the arrest of the former Chilean dictator
Augusto Pinochet.

In the past, Mr. Garzon has ignored opinions by politicians and law enforcement
officials.

But with Spain's government eager to improve its formerly tense relations with
Washington, lawyers familiar with the case said there was evidently political
pressure to dismiss it.

The attorney general's public intervention was unexpected and unusual,
particularly because he appeared to overrule prosecutors at the Madrid court
that was dealing with the complaint.

Last week the prosecutors, who are asked for an opinion before the investigating
judge proceeds, wrote that Spain could claim jurisdiction in the case because it
was a party to the United Nations Convention Against Torture and five former
Guantanamo inmates, three of them Spanish citizens and two Spanish residents,
claimed that they were tortured. Lawyers who had seen the still-unreleased
document said it gave the green light for a criminal investigation against the
six Americans.

Besides Alberto Gonzalez, the former attorney general, the complaint named John
C. Yoo, the former Justice Department lawyer who wrote secret opinions saying
the president had the authority to circumvent the Geneva Conventions, and
Douglas J. Feith, the former under secretary of defense for policy.

Secret memorandums by Mr. Yoo and other top administration lawyers helped clear
the way for aggressive policies like waterboarding and other harsh interrogation
techniques, which the C.I.A. director, the attorney general and other American
officials have said amount to torture.

The other Americans named in the complaint were William J. Haynes II, former
general counsel for the Department of Defense; Jay S. Bybee, Mr. Yoo's former
boss at the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel; and David S.
Addington, the chief of staff and legal adviser to Vice President Dick Cheney.

Mr. Conde-Pumpido said that naming White House legal advisers instead of their
bosses was a legal ''artifice.''

Gonzalo Boye, the lawyer for the human rights group that filed the complaint in
March, dismissed the attorney general's arguments as ''legal nonsense.'' He said
that in Spain as in most countries, legal advisers can be held accountable for
bending or breaking the law. It was not known when Judge Garzon would issue his
decision on how he plans to proceed. Lawyers said the case could still be
assigned to a different judge.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAWYERS (89%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); POLITICS (88%); MAGISTRATES (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); PRISONS (77%); LAW OF WAR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (73%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%); WRITERS (72%); JURISDICTION (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(64%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (61%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (53%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (94%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (90%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             455 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Crowds Flee Fighting as Sri Lanka Breaches Rebel Haven

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


Sri Lankan troops broke through earthen barriers  used by Tamil separatist
fighters on Monday, opening a breach that the government said was then crossed
by some 30,000 people escaping the fighting inside a no-fire zone originally
intended as a  haven.

As the crowds tried to flee the safe zone, in what the Defense Ministry called
''the world's largest hostage rescue mission,'' three Tamil Tiger suicide
bombers detonated explosive vests, killing dozens of civilians, the government
said.

A pro-rebel Web portal confirmed Monday that fierce fighting had resumed inside
the safety zone -- the report called the situation ''total chaos'' -- and that
thousands of civilians had fled the area. The report also said that Sri Lankan
troops had hit the principal hospital in the zone with rocket-propelled
grenades, causing heavy civilian casualties.

State television in Sri Lanka broadcast a short video showing hundreds of men,
women and children slowly streaming through an open area, some carrying large
bundles, which it said showed the migrants' exodus.

The Sri Lankan government later issued an ultimatum to the separatist Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or Tamil Tigers, giving them and their leader 24 hours to
surrender, Reuters reported, quoting the government's defense spokesman,
Keheliya Rambukwella.

It was not possible to verify the battlefield accounts from either side because
the government prevents independent journalists and most relief agencies from
reaching the area. But in an apparent acknowledgment of the army's breakthrough,
which occurred Monday morning, the rebels, also known as the L.T.T.E.,
petitioned the government for a truce on Monday afternoon.

''The L.T.T.E. would like to reiterate its commitment to a cease-fire without
any preconditions, as urged by the U.S. and other members of the international
community,'' a statement issued by the movement's political headquarters said.

''The L.T.T.E. urges the Sri Lankan government to stop its military actions,
including shelling and bombing civilian areas, and accept the call of the United
States and other members of the international community for a cease-fire, which
we believe will create a conducive atmosphere for talks on all relevant
issues.''

Sri Lankan troops, pressing the attack over the past several months, have backed
the rebel fighters into a shrinking patch of lagoons, coconut groves, jungle and
beachfront along the country's northeastern coast. The rebel redoubt is
reportedly down to about  six square miles.

Ethnic Tamil separatists have been battling the government for 25 years, and an
estimated 75,000 people have been killed in the violence.

Most analysts in South Asia now believe the war to be in its endgame. Although
the Tamil Tigers have shown great resilience as an insurgency, especially in
their use of asymmetric tactics like suicide attacks, they have lost their
principal bases of operations and nearly all of their capacity as a conventional
military force.

The International Committee of the Red Cross said it had been able to extricate
about 10,000 people on intermittent boatlifts from the no-fire zone in recent
months, while an estimated 35,000 civilians had managed to escape overland to
government-held areas where they were being detained in camps.

The United Nations has estimated that 100,000 civilians remain trapped inside
the no-fire zone, and the Tamil Tigers have been widely accused of holding the
civilians to use as human shields.

The Tigers, as well as Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International and others,
have criticized the Sri Lankan government for artillery barrages that have taken
a heavy toll on the civilian population.

The United Nations said at least 4,500 civilians had been killed since the first
of the year, with some 12,000 injured. On March 23, Human Rights Watch reported
that at least 2,700 civilians had been killed in the no-fire zone this year.

After talks on Sunday with Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general,
and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, Lawrence Cannon, the foreign
minister of Canada, called for a resumption of the 48-hour cease-fire initiated
by the Sri Lankan government last week. The cease-fire has since lapsed.

Other governments have issued similar appeals, although Sri Lanka has rejected
further pauses in the fighting, saying the Tigers use the truce periods to
reinforce their defenses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); TERRORISM (76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); JOURNALISM
(75%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (73%); HOSTAGE TAKING (72%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (68%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%); WEB SITES & PORTALS
(55%); PETITIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); HONG KONG (79%); ASIA (79%);
SOUTHERN ASIA (56%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             457 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Time To Come Clean

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 822 words


If, God forbid, terrorists release nerve gas in movie theaters from Los Angeles
to Washington tomorrow, the debate about torture will change 180 degrees. The
public will turn on President Obama for having ''coddled'' terrorists.

In short, today's revulsion at waterboarding is broad but fragile. And that
makes it essential that the United States proceed with an independent commission
to investigate harsh treatment and tally its costs and benefits.

President Obama worries that the commission will be a distraction, but the truth
is the opposite. Revelations will continue to trickle out -- including a new
hoard of photos of abuses scheduled to be released by May 28 -- creating a
constant roar of charges and counter-charges. Liberals will jab Mr. Obama from
the left, and Dick Cheney from the right, until the president resembles St.
Sebastian (the human pincushion). Mr. Obama won't be able to escape torture.

''He's trying to get it off the news cycle, and that's not going to happen,''
said Elisa Massimino, chief executive of Human Rights First. ''You can't say
you're going to follow the evidence and then not look for any.''

Morton Halperin of the Open Society Institute, a leader in the coalition
supporting a commission, said: ''He's better off saying, 'there'll be a
commission report, and I'll deal with it when it's over.' It's a much more
credible way to get it off the table.''

There are three solid reasons for a national commission:

First, it could help forge a consensus against torture, for almost everyone in
the national security world believes that the result would be a ringing
affirmation that we should not torture.

It's in Mr. Obama's interest to reach such a consensus, because otherwise the
next major terror attack -- and there will be one -- will be followed by
Republican claims that the president's wimpishness left America vulnerable. His
agenda on health care, climate change and education will then risk a collapse
into dream dust. The way to inoculate his agenda is to seek common ground
through a nonpartisan commission.

Second, a commission could help restore America's standing by distancing
ourselves from past abuses. Alberto Mora, a former general counsel for the Navy,
has said that some flag-rank officers believe that Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo
constitute ''the first and second identifiable causes of U.S. combat deaths in
Iraq,'' because they galvanized jihadis. An Air Force major and interrogator of
prisoners who goes by the pseudonym Matthew Alexander told Harper's Magazine
that ''hundreds but more likely thousands of American lives'' were lost because
of ''the policy decision to introduce the torture and abuse of prisoners.''

Third, a commission could help  counterterrorism efforts. Foreign governments
have been wary of cooperating with us for fear of being tarnished by scandal. At
home, Arab-American and Somali-American communities have been leery of reporting
tips because they see the authorities as unjust and hostile to Muslims.

''Oftentimes, the communities from which we need the most help are those who
trust us the least,'' Robert Mueller, the F.B.I. director, told the Council on
Foreign Relations recently. Last fall, a Somali-American was among a group of
suicide bombers who killed more than 20 people in the northern Somalia; he may
have been the first American citizen to commit such a suicide attack.

There's no magic bullet to prevent that from happening in Minneapolis next time,
but a truth commission would perhaps be one way to clear the air, build trust
among American Muslims and improve counterterrorism.

The truth commission shouldn't be bipartisan. Rather, it should be nonpartisan,
led by prominent legal figures and national security experts who are not
strongly associated with a political party. Among those often mentioned are
Sandra Day O'Connor, Thomas Kean and Lee Hamilton, along with retired generals
and intelligence experts. Such a panel could not be accused of a witch hunt.

It  could explore whether there should be criminal responsibility, and whether
health professionals should lose licenses for participating in torture.

Conversely, I hope the commission would  also recognize some of the most heroic
figures since 9/11: those brave military officers, especially military lawyers,
who defied the Pentagon to stand up for terrorism suspects  -- or, more
accurately, for principles of justice.

At a time when we in the news media became lapdogs rather than watchdogs, when
Congress and the courts dozed, those military lawyers sacrificed their careers
to defend American values. They deserve medals.

Mr. Obama is right that we have to focus on the economy and move ahead. But one
of our most precious possessions is our moral core, our value system, and when
you've lost your way it's important to retrace your steps to understand where
you went astray. Come on, Mr. Obama, let's not delay that process.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); LAWYERS (64%); AIR FORCES
(63%); ARMED FORCES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); DICK CHENEY (58%)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             458 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka's Dirty War

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 366 words


Army troops in Sri Lanka are closing in on a dwindling band of Tamil Tiger
separatists who are outgunned on an ever-narrowing battlefield. It would be a
relief if this 25-year fight finally ends. In the meantime, tens of thousands of
terrified civilians  are trapped in the conflict zone -- a strip of land about
four miles long -- and are running out of food and water. They must be allowed
to leave.

Human rights groups have accused both the minority Tamils, who pioneered suicide
bombing as a weapon of war and are widely classified as terrorists, and Sri
Lanka's government of gross violations. After several failed attempts at peace
talks, the army began this latest offensive. In recent months, as authorities
sensed potential victory, the attacks have gotten ever more fierce. The United
Nations estimates that more than 6,000 people have been killed and nearly 14,000
wounded just since the end of January.

While there are no good guys in this fight, the government must do all that it
can to avoid harming civilians in a war zone. You know officials have something
to hide when they bar aid groups and journalists from the war zone, as Sri Lanka
has done since last year.

Sri Lanka has callously ignored calls for a humanitarian cease-fire. This week
the government said the army would stop using heavy weapons against the rebels,
but watchdog groups say that they have received reports that fierce shelling
continues.

American officials say privately that they  will try to delay Sri Lanka from
getting a desperately needed $1.9 billion loan from the International Monetary
Fund until all civilians are allowed to leave the war zone and aid workers have
full access to refugee camps. Other countries should join that effort. The
European Union is warning that unless Sri Lanka quickly declares a cease-fire,
it will have to rethink its aid and trade. Japan and India should use their even
greater economic leverage.

Sri Lanka's leaders and the rebels must be warned that they could face
prosecution for war crimes. Once this fighting ends, the government and the
Tamils must be persuaded to pursue a serious political settlement, or this long
and brutal war would certainly reignite.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (79%); ARMED FORCES (79%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (77%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TERRORISM (75%); BOMBINGS (74%); REFUGEES (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); EUROPEAN UNION
(62%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); INDIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (51%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             462 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 6, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Boat to Safety Is Death Trap To Sri Lankans

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1303 words

DATELINE: KAKINADA, India


Fleeing the bitter end of a quarter-century-long war, the refugees turned to a
boat. It was first a shelter from artillery shells, then a frail craft to
safety. Finally, it became a coffin.

The boat was adrift on the Indian Ocean for nine days. Jaya Niranjana's
3-year-old daughter died. M. Yesudas lost his father, sister, nephew, brothers,
and uncle -- six in all. An 8-month-old baby, Kuberan, survived only because his
mother somehow managed to breast-feed him until just hours before she died.

By the time these refugees fleeing the war in Sri Lanka reached Indian shores
last Wednesday, 10 of the 21 original travelers had died or jumped overboard.
They had nothing to eat and only saltwater to drink. The scorching sun beat down
on their heads. Diarrhea struck. The first child died on April 24, then the
others. S. Indira Meenan, 25, recalled it in halting English: ''One by one. Dead
babies, children. No food, no drink.''

''Twenty-fourth, dead; 25th; 26th,'' he went on. ''One by one. Dead.''

This is the story of their boat, and their country's civil war, seemingly
endless even as the Sri Lankan government closes in on the last stronghold of
the separatist Tamil Tiger rebels, the L.T.T.E., short for the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam.

The government has trapped the remaining rebel force in a four-mile strip of
territory in the northeast corner of Sri Lanka. Pressing its final assault, the
government has rebuffed heavy international pressure to suspend the war for the
sake of an estimated 50,000 civilians trapped in rebel territory and a no-fire
zone between the forces.

In the dead of night, the boat left the sandy spit of land where fighting raged.
Its captain had apparently steered the vessel far out into the sea, in an effort
to evade the fighting, and then lost his way.

He had promised his passengers a journey of nine hours to the closest point on
the Indian coast, about 100 miles, far shorter than the distance from Miami to
Havana.

But the boat's outboard motor gave out after a few hours. By Day 9, the captain
jumped into the sea -- whether from guilt or delirium, no one will ever know.

The testimony of these refugees in an Indian government hospital is a rare
glimpse into Sri Lanka's war zone; the government bars journalists and most aid
workers from anywhere near there. It is also a measure of the desperation of its
survivors, the latest among an estimated 100,000 Sri Lankan Tamils who have
taken refuge in India over the past 20 years.

These refugees said they did not want to be quarantined in a Sri
Lankan-government-controlled camp, where tens of thousands of displaced ethnic
Tamils have fled in recent weeks.

Instead, they took the risky journey across the water. They considered
themselves lucky. Unlike many others, they had a boat, a motor and kerosene for
fuel.

For two months, their boat, a fiberglass vessel no more than 20 feet long, first
served as a bunker on the last bit of coast in Mullaittivu district on the
northeastern corner of the island. The boat belonged to Mr. Yesudas. He and his
relatives had dug it into the ground, covered it with palm tree trunks for a
roof, and hid inside when artillery shells rained down.

The area, a village called Mathalan, had been designated by the Sri Lankan
government as a ''no-fire zone.'' But the refugees said in separate interviews
that it was shelled every day, sometimes so much that they had to relieve
themselves in buckets rather than venture outside the boat-bunker.

On one side of the sandy spit was the sea. On the other stood the front line of
the Tamil Tigers, exchanging artillery fire with the Sri Lankan Army across a
narrow lagoon. Those shells landed in the no-fire zone. For nearly two months,
according to United Nations estimates, more than 150,000 civilians, including
these refugees, were trapped inside. About 50,000 remain there now, the United
Nations estimates. It has repeatedly pressed the Tamil Tigers to let their
people go, and the government to stop firing on civilians. Both sides have
rebuffed those appeals, denying the charges.

On Wednesday, Human Rights Watch called on the United Nations Security Council
and the United Nations Human Rights Council to begin deliberations on Sri Lanka,
''to avoid further loss of civilian life.''

Two and a half weeks ago, on April 20, the refugees said, they witnessed the
most intense fighting. The army that day  broke through a mud embankment that
shielded a portion of the last rebel-held spit of coast, allowing tens of
thousands of civilians to flee into government-held territory. The Tamil Tigers
said later that 1,000 civilians had been killed as the military advanced. The
military, for its part, released satellite images that showed rebel fighters
firing on civilians trying to flee.

The refugees here recalled that both sides shelled indiscriminately that day,
and that those among them who hid in their bunkers had no time to count the
dead.

About 1 a.m., after the shelling had stopped, they dug out the boat from under
the sand and quietly took it out into the sea. Had the Tamil Tigers detected
them trying to escape, Mr. Yesudas said flatly, they would have shot at  the
boat. ''If we didn't get out that day, we wouldn't have gotten out at all.''

They had all fled fighting before. Mr. Yesudas's family filed out of their
ancestral village in Jaffna Peninsula in 1996, following the rebels as the army
chased them out. The family settled into a new village, prospered and saved
their sons and daughters from being forced to fight with the guerrillas. When
the war resumed last year, they ran from village to village, hoping that a
cease-fire would soon come.

Sivadasa Jagadeeswaran, the father of Kuberan, the baby, said that for nearly 10
months, his family had been on the run, too, living mostly in makeshift tents of
bedsheets and palm fronds. There were not enough tents to go around, and not
enough food. A month before he fled, his father was  killed, he thinks by
shelling, in the main market in the no-fire zone. They found his father's body
at the hospital, the back of his head blown out entirely.

Early on April 21, he stepped into the boat with his wife and their two sons.
Their eldest, age 4, was among the first to die. They threw the child into the
sea. Then, his wife's father died. Her two brothers jumped overboard, lured by
the twinkling lights of what may have been a fishing trawler. His wife held on
until the last day. She complained of thirst, but vomited when he gave her
seawater. Soon, she was gone.

This afternoon, a single father to an only child, he cooed softly to the baby on
the hospital bed. He gave him a bottle of milk. He checked to make sure his
diapers weren't wet. The baby giggled, oblivious to the misery around him.

Indira Kumar and his wife, Jaya, watched him from the next bed. He said he
decided to leave that night to save his daughter, Prasambavi. She, too, held out
until the last day on the boat. The night before, she had begged  for a cold
drink.

Their boat was first noticed by an Indian fisherman, K. Srinivas Rao, who had
gone shark hunting that day, roughly 90 miles  from shore. In the distance, he
saw two men waving their arms frantically. One of them was holding up a baby.
When he got closer, he saw that most of the passengers were so weak they could
hardly move. He drew the boat to the shore. The strangers could barely explain
their circumstances. They spoke only Tamil.

Mr. Yesudas said he had no interest in going home. He had saved his family for
so long, and lost so many. He had no hope that things would get any better
anytime soon in Sri Lanka, not even after the war is declared over.

''The L.T.T.E. is not going tostop. The army is not going to stop,'' he said,
referring to the rebel group. ''It is an eternal war.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sivadasa Jagadeeswaran and his 8-month-old son recovered in a
hospital in Kakinada, India, after a boat trip from Sri Lanka. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
An 8-month-old Sri Lankan boy, Kuberan, with an uncle in a hospital in Kakinada,
India.
 Jaya Niranjana in the hospital. Her 3-year-old daughter died on a boat from Sri
Lanka. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A16) MAP: Mathalan
was shelled often, despite being a ''no-fire zone.'' (pg.A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (90%); REFUGEES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); WRITERS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (82%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (92%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); INDIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             468 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hospital Is Attacked in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 284 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


A primary school in Sri Lanka that had been converted into a field hospital was
reported to have been pounded by artillery strikes on Tuesday, leaving at least
47 people dead and dozens more wounded.

The hospital is the last remaining medical center serving the 50,000 civilians
trapped in the war zone in Sri Lanka, and it was not immediately clear if it had
been demolished.

Confirmations of the shelling and the casualties were given by a government
doctor working in the battle zone and by a political official who was quoted on
a Web site used by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or L.T.T.E.

The doctor, Thurairaja Varatharajah, said a mortar shell hit the admissions ward
of the hospital on Tuesday morning, The Associated Press reported, with further
shelling  several hours later.

His account was similar to one given on the pro-rebel Web site, citing an
administrative officer identified as K. Tharmakulasingam, who said 47 people had
been killed and 55 wounded.

It has not been possible in recent months to verify the many charges and
countercharges in the bitter war between the government and the Tamil Tigers.
Independent journalists and most aid agencies have been barred from the war
zone.

The battle zone has shrunk to barely two square miles  as the military has
steadily surrounded and slowly squeezed the dwindling guerrilla force.

The Tamil Tigers blamed the army for the artillery barrage.

While the government had no immediate comment on the attack, it has denied using
artillery, heavy weapons or airstrikes in the area  -- a claim widely disputed
by human rights groups and foreign governments -- and has accused the rebels  of
shelling their fellow Tamil citizens.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (90%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMIES (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); JOURNALISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); PRIMARY
SCHOOLS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             469 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Libya: Fabricator of Iraq-Qaeda Link Dies, Paper Says

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 148 words


A Libyan militant whose false information about links between Iraq and Al Qaeda
was used by the Bush administration as part of its justification for war in Iraq
has died in a prison in Libya, a Libyan newspaper reported. The militant, Ali
Mohammed Abdel-Aziz al-Fakheri, known by his nom de guerre, Ibn al-Shaykh
al-Libi, hanged himself late last week, the newspaper, Oea, said. There was no
official confirmation of his death from Libyan officials or state-run news
media. Mr. Libi was captured in Pakistan in 2001 and later sent by the C.I.A. to
Egypt, where he was subjected to harsh interrogation techniques. It later
emerged that he had fabricated his stories about Iraq to try to avoid harsh
treatment by his Egyptian captors. Human Rights Watch, based in New York, said
the United States handed him over to Libya in late 2005 or early 2006, and he
was sentenced to life in prison.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IRAQ WAR (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%);
AL-QAEDA (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); SENTENCING (72%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (74%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (93%); EGYPT (86%); PAKISTAN
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             470 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pictures of Torture, the Fact of Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 939 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Obama Reversal on Abuse Photos'' (front page, May 14):

While release of the photos depicting torture by United States military
personnel may ''further inflame anti-American opinion'' and endanger troops, the
torture itself is what truly inflames our enemies and allies.

Anything less than full disclosure endangers all Americans, for only by fully
confronting the extent of these immoral and illegal practices can we properly
assess what it will take to prevent future administrations and military
personnel from weakening our legal and ethical footing and endangering our
soldiers.

Further, we need to stop discussing whether torture gets results. Whether it
does or not, it is immoral, period, and should never be considered.

John Williams New York, May 14, 2009

To the Editor:

It isn't hard to understand or appreciate the fine line that President Obama
seeks to walk in the reversal of his previous decision to release more detainee
abuse photos: on the one hand, the prospect of those in the previous
administration who formulated and approved torture policy getting off scot-free
is frustrating to many; on the other hand, doesn't the prospect of revenge being
perpetrated against our troops make releasing the photos too risky?

As Republicans continue their efforts to bring the president down, at least to a
level where they can gain some upward traction, President Obama continues to
wrestle with the many issues of the day, juggling them, at least now, more
skillfully than his predecessors, thinking things through even after making a
decision, and unafraid to reverse himself if he feels it is necessary.

President Obama will be criticized either way. That is in large part
specifically because of the nature of the new Republican Party, and only partly
because that is the nature of a democracy.

Patricia A. Weller Westminster, Md., May 14, 2009

To the Editor:

When Allied forces liberated the Nazi death camps in World War II, Gen. Dwight
D. Eisenhower, the Allied commander, ordered German citizens to walk through the
concentration camps to see the victims' bodies. He wanted them to witness what
their government had done as proof against denials the Holocaust had occurred.

President Obama should follow Eisenhower's example and let Americans confront
the visual evidence of the horrors committed in our name. Verbal accounts are
not enough to silence those who will deny or minimize this abuse.

Claude Cookman Bloomington, Ind., May 14, 2009

The writer, an associate professor in the Indiana University School of
Journalism, is a historian of photography who has published on the My Lai
atrocity photographs.

To the Editor:

Re ''Rogue Diva of Doom,'' by Maureen Dowd (column, May 13):

Dick Cheney presents Americans with the false choice of the ideologue: if we
don't torture, Americans will die. Ideologues propose false choices because the
tactic rhetorically transforms their radical ideas into the only plausible and
acceptable ones.

Our choice is not between torturing and dying. Americans expect their government
to do all that is necessary to protect the nation as long as it is done within
the tradition of American freedom and justice. Freedom and justice can be
preserved only by courageous people, however.

No one is asking most of us to storm the beaches at Normandy or march across a
bridge in Selma, Ala. But we do need to be courageous enough to uphold a
heritage that was built on the enormous sacrifices of generations of Americans.
If Americans are too afraid to champion American ideals, who will?

Melissa Macauley Princeton, N.J., May 13, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''The Torture Debate: The Missing Voices'' (editorial, May 7):

There are other crucial voices missing from the torture debate, particularly
those civilians who were arbitrarily arrested, imprisoned, tortured and then
released months or years later without being charged. This happened in
Afghanistan, Iraq (remember Abu Ghraib) as well as in Guantanamo and at C.I.A.
black sites.

In the Physicians for Human Rights 2008 report ''Broken Law, Broken Lives,'' my
colleagues and I documented the profound physical and psychological suffering
resulting from the torture and abuse of 12 people, all of whom were ultimately
released without charges, but not before being subjected to beatings, sexual
humiliation, sleep deprivation, death threats and extremes of heat and cold. In
other words, they were tortured.

In several instances, health professionals were complicit. Then there are the
voices of torture survivors, like my patients at the Bellevue-N.Y.U. Program for
Survivors of Torture, subjected to brutalities in their home countries eerily
similar to what we did. Their voices must be heard along with those of innocent
civilians living under despot regimes who now face greater risk of torture
because of our misguided policies.

There needs to be an independent and complete investigation.

Allen S. Keller New York, May 8, 2009

The writer, a medical doctor, is director of the Bellevue-N.Y.U. School of
Medicine Program for Survivors of Torture and a member of the advisory board of
Physicians for Human Rights.

To the Editor:

As the debate over torture heats up, it seems the Republican response is always
to remind us that Bush & Company ''kept us safe since 9/11.'' That's terrific,
and the Bush administration surely gets some credit for that. But wouldn't it
have been even better if it had also kept us safe on 9/11? Why is it that 9/11
doesn't count when Dick Cheney and the Republicans are bragging about their
safety record?

Scott Miller St. Louis, May 12, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ROBERT A. DI IESO JR.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); ETHICS (78%); WORLD WAR II (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
JOURNALISM (73%); WRITERS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); HOLOCAUST (66%);
HISTORY (61%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); DICK CHENEY (57%)

STATE: INDIANA, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             476 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israelis, Iranians and Existential Threats

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 536 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Israel's Fears, Amalek's Arsenal,'' by Jeffrey Goldberg (Op-Ed, May 17):

The essence of Mr. Goldberg's astute article, summed up in his final observation
-- that the relatively dovish Israeli president, Shimon Peres, would prefer
overreaction to underreaction in dealing with existential threats -- highlights
the Israeli dilemma.

What other country has had to endure multiple nonstop calls for its extinction
from the time of its birth and extending now into a seventh decade? What other
country is continually vilified for human rights violations by farcical displays
at the United Nations, often by undemocratic, totalitarian regimes that
brutalize their own citizens?

Why was there no condemnation of the Palestinians for rejecting with nary a
counterproposal very reasonable peace offers by Israel during the waning days of
the Clinton administration? Or for responding to a unilateral Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza in 2005 with a barrage of rockets aimed at civilians in Israel proper?

The resilient Israeli psyche has enabled the populace to be incredibly
productive in so many areas, including the arts and humanities, sciences and a
host of technological fields, despite being in what amounts to a constant state
of war for Israel's entire lifetime.

How could Mr. Peres think otherwise?

Jerry Rapp  New York, May 18, 2009

To the Editor:

Jeffrey Goldberg refers to the special dread that Israelis feel about their
''precarious existence,'' yet he does not mention the fact that Israel possesses
an arsenal of nuclear weapons and the most powerful army in the Middle East.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Mr. Goldberg points out, has said that were
Iran to also possess nuclear weapons, then Hamas and Hezbollah (Iranian
''proxies'') would possess a ''nuclear umbrella'' under which to engage in
terror activities against Israel. More to the point, Israel would no longer
possess the exclusive nuclear umbrella upon which it has historically depended
to dominate the Muslim Middle East.

What makes Israel precarious is its continuing reliance on military power to
solve political problems -- its failure to negotiate -- not its loss of military
supremacy. Nuclear parity with Iran might even shock Mr. Netanyahu into finally
accepting peace -- meaning a state for a people whose existence is truly
precarious, the Palestinians.

Baylis Thomas  New York, May 18, 2009

The writer is the author of two books about Israel.

To the Editor:

Jeffrey Goldberg illustrates the core problem that Israel presents to the world
today.

Israel is said to be ever ready to attack. Amalek, Mr. Goldberg explains, ''is
Hebrew for 'existential threat,' '' and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ''sees
Iran as a new Amalek.''

So Israel is contemplating a pre-emptive strike on Iran. Thus Israel decimates
the infrastructure of Lebanon in 2006, the civilians of Gaza in 2009, and now
threatens Iran.

Yet, in this violent world, many countries have the means to attack one another.
Instead of pre-emptive strikes, a mature, powerful country would engage in
diplomacy, mutual agreements and safeguards to assure security, prosperity and
peace.

Anne Remley  Ann Arbor, Mich., May 18, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (89%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(86%); ARMIES (78%); HAMAS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); HEZBOLLAH (73%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (69%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); TERRORISM (68%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (78%); SHIMON PERES (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             477 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee's Age in Dispute

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


An Afghan who has spent over six years at the American military prison at
Guantanamo Bay was only about 12  when he was detained, not 16 or 17 as his
official record says, an Afghan rights group said Tuesday.

Interviews with the family of Mohammed Jawad, who like many poor Afghans does
not know his exact age or birthday, showed he was probably not even a teenager
when he was arrested in 2002, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
said.

He was picked up by the Afghan police in connection with a grenade attack in
Kabul in which two United States soldiers and their Afghan interpreter were
wounded. He was transferred to American custody and flown to Guantanamo in early
2003.

Commissioner Nader Nadery said Mr. Jawad was tortured and abused by the Afghan
police and at Guantanamo. The commission is seeking his release and
repatriation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (88%); POLICE FORCES (88%); PRISONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); TORTURE (86%); ARRESTS (86%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             485 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Is Killed in Ingushetia In Latest Caucasus Violence

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


The body count among officials in Russia's volatile North Caucasus region keeps
rising. A high-ranking judge was the latest to die, killed Wednesday when a
group of men sprayed machine-gun fire on the van she was riding in, a day after
President Dmitri A. Medvedev visited the region to condemn the violence.

The killing underscored Russia's failure to contain the violence of separatists
and Islamic militants. Despite Russian officials' occasional rosy pronouncements
of successes, these forces remain a potent source of instability in a region
that has known little peace in recent decades.

Officials said it was likely that the judge, Aza Gazgireeva, had been gunned
down because of her professional activities. A deputy chief justice in the
Supreme Court of Ingushetia, a Muslim republic that borders Chechnya, she often
oversaw cases involving crimes carried out by violent Islamic separatist groups
active in the region, said Kaloi S. Akhilgov, a spokesman for Ingushetia's
president.

While interclan violence, blood feuds or just gangland criminality are
responsible for some of the bloodshed, Islamic militants carry out much of the
violence in the North Caucasus, said Tanya Lokshina, a Caucasus expert with
Human Rights Watch. ''They have declared that all members of law enforcement and
state officials are traitors to Islam and enemies that should be exterminated.''

Thirteen police officers have been killed this year in Ingushetia alone, said
Madina Khadzieva, a spokeswoman for the Ingushetia police. ''From 2008 through
2009 there have been many of these types of crimes, not against judges, but
generally members of law enforcement agencies, police, soldiers, etc.,'' she
said

The situation appears little different in other areas of the North Caucasus.
Last month, a suicide bomber killed two police officers in Grozny, Chechnya's
capital. And last week, Adilgerei Magomedtagirov, the interior minister of the
republic of Dagestan, was fatally shot along with one of his deputies at a
wedding for a colleague's daughter. As Dagestan's top law enforcement official,
Mr. Magomedtagirov led the fight against Islamic radicals there.

In a sign of the Kremlin's concern, Mr. Medvedev flew Tuesday to Dagestan, where
he described what he called a ''difficult and lamentable'' situation. So far in
2009, he said, 75 people in law enforcement and 48 civilians have been killed in
terrorist attacks in the region. He said 112 militants had been killed.

Mr. Medvedev blamed foreign extremists for the violence.  But he also blamed the
extreme poverty of the region and lashed out at regional officials for the
corruption that he said had crippled local governments in their efforts to fight
the militants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); TERRORISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); CORRUPTION (73%);
SUPREME COURTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (78%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CAUCASIAN STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             486 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 13, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Dispute Over Afghan Deaths in Strike

BYLINE: By ADAM B. ELLICK.

Abdul Waheed Wafa contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 356 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Sharply conflicting reports on an American airstrike this week continued to
trickle out Friday from American military and Afghan officials as to whether the
attack killed civilians.

The airstrike in Ghor Province in western Afghanistan on Tuesday was aimed at a
local Taliban militant, Mullah Mustafa, but instead killed 10 civilians and 12
insurgents, according to Sayed Iqbal Munib, the governor of Sar-i-Pul, a
neighboring province.

But American officials Friday said the strike killed up to 16 militants and no
civilians. A spokeswoman, Elizabeth Mathias, said the strike hit a vehicle ''in
the middle of nowhere, away from civilians and homes.'' She said the military
has a video showing the strike hitting the militants away from populated areas,
but the military will not release it because its source cannot be revealed.

Mr. Munib said an investigation was continuing.

Civilian deaths have become a political flash point in Afghanistan, undermining
public support for the war and inflaming tensions with President Hamid Karzai,
who has  condemned the American-led coalition for the rising toll.

According to the United Nations, the number of civilian casualties caused last
year by the Taliban and other insurgents was several thousand, compared with 828
civilian deaths attributed to American, NATO and Afghan forces, mostly from
airstrikes and village raids.

Tuesday's attack came as Gen. David H. Petraeus, the senior American commander
for Iraq and Afghanistan,  said this week that violence here had reached a new
high and warned of increasing difficulties.

Last week, there were about 400 insurgent attacks compared with about 50 per
week in 2004. Tensions have been especially acute recently after an American
military investigation concluded that its personnel made significant errors in
carrying out airstrikes in western Afghanistan in early May that killed dozens
of Afghan civilians in Farah Province.

The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission said that operation killed up to
97 civilians, most of them children, while the Afghan government's figure was
140. The Americans said the number was 20 to  30.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
DEATHS & DEATH RATES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); RELIGION (57%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%); DAVID PETRAEUS (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             489 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2009 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

A.C.L.U. Report Says Antiterror Fight Undercuts Liberty of Muslim Donors

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE STROM

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 642 words


The fight against terrorism has dealt a harsh blow to Muslim charities and
interfered with their donors' religious freedom, a new report by the American
Civil Liberties Union concludes.

The report says statutes that it describes as overly broad and enforced in a
discriminatory manner, coupled with a lack of due process, have starved Islamic
charities of money and impeded Muslims' ability to fulfill zakat, their
religious requirement to make charitable donations.

The report is based on interviews with more than 100 Muslim community leaders as
well as experts on antiterrorism laws and regulations. Though it gives no
estimate of the decline in donations to Muslim groups, it says a total of nine
Islamic charities have closed as a result of government action against them
since the Sept. 11 attacks.

That action ranges, it says,  from declaring a group to be under investigation
to designating it a terrorist organization and freezing its assets.

''While there is a legitimate concern about the use of charitable funds to
finance terrorism, it does not outweigh the rights of American Muslims to
fulfill their religious obligations or override constitutional requirements for
due process,'' said the  author, Jennifer Turner, the A.C.L.U.'s human rights
researcher.

President Obama mentioned the issue in his speech in Cairo this month. ''In the
United States, rules on charitable giving have made it harder for Muslims to
fulfill their religious obligation,'' Mr. Obama said. ''That is why I am
committed to working with American Muslims to ensure that they can fulfill
zakat.''

Natalie Wyeth, a spokeswoman for the Treasury Department, which is charged with
oversight of charitable activity, said the department was working  to address
some of the concerns.

The report notes that independent bodies like the Sept. 11 commission have found
that evidence used to seize assets is often secret, making it impossible to
challenge, and has in some cases included  hearsay or been based on news
reports.

Advocates for Muslim donors and organizations say the rules governing charitable
giving are opaque or poorly defined. Donors could, for instance, find themselves
in trouble for past gifts to an organization newly designated a terrorist group.

''It's absolute madness how this policy has been put together and practiced,''
said Maja Freij, chief financial officer at Access, a large Arab-American social
services group based in Dearborn, Mich. ''It makes you guilty by association,
offers no due process and lacks checks and balances.''

Farhana Khera, executive director of Muslim Advocates, said, ''American Muslims
with U.S. passports are returning from abroad and being asked about their
charitable donations by customs and immigration agents.''

Paradoxically, two of the largest mainstream Arab-American charities -- Access
and Islamic Relief USA -- say they have benefited from aggressive enforcement of
antiterrorism laws.

Islamic Relief USA, an aid organization with affiliates around the globe, has
seen annual donations rise to about $25 million last year from roughly $7
million at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks, with an additional $50 million in
in-kind gifts, said the group's spokesman, Mostafa Mahboob.

At least part of that increase can be attributed to the decline of other Muslim
charities, Mr. Mahboob said, though his group has also been working to emphasize
its work in places with relatively little Islamic presence, like New Orleans in
the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.

Ms. Freij, of Access, said support for her organization by companies like Ford,
and the fact that more than half its financing was government-provided, had
helped it retain and even add to its Muslim donors. ''While they are scared to
make a charitable donation to a mosque,'' she said, ''we are a safe haven for
them to write that check.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 17, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Tuesday about an A.C.L.U. report that concludes that
the fight against terrorism has hurt most Muslim charities described incorrectly
Islamic Relief USA, a charity that says its donations have actually increased.
It is a Muslim-American group, not an Arab-American group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); CHARITIES (90%); WAR ON TERROR
(90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DUE PROCESS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
CHARITABLE GIVING (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); ARAB
AMERICANS (89%); CHARITIES LAW (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); HEARSAY (78%); ASSET
FORFEITURE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (75%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (72%); TREASURY
DEPARTMENTS (69%); EVIDENCE (67%); US PRESIDENTS (66%); IMMIGRATION (62%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (55%)

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EGYPT (55%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             493 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Who Are We?

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 827 words


Policies that were wrong under George W. Bush are no less wrong because Barack
Obama is in the White House.

One of the most disappointing aspects of the early months of the Obama
administration has been its unwillingness to end many of the mind-numbing abuses
linked to the so-called war on terror and to establish a legal and moral
framework designed to prevent those abuses from ever occurring again.

The president deserves credit for unequivocally banning torture and some of the
other brutal interrogation techniques that spread like a plague in the Bush
administration's lawless response to the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. But other
policies that offend the conscience continue.

Americans should recoil as one against the idea of preventive detention,
imprisoning people indefinitely, for years and perhaps for life, without charge
and without giving them an opportunity to demonstrate their innocence.

And yet we've embraced it, asserting that there are people who are far too
dangerous to even think about releasing but who cannot be put on trial because
we have no real evidence that they have committed any crime, or because we've
tortured them and therefore the evidence would not be admissible, or whatever.
President Obama is O.K. with this (he calls it ''prolonged detention''), but he
wants to make sure it is carried out  --  here comes the oxymoron  --  fairly
and nonabusively.

Proof of guilt? In 21st-century America, there is no longer any need for such
annoyances.

Human rights? Ha-ha. That's a good one.

Also distressing is the curtain of secrecy the Obama administration has kept
drawn over shameful abuses that should be brought into the light of day. Back in
April, the administration rightly released the ''torture memos'' detailing the
gruesome interrogation techniques unleashed by the Bush crowd. But last month,
Mr. Obama apparently tripped over his own instincts and reversed his initial
decision to release photos of American soldiers engaged in the brutal abuse of
prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan.

We saw the profound effect of the disclosure of the photos from Abu Ghraib in
2004. Imagine if they had never been released. Now, in an affront to a society
that is supposed to be intelligent and free, the Obama administration is trying
to sit on photos that are just as important for Americans to see. The
president's argument for trying to block the court-ordered release of the photos
is a demoralizing echo of the embarrassingly empty rhetoric of the Bush years:

''The most direct consequence of releasing them, I believe, would be to further
inflame anti-American opinion and to put our troops in danger.''

The Obama administration is also continuing the Bush administration's abuse of
the state-secrets privilege. Lawyers from the Obama Justice Department have
argued, as did lawyers from the Bush administration before them, that a lawsuit
involving extraordinary rendition and allegations of extreme torture should be
dismissed outright because discussions of such matters in court would harm
national security.

In other words, the victims, no matter how strong their case might be, no matter
how badly they might have been abused, could never have their day in court. Jane
Mayer, writing in the June 22 New Yorker, said of the rendition program, in
which suspects were swept up by Americans and spirited off to foreign countries
for imprisonment and interrogation: ''As many as seven detainees were
misidentified and abducted by mistake.''

The Bush and Obama view of the state-secrets privilege effectively bars any real
examination of such egregious mistakes.

It was thought by many that a President Obama would put a stop to the madness,
put an end to the Bush administration's nightmarish approach to national
security. But Mr. Obama has shown no inclination to bring even the worst
offenders of the Bush years to account, and seems perfectly willing to move
ahead in lockstep with the excessive secrecy and some of the most egregious
activities of the Bush era.

The new president's excessively cautious approach to the national security and
civil liberties outrages of the Bush administration are unacceptable, and the
organizations and individuals committed to fairness, justice and the rule of law
--  the Center for Constitutional Rights, the American Civil Liberties Union,
and many others  --  should intensify their efforts to get the new
administration to do the right thing.

More than 500 of the detainees incarcerated at one time or another at Guantanamo
Bay have been released, and, except for a handful, no charges were  filed
against them. The idea that everyone held at Guantanamo was a terrorist  --  the
worst of the worst  --  was always absurd.

Vincent Warren, executive director of the Center for Constitutional Rights,
noted that Mr. Obama had promised to bring both transparency and accountability
to matters of national security. It's the only way to get our moral compass
back.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); TORTURE (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); JAIL SENTENCING (74%); CORRECTIONS
(74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); LAWYERS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
LITIGATION (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             494 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 23, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

President of Ingushetia Is Wounded in Suicide Bombing

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


The reformist leader of an unstable region near Chechnya, who had been installed
by the Kremlin to calm tensions there and seemed to be making progress, was
seriously wounded Monday in an assassination attempt.

The leader, President Yunus-Bek Yevkurov  of Ingushetia, was being driven to
work when a suicide bomber in a Toyota Camry packed with explosives swerved into
his motorcade and set off an enormous blast, officials said.

The attack underscored the difficulties facing Russia's government as it
continues to grapple with Islamic extremism, widespread corruption and clan
rivalries in the Caucasus Mountains, which are on the country's southern rim.

Ingushetia, which has 450,000 people, and another Muslim region nearby,
Dagestan, have been deeply troubled for years. Both regions border Chechnya,
where Moscow has suppressed Muslim separatists in two civil wars since the
Soviet Union's collapse.

Mr. Yevkurov was first treated at a hospital in Nazran, the major city in
Ingushetia. A team of doctors was airlifted from Moscow to oversee his care,
officials said, and then Mr. Yevkurov was to be transported to a hospital in
Moscow.

Mr. Yevkurov's driver died in the explosion, and there were conflicting reports
about whether one or more of his bodyguards died. His brother was said to have
been wounded.

There was no claim of responsibility for the bombing, officials said. Russia's
president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, appeared on national television and declared that
the attack was evidence that Mr. Yevkurov's policies were winning over the local
population and beating back militants.

''The president of Ingushetia has done a lot of late to strengthen law and order
and build up civil peace in the republic,'' Mr. Medvedev said. ''Of course, the
bandits do not welcome these efforts, and what has happened is their response to
the Ingushetia authorities' work and greater activity in these areas.''

Two weeks ago, Mr. Medvedev visited Dagestan after its interior minister was
assassinated. He  attributed violence in the region  to  foreign extremists,
calling them ''freaks who come to our country for the sole purpose of causing
damage to it.''

A day later, a senior judge in Ingushetia was assassinated. Soon after, a former
deputy prime minister of Ingushetia was gunned down.

The explosion on Monday that wounded Mr. Yevkurov was so powerful that it
crushed his car and damaged nearby houses.

''I thought that it was my gas stove that blew up,'' a woman told state
television. ''My daughter fell down. I saw the roof tumbling down. I saw the
fence toppling over, windows falling out and everything burning.''

Mr. Yevkurov, 45, a former Russian military intelligence officer, was appointed
last fall by Mr. Medvedev after unrest in Ingushetia had escalated under the
previous leader, Murat Zyazikov. Some officials in Moscow expressed fears that
Ingushetia was on its way to succumbing to the kind of hostilities that once
stirred Chechnya.

Seeking to build public trust, Mr. Yevkurov has ruled with far more restraint
than his predecessor, who was widely reviled and accused of being dictatorial
and corrupt. Mr. Yevkurov has met regularly with opposition politicians and
leaders of advocacy groups, and even publicized what he said was his personal
cellphone number, to solicit complaints from citizens.

He has tried  to live modestly, disdaining the lavish presidential residence and
other perks that typically accrue to leaders in the region, who have a
reputation for corruption.

Human rights advocates, who had harshly criticized his predecessor, have praised
him.

''He attempted to show, and prove, that the authorities are seeking to protect
society from the terrorist threat,'' said Aleksandr Cherkasov, an expert on the
Caucasus at Memorial, one of Russia's premier human rights organizations.

''It was not only his words,'' Mr. Cherkasov said. ''It has been done through
significant actions. His policies have offered hope that the situation can be
improved. Because of that, he has been dangerous to the separatist
underground.''

Even as the Kremlin has embraced Mr. Yevkurov's style in Ingushetia, it has
supported a more hard-line one in Chechnya.

The strongman there, President Ramzan A. Kadyrov, has succeeded to some extent
in pacifying Chechnya and rebuilding the capital, Grozny. But human rights
groups have called his tactics brutal, saying he has employed torture and
extrajudicial killings.

In April, the Kremlin formally declared the end of military operations in
Chechnya, portraying the move as evidence of the success of its strategy there.
But the violence has not completely ended.

On Monday, after meeting with security officials, Mr. Medvedev met with Mr.
Kadyrov and reiterated his backing for Mr. Kadyrov's work.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Yunus-Bek Yevkurov's motorcade was attacked in Nazran,
Ingushetia, on Monday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KAZBEK BASAYEV/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE --
GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); DEATHS (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
APPOINTMENTS (73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); SHOOTINGS
(72%); RELIGION (70%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (64%); CORRUPTION (55%); MOUNTAINS
(55%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

STATE: CAUCASUS MOUNTAINS (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             495 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 25, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia: Chechen Vows To Avenge Attack On a Neighboring Leader

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 127 words


The hard-line leader of the Russian region of Chechnya declared Wednesday that
he would exact ''cruel revenge'' on the organizers of a suicide bombing that
nearly killed the leader of a neighboring region, Ingushetia. The Chechen
leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, visited Ingushetia and said he would coordinate
security operations with the Ingush government. Chechnya and Ingushetia are
impoverished areas of the Caucasus mountains that have Muslim insurgencies and
extensive political corruption. Mr. Kadyrov has had some success calming his
republic, though human rights groups say he uses brutal tactics. The Ingush
president, Yunus-Bek Yevkurov, who is considered more of a reformer, remained in
a hospital in Moscow in critical condition from the attack on Monday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (87%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (87%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(87%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (84%); POLITICAL
CORRUPTION (84%); CORRUPTION (83%); MOUNTAINS (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS (52%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: CAUCASUS MOUNTAINS (92%)

COUNTRY: CAUCASIAN STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             496 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 27, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shift Possible on Holding Terror Suspects

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and PETER BAKER; Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Obama administration is considering forgoing legislation and issuing an
executive order that would authorize the president to incarcerate some terrorism
suspects indefinitely, White House officials said Friday.

Such an order would be controversial -- seemingly aligning the administration
with a disputed legal doctrine of former President George W. Bush, whose lawyers
held that the president had sweeping authority in wartime to imprison those he
deemed threats to national security.

Obama officials sought to play down the significance of the discussions by an
administration panel, saying that consideration of such an order was still in an
early phase and subject to change. They said that lawyers had not written a
specific proposal and that nothing had been submitted to the White House for
review by senior officials.

Still, the possibility of the order appeared to reflect increasing frustration
within the administration over the difficulties posed by the effort to meet Mr.
Obama's commitment to close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by
January and the dwindling options for dealing with the detainees before then.

At the heart of the issue are more than 200 men being held at Guantanamo, in
some cases for years. Initially, the administration had hoped that most could
either be sent back to their home countries or tried in criminal courts in the
United States. But emptying the prison has proved politically difficult.

Officials acknowledge that they have had trouble persuading other countries to
accept detainees, and it now appears that some detainees -- as many as several
dozen -- are unlikely candidates for criminal trials because of legal issues,
including having evidence against them that was obtained by coerced
interrogations.

Legislation remains an option, officials said, but the possibility of an
executive order, which would bypass Congress, seems to indicate that the
administration fears it may be unable to reach an agreement with lawmakers on a
new detention system to replace Guantanamo. The White House has been unable to
effectively counter resistance to transferring detainees to the United States.

Consideration of an executive order was first reported by The Washington Post
and ProPublica, an independent journalism organization.

Mr. Obama announced in a May speech at the National Archives that he was
considering indefinite detention for some prisoners who are deemed a continuing
security threat to the United States but cannot be prosecuted because the
evidence against them was tainted.

''We must recognize that these detention policies cannot be unbounded,'' he
said. ''They can't be based simply on what I or the executive branch decide
alone.''

He added that he would ''work with Congress to develop an appropriate legal
regime so that our efforts are consistent with our values and our
Constitution.''

But administration officials said Friday that working with Congress did not
necessarily mean passing legislation. Mr. Obama, they said, would consult with
lawmakers even if he decided to enact his system through executive order.

The Post/ProPublica report said that under one possible order discussed earlier
this month, detainees would be imprisoned at a military installation in the
United States, but their detention would be subject to annual presidential
review.

Those detainees, including prisoners at Guantanamo and others who might be
captured in the future, would have the right to legal counsel and access to some
of the information used as the basis for their incarceration, the report stated.

''Detention without charge is a regime we don't want to see,'' said Sarah E.
Mendelson, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies who
led a study of options for closing Guantanamo. ''Having an executive order
rather than Congressional legislation is even worse. Then, it's a continuation
of the kind of super power within the executive branch that you saw with the
Bush administration.''

Several human rights advocates met with Mr. Obama and his top advisers before
his National Archives speech and warned him that indefinite detention had many
of the same flaws as holding prisoners at Guantanamo.

''We told him to make sure that the cure doesn't perpetuate the disease,'' said
Elisa Massimino, executive director of Human Rights First.

Still, Ms. Massimino said, the president's advisers, including Attorney General
Eric H. Holder Jr. and Gregory B. Craig, the White House counsel, seem
frustrated by what they see as a host of bad options and are ''struggling'' with
the prospect that some prisoners could never be brought to trial.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EXECUTIVE
ORDERS (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); PRISONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); JOURNALISM (61%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (50%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (52%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (52%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (52%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (52%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (52%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (52%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             497 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 2, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

To Critics, Obama's Terror Policy Looks a Lot Like Bush's

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Civil libertarians recently accusedPresident Obama of acting like former
President George W. Bush, citing reports about Mr. Obama's plans to detain
terrorism suspects without trials on domestic soil after he closes the
Guantanamo prison.

It was only the latest instance in which critics have argued that Mr. Obama has
failed to live up to his campaign pledge ''to restore our Constitution and the
rule of law'' and raised a pointed question: Has he, on issues related to
fighting terrorism, turned out to be little different from his predecessor?

The answer depends on what it means to act like Mr. Bush.

As they move toward completing a review of their options for dealing with the
detainees, Obama administration officials insist that there is a fundamental
difference between Mr. Bush's approach and theirs. While Mr. Bush claimed to
wield sweeping powers as commander in chief that allowed him to bypass legal
constraints when fighting terrorism, they say, Mr. Obama respects checks and
balances by relying on -- and obeying -- Congressional statutes.

''While the administration is considering a series of options, a range of
options, none relies on legal theories that we have the inherent authority to
detain people,'' Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, said this week
in response to questions about the preventive detention report. ''And this will
not be pursued in that manner.''

But Mr. Obama's critics say that whether statutory authorization exists for his
counterterrorism policies is just a legalistic point. The core problem with Mr.
Bush's approach, they argue, was that it trammeled individual rights. And they
say Mr. Obama's policies have not changed that.

''President Obama may mouth very different rhetoric,'' said Anthony D. Romero,
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union. ''He may have a more
complicated process with members of Congress. But in the end, there is no
substantive break from the policies of the Bush administration.''

Complicating the analysis, Mr. Bush's policies evolved over time. Much of the
legal controversy that initially surrounded his administration's efforts to
prevent terrorist attacks had drained away by the time Mr. Obama took over on
Jan. 20.

The Bush team stopped using its harshest interrogation techniques, like
waterboarding, years before leaving office. And in Mr. Bush's second term,
Congress passed legislation bringing federal statutes into alignment with
policies like military commissions and surveillance without warrants.

As a senator, Mr. Obama voted for the 2008 bill authorizing the surveillance
program, which he has continued since taking office. He voted against a 2006
bill authorizing military commissions, but it passed anyway. While Mr. Obama
initially halted the trials, he has since proposed reviving them in a revised
form.

Mr. Obama has also drawn fire from human rights advocates for fighting to
prevent detainees in Afghanistan from having habeas corpus rights. But his legal
team notes that the 2006 Military Commissions Act contains a provision saying
such prisoners may not challenge their detentions in court.

Still, Mr. Obama has also continued other Bush-era policies where statutory law
is murkier or absent -- like the C.I.A.'s ''extraordinary rendition'' program in
which detainees are transferred to other countries and the invocation of the
''state secrets'' privilege to shut down  some lawsuits. (The administration is
reviewing both policies.)

And after grappling with how to close the prison at the naval base in Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, Mr. Obama proposed a new system of preventive detention to deal with
those terrorism suspects who, he says, would be hard to prosecute and dangerous
to release.

But Mr. Obama's insistence that he would create such a preventive detention
regime only with Congressional authorization may pose little pragmatic obstacle,
because he can claim lawmakers have already granted it.

In 2004, the Supreme Courtruled, 5 to 4, that Mr. Bush could detain --
indefinitely, without trial and on domestic soil -- a man accused of fighting
for the Taliban. It cited Congress's authorization to use military force against
the perpetrators of the 2001 attacks, which remains on the books.

To be sure, Mr. Obama has made some significant changes to Bush policies. He
closed the Central Intelligence Agency's long-term prisons and required strict
adherence to antitorture rules. He also released secret legal memorandums about
interrogation.

Those changes have opened him up to attacks from the right. In particular,
former Vice President Dick Cheneyaccused Mr. Obama of abandoning the Bush-Cheney
strategies, suggesting that Mr. Obama would bear direct responsibility for any
future terrorist attack.

Mr. Obama has embraced Mr. Cheney's premise that he is an agent of change, as
his campaign rhetoric suggested he would be. In a speech in May, Mr. Obama
described his policies as ''a new direction from the last eight years.''

But Jack Goldsmith, a top legal official in the Bush administration, said the
claim of a vast gulf between Mr. Obama's counterterrorism policies and those at
the end of Mr. Bush's tenure was false.

''There is a faux debate that something new is afoot and both the Obama
administration and Cheney have an interest in that being the case, but it's just
not true,'' he said. ''It just serves almost everyone's political interests to
make it seem like something brand new is happening, but it's mostly window
dressing for just what was going on before.''

Neil J. Kinkopf, a Clinton administration lawyer, said that even if Mr. Obama's
policies look similar to Mr. Bush's, his show of greater respect for Congress
was important because he is not creating precedents that future presidents can
cite to bypass unrelated laws.

Mr. Obama has not always been consistent in that respect. In a signing statement
last week, for example, he claimed a right to ignore five sections of an
appropriations bill related to international financial institutions. Such
statutory limits, he said, ''would interfere with my constitutional authority to
conduct foreign relations.''

In any case, Jack Balkin, a Yale Law School professor, said Mr. Obama's
ratification of the basic outlines of the surveillance and detention policies he
inherited would reverberate for generations. By bestowing bipartisan acceptance
on them, Mr. Balkin said, Mr. Obama is consolidating them as entrenched features
of government.

''What we are watching,'' Mr. Balkin said, ''is a liberal, centrist, Democratic
version of the construction of these same governing practices.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A detainee at the Guantanamo prison. The president's plans for
detainees have drawn complaints from civil libertarians. (POOL PHOTO BY BRENNAN
LINSLEY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%);
LEGISLATION (89%); RULE OF LAW (79%); HABEAS CORPUS (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(74%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); BARACK OBAMA (89%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             499 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

NBC Sets Premiere For Antiterror Series

BYLINE: Compiled by Dave Itzkoff

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; ARTS,
BRIEFLY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 175 words


An NBC News investigation program about a counterterrorist team's search for
suspected war criminals and terrorists will have its premiere on July 20, The
Hollywood Reporter said. The program, ''The Wanted,'' will follow specialists in
foreign intelligence and war crimes, assembled for the series by NBC, as they
pursue suspected international terrorists, focusing on subjects including Mullah
Krekar, the founder of Ansar al-Islam, a radical Islamist group linked to Al
Qaeda, and Mamoun Darkazanli, who is suspected of providing logistical and
financial support to Al Qaeda. The program has raised concerns in the Department
of Homeland Security and other government agencies, which say it could interfere
with criminal investigations, and from human rights advocates, who say it could
broadcast false accusations. In February NBC News was criticized for its
investigation of Leopold Munyakazi, a visiting professor at Goucher College in
Maryland. He has been charged in Rwanda with taking part in the genocide there
in 1994. He denies the charges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
ESPIONAGE (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); RELIGION (70%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (51%)

COMPANY: NBC UNIVERSAL INC (98%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (98%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (98%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             503 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawyer Picked For U.S. War Crimes Post

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 135 words


The White House has nominated Stephen Rapp, a well-known figure in international
criminal law, to be ambassador at large for war crimes issues. The ambassador at
large, who works for the State Department, coordinates American policy on a
variety of legal issues, including the response to international courts and
tribunals and to grave violations anywhere of international human rights law.
The Obama administration, which has signaled its belief in a strong American
role in upholding international law, is expected to give new weight to the
office. Mr. Rapp, a former United States attorney from Iowa,  has served at the
United Nations tribunal dealing with the genocide in Rwanda and is the chief
prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is trying former
President Charles Taylor of Liberia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); CRIMINAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); RWANDA (79%); LIBERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             507 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 12, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Another Insurgency Gains in Pakistan, Stirred Up by Local Killings

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1169 words

DATELINE: TURBAT, Pakistan


Three local political leaders were seized from a small legal office here in
April, handcuffed, blindfolded and hustled into a waiting pickup truck in front
of their lawyer and neighboring shopkeepers. Their bodies, riddled with bullets
and badly decomposed in the scorching heat, were found in a date palm grove five
days later.

Local residents are convinced that the killings were the work of the Pakistani
intelligence agencies, and the deaths have provided a new spark for revolt
across Baluchistan, a vast and restless province in Pakistan's southwest where
the government faces yet another insurgency.

Although not on the same scale as the Taliban insurgency in the northwest, the
conflict in Baluchistan is steadily gaining ground. Politicians and analysts
warn that it presents a distracting second front for the authorities, drawing
off resources, like helicopters, that the United States provided Pakistan to
fight the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Baluch nationalists and some Pakistani politicians say the Baluch conflict holds
the potential to break the country apart -- Baluchistan makes up a third of
Pakistan's territory -- unless the government urgently deals with years of pent
up grievances and stays the hand of the military and security services.

Hundreds, possibly thousands, of Baluch were rounded up in a harsh regime of
secret detentions and torture under President Pervez Musharraf, who left office
last year.  Human rights groups and Baluch activists say those abuses have
continued under President Asif Ali Zardari, despite promises to heal tensions.

''It's pretty volatile,'' said Nawab Zulfiqar Ali Magsi, the governor of
Baluchistan. ''When you try to forcibly pacify people, you will get a
reaction.''

The discovery of the men's bodies on April 8 set off days of rioting and weeks
of strikes, demonstrations and civil resistance. In schools and colleges,
students pulled down the Pakistani flag and put up the pale blue, red and green
Baluch nationalist flag.

Schoolchildren still refuse to sing the national anthem at assemblies, instead
breaking into a nationalist Baluch song championing the armed struggle for
independence, teachers and parents said.

For the first time, women, traditionally secluded in Baluch society, have joined
street protests against the continuing detentions of nationalist figures.
Graffiti daubed on walls around this town call for independence and guerrilla
war, which persists in large parts of the province.

The nationalist opposition stems from what it sees as the forcible annexation of
Baluchistan by Pakistan 62 years ago at Pakistan's creation. But much of the
popular resentment stems from years of economic and political marginalization,
something President Zardari promised to remedy but has done little to actually
address.

In interviews, people in and around Turbat said the Pakistani military and
intelligence agencies were still doggedly pursuing nationalist sympathizers.

A case in point, they say, is that of the three political figures who were
killed: Gul Muhammad, Lala Munir and Sher Muhammad, all prominent in the
nationalist movement.

Government officials say the men were being prosecuted for activities against
the state but deny any involvement in their deaths. People  are not convinced
and say that while the men supported independence, they were not involved in the
armed struggle.

Mir Kachkol Ali, the men's lawyer, who witnessed their abduction, said the
killings represented a deepening of the campaign by the Pakistani military to
crush the Baluch nationalist movement. ''Their tactics are not only to torture
and detain, but to eliminate,'' he said.

The insurgents, who say they are led by the Baluchistan Liberation Army, have
escalated their tactics, too. A prominent example was the kidnapping in February
of an American citizen, John Solecki, the head of the United Nations refugee
organization in the provincial capital, Quetta.

The abduction was carried out by a breakaway group of young radicals who wanted
to draw international attention to their cause and to exchange their captive for
Baluch being held by the security services.

Mr. Solecki was released in April after the intervention of Baluch leaders,
including Gul Muhammad. Baluch leaders speculate that the intelligence agencies
may have killed Mr. Muhammad and his colleagues to provoke the kidnappers into
murdering the American, which would have branded the Baluch nationalists as
terrorists.

Instead, ''the killing of these three has centralized the national movement of
Baluchistan,'' Mr. Ali, the lawyer, said.

He and others said they had no doubt that the intelligence services were
responsible.

The three men were in his office on April 3 when a half-dozen armed men seized
them, he said.

''They were persons of the agencies,'' Mr. Ali said. ''They were in plain
clothes, but from their hairstyles, their language, we know them.'' Mr. Ali has
lodged a case with the police against the intelligence agencies for the
abduction and murder of the three.

Nisar Ahmed, a shopkeeper and friend of the political leaders, said he saw them
pushed into a pickup truck. He also said that the armed men appeared to be
intelligence agents and that they were escorted by a second vehicle with 10 more
armed men, also in plain clothes, who looked to be from the Frontier Corps
paramilitary force.

While the insurgency remains strong in other parts of Baluchistan, the military
has largely crushed the resistance around Turbat since March 2007, yet armed men
are still in the hills and continue to be rounded up, residents here said.

Yousuf Muhammad, the brother of Gul Muhammad, one of the slain political
leaders, said that in February he was hung by his hands from the ceiling for 48
hours in a Pakistani military camp.

''They came to arrest Gul Muhammad but they found me,'' he said. Another
brother, Obeidullah,  said Gul Muhammad had received threats from people in the
intelligence agencies warning him to stop his work. The latest came 10 days
before his death, he said.

A group of students in the nearby town of Tump said they were rounded up and
held in various army camps without charge for seven months in 2007. Some said
they were suspended by their hands or their feet until they passed out, were
beaten and were held in solitary confinement. Each showed a blackened mark where
a toenail had been pulled out.

The arrests and disappearances have hardened attitudes, townspeople said,
particularly among the young.

Even the governor, who is the president's representative in the province,
expressed exasperation at the Zardari government's inaction in addressing the
needs of the population. Many Baluch are increasingly cynical about the
government's ability to change things.

Sayed Hassan Shah, the minister for industry and commerce in Baluchistan, said
his party was now demanding provincial autonomy.

''This is our last option,'' he said. ''If we fail, then maybe we have to think
of liberation or separation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Demonstrators in Karachi, Pakistan, marched in April to
denounce the killings of three local politicians from Baluchistan Province,
deaths that some attribute to Pakistani intelligence agencies.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
ASIF HASSAN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
Yousuf Muhammad, right, said he was detained in February, a few months before
his brother was abducted and fatally shot.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLOTTA GALL/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)
  MAP: People in Turbat say nationalist sympathizers are detained.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
LAWYERS (78%); RIOTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); PROPERTY ANNEXATIONS (72%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); AL-QAEDA (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); TORTURE
(70%); INTERVIEWS (70%); CHILDREN (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (67%);
HELICOPTERS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: ASIF ALI ZARDARI (76%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (56%)

CITY: KARACHI,PAKISTAN (77%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             509 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 18, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inquiry on 1994 Blast at Argentina Jewish Center Gets New Life

BYLINE: By ALEXEI BARRIONUEVO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


In the 15 years since the bombing of the Argentine Jewish Mutual Aid Association
here, the deadliest terrorist attack in this country's history, the case has
become a symbol of the failings of Argentina's judicial system.

Despite all the international attention, despite investigative help from Israel
and the United States, no one has been convicted for the July 18, 1994, bombing
of the community center, in which 85 people died and more than 300 were injured.

''This was clearly a test case,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco, the Americas
director for Human Rights Watch. ''And so far it really has not helped to
establish any credibility for the justice system in Argentina.''

But suddenly, an investigation that former President Nestor Kirchner called a
national disgrace has received new urgency and is again raising hopes among
Jewish groups, though significant concerns about the inquiry remain.

In May, Argentina's Supreme Court validated much of the evidence of the initial
investigation, which had previously been ruled inadmissible after an
investigative magistrate tried to bribe a witness. In its recent ruling, the
court urged an ''end to impunity'' and emphasized the need for Argentina to
finally solve the case.

Then last month, a federal judge here, Rodolfo Canicoba Corral, ordered the
international capture of Samuel Salman El Reda, a 43-year-old Colombian citizen
whom prosecutors here had accused of helping coordinate the local Hezbollah cell
that Argentine investigators said had carried out the bombing.

Investigators here believe that they have solved the case in principle, having
accused the Iranian government of planning and financing the attack, and
Hezbollah of executing those plans.

But some experts, including a former American F.B.I. agent who assisted the
Argentines in their investigation, are skeptical about the claims of direct
Iranian involvement. ''The guilt field was painted with a bit too broad a
brush,'' said the former agent, James Bernazzani, who led the F.B.I.'s Hezbollah
operations unit in the late 1990s.

Mr. Bernazzani said he was still ''convinced'' of Hezbollah's involvement, ''but
we surfaced no information indicating Iranian compliance.''

Such doubts have long clouded the investigations. Previous inquiries were
riddled with incompetence, witnesses who were threatened and bribed, stolen
evidence and accusations of a cover-up involving the former Argentine president
Carlos Menem.

The Argentines, nevertheless, maintain that Iran was behind the attack, and have
had limited relations with Tehran partly because of the investigation's
importance to the nation's 230,000 Jews, the largest Jewish community in Latin
America. The 1994 bombing came two years after the Israeli Embassy here was
bombed, killing 29 people, a case that also remains unsolved.

Mohsen Baharvand, the charge d'affaires at the Iranian Embassy here, said Iran
was an ''easy scapegoat'' for the attack. ''The whole claim against Iran in the
AMIA case is a big lie,'' Mr. Baharvand said in an e-mail message, using the
Spanish acronym for the Argentine Jewish Mutual Aid Association.

Judge Juan Jose Galeano's original investigation focused on the so-called local
connection, including people involved in selling a van that had been loaded with
explosives. But his inquiry went awry after he decided to pay a suspect, Carlos
Telleldin, $400,000 to falsely accuse police officers of being involved in the
plot. Amid the scandal, Mr. Telleldin and four police officers were acquitted in
2004. Judge Galeano was impeached a year later.

Alberto Nisman, the prosecutor who took over the investigation in 2005, has
intensified a line of inquiry that Mr. Galeano had played down: the involvement
of Iran.

In 2006, Mr. Nisman formally accused several members of Iran's government of
planning and financing the bombing, including former President Ali Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani. Central to the indictments was an Iranian defector, Abdolghassem
Meshabi, who said that the plot had been hatched in Tehran and that Iranian
officials had paid Mr. Menem about $10 million to help cover up Iran's
involvement.

Mr. Menem denied any involvement last November. His former advisers have
insisted that he was determined to solve the case, not cover it up, and that Mr.
Bernazzani had said the F.B.I. did not view Mr. Meshabi as a credible witness.

With the case seemingly stalled, Argentina's Supreme Court in May ordered it
reopened, saying it was unreasonable to throw out all the original investigative
work because of the Galeano corruption scandal. The court ruled that the
investigation had been valid until Oct. 31, 1995, when Mr. Galeano decided to
offer the money to Mr. Telleldin.

Judge Corral said an appeals court might decide to retry Mr. Telleldin, a
used-car salesman who was acquitted after spending 10 years in jail awaiting
trial. Mr. Telleldin said in an interview that he was innocent and that it would
be ''impossible to prove'' that he knew the van he sold was going to be used for
the bombing.

Mr. Nisman, meanwhile, is pressing on with his investigation of Mr. El Reda. In
the weeks before the bombing, Mr. El Reda shuttled between ''safe houses'' in
Buenos Aires and a red brick house in Foz do Iguacu, a Brazilian town in the
Triple Frontier area where Argentina meets Brazil and Paraguay, investigators
said.

From millions of phone call records and the help of an unidentified Hezbollah
operative, investigators say they were able to piece together evidence of a
terrorist cell involving Mr. El Reda that kept in close contact with Beirut
leading up to the bombing.

On the morning of July 1, 1994, Mr. Nisman said, Mr. El Reda made a call from
the international airport here to a cellphone registered in Foz do Iguacu, a
call that may have set off the final phase of the attack.

Other calls to the cellphone were made from public phone centers near the Jewish
community center and near a mosque in Buenos Aires where the cultural attache at
the Iranian Embassy, one of the people charged in 2006, spent a great deal of
time, Mr. Nisman wrote in court papers. Mr. El Reda had forged close ties with
the Iranian attache, Mr. Nisman said.

Calls were often made from those same locations to the communications center of
Hezbollah in Beirut and to known militants in the Triple Frontier, Mr. Nisman
said.

Mr. Bernazzani warned that that ''doesn't prove anything,'' because what had
been said on the calls was not known. ''Telephones don't get indicted, people
do,'' he said.

Mr. Nisman, nevertheless, said that at 7:41 a.m. on the day of the bombing a
final call was made from Aeroparque airport in Buenos Aires. Forty minutes
later, a flight bound for Puerto Iguazu in the Triple Frontier took off. Mr.
Nisman said he believed that Mr. El Reda made the call before boarding the
plane.

Then, at 9:53 a.m., a van loaded with  about 600 pounds of ammonium nitrate
fertilizer and fuel oil exploded in front of the community center. A few days
later Mr. El Reda left South America for Lebanon, where he still lives with his
family, Mr. Nisman said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Volunteers who recovered objects that were found after a 1994
bombing in Buenos Aires showed a restored book on Friday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL
GARCiA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); WITNESSES (89%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (88%); MAGISTRATES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%);
HISTORY (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); BRIBERY (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%);
JUDGES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); HEZBOLLAH (54%)

PERSON: NESTOR KIRCHNER (58%)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (90%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (54%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
ISRAEL (93%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); IRAN (54%)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             514 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

6 in Crowd Killed as Suicide Bomber Strikes Outside Theater in Chechen Capital

BYLINE: By ANDREW E. KRAMER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 427 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Six people were killed in Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, on Sunday when a
suicide bomber detonated explosives outside a theater as a crowd gathered for a
performance. The bombing was the second in the city this month.

Police officers had stopped the man a dozen or so yards from the theater's
entrance, news agencies reported, preventing him from entering a hall packed
with about 1,000  people where he might have caused many more casualties.
Instead, the man exploded his explosives beside benches and a fountain in front
of the theater.

Russian state television showed police tape cordoning off the square and
ambulances leaving the area. Ten people were wounded, television news reported.
The powerful blast rattled windows blocks away.

Four of the dead  were police officers, including the director of security for
public events in Grozny, the Russian Information Agency reported. Another was a
Turkish construction worker described as a bystander, and the sixth a citizen of
Georgia who died in a hospital later on Sunday.

Another Georgian citizen was wounded, the news agency reported. It said the
bomber's remains were too damaged to be identified immediately.

On July 7, a bomb hidden in an urn on a Grozny street exploded, wounding nine
people.

Russia is fighting a low-grade insurgency in Chechnya, a region in the Caucasus
Mountains the size of Connecticut, where rights groups say police abuse is as
much of a problem as militant attacks.

Two weeks ago, Natalia Estemirova, a researcher for the human rights group
Memorial, was abducted in Grozny and her body later found on the side of a road.
Memorial accused the region's president, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, of involvement in
her killing; Mr. Kadyrov has sued the group for slander.

In other violence in the region on Sunday, police officers in Grozny killed a
man in a shootout who was described as a rebel. In the neighboring region of
Ingushetia, four men died when the car they were riding in exploded. The
regional Interior Ministry said they were militants transporting a makeshift
bomb, The Associated Press reported.

Violent attacks have increased in the North Caucasus recently. In June, a
suicide car bomber critically wounded the president of Ingushetia, Yunus-Bek
Yevkurov, by colliding with his motorcade on a highway.

After the explosion on Sunday, Mr. Kadyrov, the president of Chechnya, said it
was an effort by militants to halt a military operation under way in the
mountains between Chechnya and Ingushetia that was begun in response to the
attack on Mr. Yevkurov.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (92%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (78%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (76%); LIBEL
& SLANDER (76%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (70%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (65%); MOUNTAINS (65%); LITIGATION
(63%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: CAUCASUS MOUNTAINS (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CAUCASIAN STATES (92%); GEORGIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 30, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Injects Precision Into Its Air War on Taliban

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1121 words


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Pakistan's Air Force is improving its ability to pinpoint
and attack militant targets with precision weapons, adding a new dimension to
the country's fight against violent extremism, according to Pakistani military
officials and independent analysts.

The Pakistani military has moved away from the scorched-earth artillery and air
tactics used last year against insurgents in the Bajaur tribal agency. In recent
months, the air force has shifted from using Google Earth to sophisticated
images from spy planes and other surveillance aircraft, and has increased its
use of laser-guided bombs.

The changes reflect an effort by the Pakistani military to conduct its
operations in a way that will not further alienate the population by increasing
civilian casualties and destroying property. But they are also dictated by
necessity as the military takes its campaign into areas where it is reluctant to
commit ground troops, particularly in the rugged terrain of Waziristan, where it
had suffered heavy losses.

Military analysts say the airstrikes alone cannot ultimately substitute for
ground forces or for better counterinsurgency training. But they say the
airstrikes have become a valuable tool for Pakistan in fighting the Taliban and
Al Qaeda in sometimes inaccessible terrain.

Since May, F-16 multirole fighter jets have flown more than 300 combat missions
against militants in the Swat Valley and more than 100 missions in South
Waziristan, attacking mountain hide-outs, training centers and ammunition
depots, Pakistani military officials said.

In conjunction with infantry fire, artillery barrages and helicopter gunship
attacks, military officials say, the air combat missions reinvigorated the
military campaign in Swat and have put increasing pressure on the leader of the
Pakistani Taliban, Baitullah Mehsud, in South Waziristan.

Interviews with Pakistani fighter pilots and senior commanders offered a rare
window into this other air war -- a much larger but less heralded campaign that
runs parallel to the three dozen secret missile strikes carried out this year by
Central Intelligence Agencydrones in Pakistan's lawless tribal areas.

The air force's new tools and tactics have several sources. The air force has
without fanfare accepted some American assistance, like sophisticated
surveillance equipment and high-grade images.

But sensitive to anti-American fervor in the country, Pakistani officials have
refused most outside aid, developing a small corps of ground spotters largely on
their own, and occasionally tapping the Internet for online assistance.

Pakistani officials are urging the Obama administration to lease Pakistan
upgraded F-16s, until its own new fighters are delivered in the next year or
two. This would allow Pakistani pilots to fly night missions, impossible with
their current aircraft.

Pakistan has argued that it needs the more advanced versions of the F-16 to more
effectively  battle the Taliban insurgency. In the past, American officials
raised concerns that Pakistan's arms purchases and troop deployments  were
geared mainly to bolstering its ability to fight its traditional enemy to the
east, India. ''Of course, there is a real threat from India,'' Air Chief Marshal
Rao Qamar Suleman, Pakistan's air force chief of staff, said in an interview at
his headquarters here. ''But right now we have to tackle the threat from the
militants.''

Nearly every day in the past few months, Pakistani warplanes have pummeled
militant targets in the contested Swat Valley and South Waziristan. The
campaigns are a big change from operations in Bajaur last fall.

''The biggest handicap we had in Bajaur was that we didn't have good imagery,''
Air Chief Marshal Qamar said. ''We didn't have good target descriptions. We did
not know the area. We were forced to use Google Earth.

''I didn't want to face a similar situation in Swat,'' he said.

In advance of the Swat campaign, the air force equipped about 10 F-16s with
high-resolution, infrared sensors, provided by the United States, to conduct
detailed reconnaissance of the entire valley.

The United States has also resumed secret drone flights performing military
surveillance in the tribal areas, to provide Pakistani commanders with a wide
array of videos and other information on militants, according to American
officials.

In most cases, officials said, the Pakistani Army provides target information to
the air force, which confirms the locations on newly detailed maps. Identifying
high-value targets through the use of army spotters or, in  some cases, a new,
small group of specially trained air force spotters, the air force was able to
increase its use of laser-guided bombs to 80 percent of munitions used in Swat,
from about 40 percent in Bajaur, Air Chief Marshal Qamar said.

Another change was the mass evacuation of civilians. About  two million people
were displaced, sometimes with only a few hours' notice, as part of an effort to
get civilians out of conflict areas to reduce their casualties.

Some American officials voice skepticism about Pakistani claims of success. ''We
don't have access to battle-damage assessment or the information on the actual
strike execution, so we cannot make a qualitative comparison of what the
intended effect was versus the actual effect,'' said an American adviser, who
spoke on condition of anonymity, to avoid jeopardizing his job.

Officials of human rights organizations say the military has not been able to
eliminate all civilian casualties from airstrikes and ground fire, but they
agree that the numbers are down.

''Certainly, the level of civilian casualties in this phase of the conflict has
been lower than in previous operations in the tribal areas,'' said Ali Dayan
Hasan, senior South Asia researcher for Human Rights Watch, based in Lahore,
Pakistan.

The air force still operates under limitations. Because the F-16s are equipped
to fly only by day, the militants move and conduct operations at night. Indeed,
not one of the 21 main militant leaders in Swat has been killed or captured,
Pakistani officials acknowledge. In addition, the Pakistani jets cannot be
refueled in midair, as American fighters can, limiting how long they can remain
over a target area.

In South Waziristan, as the army mulls a ground war, the air force continues to
attack militants' hide-outs and training camps as well as storage caves and
tunnels with 500-pound and 2,000-pound bombs.

''We're still developing our plans for South Waziristan,'' Air Chief Marshal
Qamar said. ''We are preparing to ramp up. I think Baitullah Mehsud is getting
the message, and the message is, if he keeps doing these things, we'll hit
him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Pakistanis in May at a temporary camp for internally displaced
people. Millions of civilians have been moved from conflict areas. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (90%); AIR FORCES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); ESPIONAGE (89%); MILITARY
SURVEILLANCE (89%); SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (89%); AIRCRAFT
PILOTS (89%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (77%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY
(75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LASERS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); MOUNTAINS (73%); LASER
WEAPONS (73%); HELICOPTERS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: BAITULLAH MEHSUD (58%); BARACK OBAMA (52%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%)

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             518 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 31, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fishermen Scoop Up Sri Lanka's Peace Dividend

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; TRINCOMALEE JOURNAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: TRINCOMALEE, Sri Lanka


It was just after dawn and the fish market beneath this port city's clock tower
was humming. Fishermen shouldering baskets laden with the night's catch tipped
their Spanish mackerel, tuna and prawns onto the slick concrete floor for
buyers. Sweaty men with clipboards and wads of cash leaned in close to inspect
with crinkled noses, squinting eyes and prodding fingers.

''I'll take this for 500 rupees a kilo,'' nearly $5, one buyer said to an
expectant fisherman, waving his chin in the direction of a large, glistening
yellowfin tuna. ''Can you get me more?''

Fishermen here certainly hope so. The end of the brutal 26-year war against the
Tamil Tiger insurgency in Sri Lanka prompted the government to ease fishing
restrictions on Trincomalee's harbor, breathing new life into the region's
moribund fishing industry. Boats once moldering on shore now go on all-night
runs for tuna, squid and lobster. Ghostly markets are coming back to life.

Trincomalee has one of the world's deepest natural harbors, and its potential
for fishing, shipping and tourism seems endless. It holds a bounty of fish, crab
and prawns that could provide tens of millions of dollars in earnings. Whales
spawn here and dolphins leap in the azure waters.

But the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, one of the world's most brutal and
enduring separatist groups, had a small but effective navy it used in suicide
missions and to supply weapons to its fighters. Although the rebels were chased
from this region in 2006, the bay has been largely off limits to development
because of security concerns.

In the past month, the government has allowed fishermen to fish in 12-hour
shifts here and has allowed fishing to resume in other previously restricted
coastal areas.

Fishing is at the heart of the economic and cultural life of this region, indeed
of much of coastal Sri Lanka, and its return is being celebrated in the north
and east.

''When people here cannot fish they feel as if they are not living,'' said T. T.
R. de Silva, the top central government official here.

The rapid rebound of the fishing industry here mirrors a broader rebirth under
way, one that gives people in Sri Lanka a tantalizing morsel of how prosperous
postwar life could be.

In Sri Lanka, with its lush tea plantations, miles of pristine beaches, rolling
farmland and deep water harbors, the economy is waiting to be unleashed,
government officials and business leaders say. Nowhere is that truer than in the
war-scarred east and north of the country.

In 1981 the Eastern Province accounted for 11 percent of the country's gross
domestic product. In 2006 it contributed only 4 percent, said Palitha T. B.
Kohona, Sri Lanka's foreign secretary, who has been trying to drum up investment
in the formerly war-torn parts of the country.

''The potential here is just enormous,'' he said. ''There is nowhere to go but
up.''

Sri Lanka's economy has grown at a relatively good clip despite nearly three
decades of war,  averaging about 6 percent annually in the past four years.

But winning the war, which required an army of about 200,000 men and huge
expenditures on arms, has left the government's coffers almost empty. After
weeks of wrangling, the International Monetary Fundhas agreed to help Sri Lanka
with a $2.6 billion line of credit, despite objections from some Western
countries concerned about the government's human rights record.

In the last weeks of the war thousands of Tamil civilians died in a narrow strip
of land where they were stuck, along with Tamil Tiger fighters. The government
says it did not intentionally attack civilians, but human rights organizations
have called for an independent investigation. The government has vehemently
opposed such an inquiry.

Here in Trincomalee, hopes for a large peace dividend are high.

''The war is over,'' said D. H. Podimahathaya, a 43-year-old fisherman who has
seen his income plummet because of restrictions on fishing in Trincomalee
harbor. ''Everyone suffered a lot. Now we need money.''

Mr. Podimahathaya's family has been fishing for generations, and the
restrictions hit them hard.

''Our whole family depends on fishing,'' he said. ''At some times we didn't have
anything to eat. But now the situation is improving.''

Muthumala Gunadasa, a wizened 57-year-old fisherman, said the war had forced
three of his brothers to migrate to the south, despite the fact that the fishing
here is much more lucrative.

''But now those who left are returning home,'' he said. ''Everyone wants to fish
here.''

But the picture in Trincomalee is not exactly postcard perfect, said R.
Rajarammohan, chairman of the city's Chamber of Commerce. The seas may be more
open, but strict security measures remain on land, like the roadblocks leading
from the city to the capital, Colombo, where much of Trincomalee's daily catch
is headed.

''When goods and people cannot move freely, it is premature to talk about an
economic turnaround,'' Mr. Rajarammohan said. ''If the war is over, are all of
these measures really necessary?''

Indeed, the journey from Trincomalee to Colombo, just 160 miles, can take more
than eight hours. Soldiers stop motorists more than a dozen times, and at one
major checkpoint passengers must get out of their vehicles and have their cargo
searched.

Government officials say that these precautions are necessary because Tamil
rebels may remain hidden in the north and east. The rebels have used women and
children as suicide bombers in the past, so almost anyone could be a suspect,
Mr. de Silva said.

''We cannot be too careful,'' he said. ''The war only just ended.''

Fishermen here are glad to be back out on the water, but they say they are
looking forward to the day when they can fish anytime they like. At the moment
they can go out for only 12 hours at a time, and they can use only small
outboard motors, which limits the size of their catch.

''There is so much demand, but we can't meet it,'' said a  62-year-old fisherman
named Siripala. ''One day, we hope to be free to fish without fear.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Fishing is at the heart of the economic and cultural life of
Trincomalee. Additional photographs are at nytimes.com/world.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
KEITH BEDFORD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)  MAP: Part of the daily catch, left, in
Trincomalee, Sri Lanka. With the end of a civil war, the government has eased
curbs on fishing in the waters off Trincomalee, which offer a bounty of fish and
other seafood.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRUSTACEANS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); MARINE
MAMMALS (90%); FINFISH FISHING (89%); SHELLFISH FISHING (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); HARBORS & PORTS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (74%); COASTAL AREAS (73%); NIGHT & SHIFT WORK (73%); TEA (73%);
BEACHES (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS (72%); ARMS TRADE (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(69%); GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (69%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (63%);
TEA FARMING (60%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (75%)

CITY: VICTORIA, SEYCHELLES (73%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             521 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

India: Report On Police Abuse

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 83 words


India's poorly trained and overworked police detain people illegally, torture
and kill suspects, and refuse to investigate allegations against the politically
powerful, according to a report published by Human Rights Watch on Tuesday. The
report documented abuse and corruption including so-called encounters, in which
police officers kill a suspect and claim the victim died during a shootout;
torture used to obtain false confessions; and false charges filed at the request
of local politicians.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); CORRUPTION
(88%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (86%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             522 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 7, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fatah Delays Elections, But Extends Conference

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 540 words

DATELINE: BETHLEHEM, West Bank


Amid stormy meetings and acrimonious disagreements over voting procedures,
leaders of Fatah, the mainstream Palestinian nationalist movement, postponed
elections for its decision-making bodies that were scheduled for Thursday. They
said the landmark party conference taking place here would go on for at least
two more days.

Fatah members are hoping that the conference, their first in 20 years, will
revitalize and unify the troubled movement and fortify it against its Islamic
rival, Hamas. But Fatah, at the vanguard of Palestinian efforts to negotiate
peace deals with Israel, has been showing its more usual tendency for infighting
and disarray.

Some delegates complained of bad planning, and observers described an atmosphere
bordering on anarchy. But others said they were happy that the full spectrum of
members' opinions was finally being aired.

''I am proud,'' said Saeb Erekat, a senior aide of Mahmoud Abbas, the
Palestinian president and Fatah's leader. ''Are we fighting? You bet! Are we
screaming at each other? You bet!''

Taisir Nasrallah, a delegate from the Balata refugee camp in Nablus, said he
felt ''overwhelming anger'' among the members against the traditional
leadership. He added that many delegates wanted the old leaders to be held
accountable for Fatah's failures, like the loss of Gaza to Hamas.

The conference opened on Tuesday and was supposed to last three days. But by
Thursday, delegates were still mired in discussions on how to hold fair internal
elections when hundreds of their counterparts were stuck in Gaza, prevented from
leaving by Hamas.

Some of the younger generation of reformers, who are hoping to increase their
power within the movement, complained that the traditional leaders had packed
the conference with their own supporters at the last minute.

''They brought their relatives, their secretaries,'' said Hussam Khader, a
firebrand Fatah leader from Nablus who has long campaigned against corruption in
the movement.

Others dismissed the complaints as electioneering.

One point of consensus reached on Thursday was the notion that Israel was
responsible for the death of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader and Fatah
founder, who died in 2004. In the convention hall, delegates blamed Israel for
having kept the ailing Mr. Arafat under siege in  his headquarters in the West
Bank. Fatah officials said they would continue to investigate the circumstances
of his death, and suspicions that Israel poisoned him.

Delegates have come to Bethlehem from as far as Yemen and the United States.
They include people as diverse as Sari Nusseibeh, an intellectual from Jerusalem
who has championed nonviolence, and Khaled Abu Asba, who took part in a
notorious attack in 1978 in which an Israeli bus was hijacked and about three
dozen Israeli civilians were killed.

Separately, Human Rights Watch,  based in New York, released a report on
Thursday stating that Hamas rocket attacks from Gaza against civilian areas in
Israel were unlawful and amounted to war crimes.

The rocket fire led Israel to mount a deadly three-week campaign against Hamas
in Gaza that ended in mid-January. Since then, the rocket fire has decreased
sharply, but Hamas has not renounced the use of rockets.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A mural of Yasir Arafat smiled upon Gaza City, and his spirit
dominated the Fatah conference this week in the West Bank.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALIL
HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (93%); ELECTIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); HAMAS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%);
BOMBINGS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); PEACE PROCESS
(73%); REFUGEES (68%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (67%); CORRUPTION (67%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (67%); INVESTIGATIONS (66%); HIJACKING (65%); WAR CRIMES (62%);
POISONINGS (61%); RELIGION (56%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             523 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 8, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Leader Courts the Warlord Vote, but Others Fear the Cost

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.; Abdul Waheed Wafa, Sangar Rahimi and Carlotta
Gall contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


When Marshal Muhammad Qasim Fahim was interim vice president and defense
minister after the United States invasion in 2001, his tanks overlooked Kabul
and he was widely seen as more powerful than the American-backed president,
Hamid Karzai.

When Afghans finally got a chance to elect their president for the first time,
in 2004, Mr. Karzai cast off Mr. Fahim, a Tajik warlord, winning the election as
well as praise from Western governments that were worried Mr. Fahim might order
his tanks into the streets and seize power.

Now, in the campaign for the Aug. 20 presidential election, Mr. Karzai has taken
a different tack: Over the pleading of Western officials, he picked Mr. Fahim as
first vice president on his ticket.

The reversal, critics say, is emblematic of the campaign by Mr. Karzai, who in
angling to keep a hold on power has lined up half a dozen warlords who have
guaranteed their political support in exchange for back-room deals.

While the precise nature of such deals is not known, Western officials, Afghan
politicians and nongovernmental organizations contend that they include promises
of protection from prosecution, the awarding of cabinet ministries and
governorships, the creation of provinces to benefit one ethnic group, and the
freeing of major drug traffickers.

This is not the first time that Afghans or their American patrons have cut deals
with the warlords -- whose widespread looting and killing of civilians in the
1990s helped spur the rise of the Taliban. After the Taliban were driven from
power, the American government funneled millions of dollars and military support
to the warlords.

But now many Afghans and foreign observers say the ties to warlords may win Mr.
Karzai the election, but cost him and his country dearly, leaving him badly
compromised and the central government greatly weakened.

''It was necessary from the U.S. point of view to have armed people on the
ground'' when the focus was toppling the Taliban, said Thomas Ruttig, a veteran
United Nations diplomat and now a director of the Afghanistan Analysts Network,
a nonprofit research group. ''But if you are now bringing in warlords and other
people who have an interest in leaving things unstable, you are undermining
yourself.''

Today Mr. Karzai's warlord backers include Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, the Uzbek
commander whose men are accused of killing hundreds of Taliban prisoners of war
in 2001 and who is now vying to regain wider control of northern Afghanistan;
Hajji Muhammad Moheqiq and Karim Khalili, warlords from the Hazara Shiite
minority ethnic group; and Abdul Rab Rassoul Sayyaf, whose militia killed
hundreds of Hazara civilians in western Kabul in 1993.

Another warlord supporter, Gul Agha Sherzai, who has been implicated in
drug-related corruption and is now governor of Nangarhar Province, could
''possibly'' become governor of Kandahar, ''or maybe a minister,'' said Mr.
Karzai's campaign manager, Hajji Din Muhammad.

''I'm sure that whoever the mujahedeen support will win the election,'' Mr.
Muhammad said, referring to the warlords.

Western officials are watching closely.  ''I expect an understanding of the fact
that we need fewer warlords and more competent ministers,'' said Kai Eide,
leader of the United Nations mission in Afghanistan. He said that Western
governments were encouraged by reform-minded appointees to several ministries,
including interior and finance, and that it had been made clear to Mr. Karzai
that the trend must continue. But he declined to say if the president had
addressed the warlords' role after the election.

''If what we expect is not understood and not respected, then I think it will
have consequences in terms of the enthusiasm of the international community,''
Mr. Eide said. ''We have to put the warlord period behind us.''

To many Afghans, serious damage has already been done. They say that the renewed
association with warlords -- including support by some warlords for one of Mr.
Karzai's challengers, Abdullah Abdullah, a former foreign minister -- means that
the powerful will not be held to account, particularly those accused of gross
human rights abuses.

''It's very easy to say, 'I'll bring reform and justice,' '' said Dr. Sima
Samar, chairwoman of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission and a
cabinet minister in Mr. Karzai's first interim government. ''But where is the
accountability? If you have these people around you, it shows you are not
serious about justice.''

More recently, Mr. Karzai has defended his warlord political supporters as
national heroes who fought the Russians and the Taliban. And Mr. Muhammad, his
campaign manger, said: ''Anyone who wants to implement a program in Afghanistan
cannot implement it without the support of the mujahedeen. They still have lots
of influence in their areas.''

When Mr. Karzai's warlord strategy emerged this spring, it seemed he had all but
secured his re-election. But many analysts now believe he may not gain the 50
percent of the vote he needs to win the election outright and could face a
runoff.

The election may demonstrate whether the warlords' influence has begun to wane.
In 2004,  when Mr. Karzai won with 55.4 percent of the vote, Mr. Moheqiq and
General Dostum won a combined 21.6 percent.

Mr. Moheqiq and Mr. Khalili, who led militias during the civil war and the fight
against the Taliban, are believed to have won a promise to carve new provinces
from Hazara-dominated districts in Ghazni and Wardak Provinces, Western
officials said.

That would bolster the national power of the Hazara leaders and could set off
regional conflicts with Hazara rivals. Mr. Moheqiq also said Mr. Karzai promised
him control of five ministries.

Mr. Muhammad said he knew nothing about such deals.

But for Western officials, it is the dealings with General Dostum, known for his
brutality, that are the most worrisome.

The general, who denies any ''intentional massacre'' of Taliban prisoners in
2001, had been appointed a senior military adviser by Mr. Karzai. He left the
country last year after assaulting a rival, but was declared free to return
after announcing support for Mr. Karzai. American officials have sought to delay
that return.

General Dostum's deal with Mr. Karzai could lead to a power struggle in the
north. But Mr. Abdullah has claimed recently that he has support from General
Dostum, though officials from the general's party deny that.

American officials were also angered by Mr. Karzai's pardon in April of five men
from Nangarhar Province convicted of smuggling 260 pounds of heroin in 2007. The
men had been prosecuted by a special task force, with lawyers tutored by
American and NATO counterparts.

The task force is a model for the justice system that Western officials want for
Afghanistan, but the pardon sent a signal that even major drug traffickers with
the right connections could escape. One pardoned convict is a nephew of Mr.
Muhammad, who is also a former Kabul governor.

According to the decree signed by Mr. Karzai and obtained by The New York Times,
the men were pardoned ''out of respect'' for their family members, who dominate
politics in a broad section of eastern Afghanistan.

In an interview, Mr. Muhammad said he had never lobbied Mr. Karzai for the
pardon.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A sign at a rally on Friday in Kabul for President Hamid Karzai
pictured him between two warlords: Marshal Muhammad Qasim Fahim, left, and Karim
Khalili.
Against Western wishes, Mr. Fahim, center, is running for first vice president
on Mr. Karzai's ticket in the Aug. 20 elections.
 Mr. Karzai's backers include Abdul Rab Rassoul Sayyaf, whose militia killed
Hazara civilians in western Kabul in 1993.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GOVERNORS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (71%); HOMICIDE (71%); ETHNICITY (66%); ETHNIC
GROUPS (66%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (65%); POWS & MIAS (64%); CORRUPTION (60%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (92%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); TAJIKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 8, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Tamil Tiger Leader Arrested, Sri Lankan Officials Say

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 363 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The leader of the remnants of the Sri Lankan separatist group known as the Tamil
Tigers was arrested Thursday and taken to the Sri Lankan capital, Colombo, for
questioning, military officials there confirmed.

Selvarasa Pathmanathan, more commonly known by the nom du guerre K.P., took over
the leadership of the Tigers after the group's longtime leader, Vellupillai
Prabhakaran, was killed along with most of his senior command in a bloody last
stand against Sri Lankan troops on a narrow strip of beach in the northeastern
corner of the island in May.

Sri Lankan officials refused to say where and under what circumstances Mr.
Pathmanathan was arrested. Some news reports on Thursday said he had been
captured in Thailand, but the Thai government denied this, according to Reuters,
while one Tamil news Web site said security agents in Malaysia had arrested him.

Faced with an Interpol arrest warrant, Mr. Pathmanathan has been operating
underground in Southeast Asia for years, running at one point dozens of ships
that smuggled weapons and other contraband to raise cash for the Tigers.
Security experts estimate that at its height, the Tigers' fund-raising apparatus
was bringing in more than $200 million a year.

But with Mr. Prabhakaran's death, the future of the Tigers has been uncertain,
and Mr. Pathmanathan was just one of several contenders to lead the separatist
group, which sought to carve out a homeland for Tamils, who are a Hindu minority
in a largely Buddhist, Sinhala-speaking nation.

Mr. Pathmanathan had pledged to create a Tamil government in exile and continue
the struggle for Tamil independence. Sri Lankan government officials have taken
extensive measures aimed at stamping out any remnants of the Tigers. They have
been holding hundreds of thousands of displaced Tamils who were held as human
shields by the Tamil Tigers, keeping them in closed camps under the claim that
Tamil Tiger fighters were hiding among them. Human rights organizations and
several Western governments have criticized Sri Lanka's conduct of the war,
saying that thousands of civilians were killed, in part by government shelling,
in the bloody last days of the battle.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SMUGGLING (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (73%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); DISPLACED PERSONS (68%); FUNDRAISING
(67%); RELIGION (64%); BEACHES (56%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL) (56%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); THAILAND (90%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); INDIA (79%);
MALAYSIA (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             527 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 14, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clinton Supports President Of Liberia

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: MONROVIA, Liberia


Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton landed in Liberia in the driving rain
Thursday morning and sent a strong message of support to President Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf,  who has recently come under scrutiny for her role in the country's
conflict-ridden past.

Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf, a Harvard-trained economist, instantly became a symbol of
women's empowerment and a departure from war in this long-suffering nation in
2005, when she became Africa's first woman to be elected head of state.

But in late June, Liberia's Truth and Reconciliation Commission recommended
barring her from public office for 30 years because she had been one of the
''political leaders and financiers of different warring factions'' during the
country's intermittent armed conflicts from 1989 to 2003.

Mrs. Clinton backed her up 100 percent.

''I look at what President Sirleaf has done over the past three years and I see
a very accomplished leader,'' she said.

Mrs. Clinton also said, ''We think Liberia is on the right track, as difficult
as that might be.''

Liberia is the second to last stop on Mrs. Clinton's seven-nation African tour.
She has met with rape survivors from Congo's war, scolded Kenyan politicians for
failing to try the instigators of political violence, toured a refugee camp and
talked about the oil business with Nigerian leaders.

At one point, Mrs. Clinton sparred with a Congolese student who asked for former
President Bill Clinton's opinion on a certain subject, and she snapped back,
''My husband is not the secretary of state, I am,'' a comment that has gotten
more attention than anything else she has said or done on this trip.

On Thursday, at a news conference in the Liberian Foreign Affairs Ministry, Mrs.
Clinton was asked whether she regretted the exchange. She declined to answer.

''The most important part of this trip has been the relationships we built,''
she said.

Mrs. Clinton also spoke at Liberia's national legislature, telling lawmakers,
''I know some of you in this chamber bore arms against each other,'' which drew
nervous laughter. ''But your being here, committed to the peaceful resolution of
disputes, is a great message.''

All the warring factions during Liberia's recent conflicts were responsible for
gross human rights violations, the truth commission said. And Mrs. Johnson
Sirleaf has admitted sending money to Charles Taylor, an infamous Liberian
warlord now on trial for war crimes, when he challenged the former dictator
Samuel K. Doe.

But in a speech for her nation's Independence Day celebrations last month, Mrs.
Johnson Sirleaf apologized for her ''misjudgment'' and said that ''when the true
nature of Mr. Taylor's intentions became known, there was no more impassioned
critic or strong opponent to him in a democratic process'' than she.

Since 2003, the United States has spent more than $2 billion trying to stabilize
Liberia, a country of 3.5 million people. Per capita, that is about as much
foreign aid as the United States has given any country.

Mrs. Clinton promised more, saying the United States would help fix up
Monrovia's airport and train police officers. Lawlessness was still a serious
problem, she said, and as if to reinforce the point, a group of young men on
buzzing motorcycles, who were apparently chasing after a thief, nearly collided
with her motorcade as she was passing through Monrovia's broken streets.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); WOMEN (76%); FEMINISM
& WOMEN'S RIGHTS (76%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (72%);
REFUGEES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (62%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (92%); ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (90%); BILL CLINTON
(79%)

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (78%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (97%); AFRICA (92%); KENYA (79%); NIGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             530 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 16, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Downpours Flood the Camps of Sri Lankan Refugees

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 513 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Downpours in northern Sri Lanka have flooded camps housing more than 250,000
people displaced by the fighting between the government and the Tamil Tigers,
according to aid officials.

The rain, which fell heavily for much of the afternoon on Saturday, sent rivers
of muck cascading between tightly packed rows of flimsy shelters, overflowed
latrines and sent hundreds of families scurrying for higher ground.

The flooding raised fears for the safety of the displaced, who are being held in
closed camps guarded by soldiers. Monsoon rains are expected to begin in little
more than a month, and many aid groups worry that the hastily built camps will
not survive the inundation.

''If only three or four hours of rain cause this much chaos, only imagine what a
full monsoon can cause,'' said David White, country director for Oxfam.

The camps occupy vast tracts of formerly forested land near the northern town of
Vavuniya. Because the ground on which many of the camps were built was cleared
of trees recently, the soil is soft and porous. It turns into mud almost
instantly, making it nearly impossible to get trucks through to deliver food,
water and medicine, aid officials said.

Life in the camps was already tough, but the rain has made it almost unbearable,
according to people who have visited the camps in the last 24 hours. The pegs
holding down plastic tents have come loose, leaving some families without
shelter. Latrines have collapsed, sending waste spilling into nearby rivers.
Silt has clogged water treatment plants that are essential for providing
drinking water and preventing the spread of waterborne disease.

Groundviews, a citizen journalism Web site in Sri Lanka, published photographs
that showed a grim scene of mud and squalor. Aid workers said that they were
able to restore some services, like food deliveries, and get temporary shelters
for families that lost their tents.

The people in the camps are displaced ethnic Tamils. Most were trapped, along
with the last fighters of the Tamil Tiger separatist group, on a narrow strip of
land in northwestern Sri Lanka. Government troops wiped out the senior
leadership of the rebel group after a fierce battle in May. Thousands of
civilians died alongside the fighters, according to the United Nations.

Those who survived fled to camps around Vavuniya, where they have been held ever
since. The government has said it cannot allow the displaced people to go home
because the areas they fled are sown with land mines, and because Tamil Tiger
fighters remain hidden among them. Human rights organizations and several
Western governments have criticized the government's handling of the displaced,
calling it tantamount to internment.

As the heavy rains approach, the government will need to move much faster to get
displaced people out of the camps, Mr. White said. The government has pledged to
get most of the displaced out of the camps by the end of the year.

''Really, we have run out of options and the only option that is left is to
speed up the resettlement process,'' Mr. White said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: MAP: Refugee camps are located near the town of Vavuniya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); REFUGEES (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); FLOODS & FLOODING (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WEATHER
(78%); DISASTER RELIEF (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (66%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (66%); WATER SUPPLY UTILITIES
(64%); WATER QUALITY (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(60%); JOURNALISM (50%); CITIZEN JOURNALISM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             531 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 18, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Waking Up To Terror

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 292 words


The ''night letters'' have been coming for a while now. I saw my first one last
week, posted on a door in Kunar Province, on the Pakistani border. But its
message was no different than the ones that, according to press reports, have
been popping up overnight in most of the eastern provinces of Afghanistan,
whether posted on mosques or government buildings, or at busy road
intersections, or simply scattered onto streets: do not vote on Thursday, or we
will punish you. Signed, the Taliban.

The theological claim is that good Muslims are not allowed to seek any state
position for themselves, and it is ''haram'' -- forbidden -- to cast a vote for
anyone who chooses to do so. Many of the letters also claim that the candidates
represent Western interests that are trying to destroy Islam and Afghan culture.
The message is amplified on radio broadcasts, Web sites and even over
loudspeakers on trucks.

Even without the Taliban threats, those of us in eastern parts of the country
would be plenty pessimistic. With former warlords running for office and the
corruption of Hamid Karzai's government filtering all the way down to our local
administrations, it is hard to remain hopeful. People seem more politically
aware than they did in 2004, but there are so many candidates this time --
around 40 for president alone -- that it's hard to know what they stand for. And
with the national radio and television slanting their coverage in favor of the
president, we assume Mr. Karzai will win.

-- MIRWAIS AHMADZAI, a program manager with the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission

With Afghanistan's second-ever presidential election coming on Thursday, the
Op-Ed editors asked four Afghans to report on the moods of voters in their
communities.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JON HAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); TALIBAN (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); ELECTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(76%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (73%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (71%); MANAGERS &
SUPERVISORS (66%); CORRUPTION (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (65%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (58%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (56%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             534 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 23, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Shifts, Giving Names of Detainees to the Red Cross

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT; Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1297 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In a reversal of Pentagon policy, the military for the first time is notifying
the International Committee of the Red Cross of the identities of militants who
were being held in secret at a camp in Iraq and another in Afghanistan run by
United States Special Operations forces, according to three military officials.

The change begins to lift the veil from the American government's most secretive
remaining overseas prisons by allowing the Red Cross to track the custody of
dozens of the most dangerous suspected terrorists and foreign fighters plucked
off the battlefields in Iraq and Afghanistan.

It is a major advance for the organization in its long fight to gain more
information about these detainees. The military had previously insisted that
disclosing any details about detainees at the secretive camps could tip off
other militants and jeopardize counterterrorism missions.

Detention practices will be in the spotlight this week. The Central Intelligence
Agency on Monday is to release a highly critical 2004 report on the agency's
interrogation program by the C.I.A. inspector general.

The long awaited report provides new details about abuses that took place inside
the agency's secret prisons, including C.I.A. officers carrying out mock
executions and threatening at least one prisoner with a gun and a power drill.

Also, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. is expected to decide in the next
several days whether to appoint a criminal prosecutor to investigate the
interrogations of suspects accused of being involved in terrorism after the
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

The new Pentagon policy on detainees took effect this month with no public
announcement from the military or the Red Cross. It represents another shift in
detention policy by the Obama administration, which has already vowed to close
the American military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by next year and is
conducting reviews of the government's procedures for interrogating and
detaining militants.

A spokesman for the Red Cross in Washington, Bernard Barrett, declined to
comment on the new notification policy, citing the organization's longstanding
practice of refusing to talk about its discussions with the Defense Department
about detention issues.

Unlike the secret prisons run by the C.I.A. that President Obama ordered closed
in January, the military continues to operate the Special Operations camps,
which it calls temporary screening sites, in Balad, Iraq, and Bagram,
Afghanistan.

As many as 30 to 40 foreign prisoners have been held at the camp in Iraq at any
given time, military officials said; they did not provide an estimate for the
Afghan camp but suggested that the number was smaller.

The Red Cross is allowed access to almost all American military prisons and
battlefield detention sites in Iraq and Afghanistan, but the Special Operations
camps have been excluded.

The New York Times reported in 2006 that some soldiers at the temporary
detention site in Iraq, then located at Baghdad International Airport and called
Camp Nama, beat prisoners with rifle butts, yelled and spit in their faces, and
used detainees for target practice in a game of jailer paintball.

Military officials say conditions at the camps have improved significantly since
then, but virtually all details of the sites remain shrouded in secrecy.

Under Pentagon rules, detainees at the Special Operations camps can be held for
up to two weeks. Formerly, the military at that point had to release a detainee;
transfer him to a long-term prison in Iraq or Afghanistan, to which the Red
Cross has broad access; or seek one-week renewable extensions from Defense
Secretary Robert M. Gates or his representative.

Under the new policy, the military must notify the Red Cross of the detainees'
names and identification numbers within two weeks of capture, a notification
that before happened only after a detainee was transferred to a long-term
prison. The option to seek custody extensions has been eliminated, a senior
Pentagon official said.

Pentagon officials sought to play down the significance of the shift, saying
that most detainees at the camps had already been registered with the Red Cross
within the  two-week period.

''The department makes every effort to register detainees with the I.C.R.C. as
soon as practicable after capture,'' said Bryan G. Whitman, a Defense Department
spokesman.

But human rights advocates hailed the policy change, saying that Special
Operations forces had often extended the custody of detainees, leaving them in a
legal limbo for weeks on end.

''Any improvement in I.C.R.C. notification and access is a positive development
because it not only accounts for the whereabouts of a person, but hopefully will
expedite notification to the family who is left anxious wondering about the fate
of his or her relative,'' said Sahr MuhammedAlly, a senior associate for law and
security at Human Rights First, an advocacy group. The change in notifying the
Red Cross stemmed largely from a new climate that emerged after Mr. Obama's
election, military officials said. The new administration set out the larger
goal to revamp detention and interrogation practices that had drawn
international condemnation under the Bush administration.

Into this environment stepped Gen. David H. Petraeus, newly selected to lead the
Central Command of American military operations in the Middle East. When he was
the top commander in Iraq, General Petraeus supported ideas promoted by Maj.
Gen. Douglas M. Stone to overhaul the detention system there, separating
hard-core militants from petty criminals who could be easily radicalized,
offering detainees vocational training and family visits. The United States is
now adopting this  approach to revamp the Afghan prison system.

This spring, based on a request by General Petraeus, Mr. Gates ordered a review
of the Special Operations camps. Lt. Gen. Philip M. Breedlove, an Air Force
officer who had served on the military's Joint Staff in Washington, spent
several weeks in Afghanistan and Iraq examining the sites. At the request of
Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Breedlove also
accompanied Special Operations teams on some of their missions to observe how
they treated prisoners at the point of capture.

In July, Admiral Mullen sent a confidential message to all of the military
service chiefs and senior field commanders asking them to redouble their efforts
to alert troops to the importance of treating detainees properly.

Admiral Mullen felt compelled to issue his message after viewing photographs
documenting abuse of prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan by American military
personnel in the early years of the wars, a senior military official said.

Mr. Obama decided in May not to make the photographs public, warning that the
images could ignite attacks against American troops.

In a classified report dated June 17, General Breedlove largely praised the
conditions at the  camps. He found only minor problems, including a failure to
provide a Koran to each detainee, and a lack of arrows or other symbols
indicating which direction Muslim prisoners should face to pray toward Mecca.

Military officials acknowledged that the Special Operations forces might have
improved conditions to impress the visiting investigator. But one of the
general's recommendations surprised officials: provide more information about
detainees at the camps to the Red Cross earlier in the detention process.

The Red Cross has been lobbying the Pentagon for years for access to those held
at the Special Operations camps, or least information about who is being
detained in them. General Breedlove's recommendation gave thegroup's efforts a
prominent military endorsement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
reminded commanders of the need to treat detainees properly. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHIP
SOMODEVILLA/GETTY IMAGES) (pg.A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); APPOINTMENTS
(73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%); AIRPORTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE
RED CROSS (84%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (84%); JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); ERIC HOLDER (57%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (68%)

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             536 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Old Nazis Die Off, Pursuit Goes On

BYLINE: By ANDREA FULLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For 30 years, Eli M. Rosenbaum has been hunting Nazi war criminals. Even as the
last of them die off, he is not giving up.

''There is still time to bring some of these people to justice, and we ought not
fail to do that,'' said Mr. Rosenbaum, director of the Office of Special
Investigations, who arrived at that Justice Department agency as a summer intern
in 1979, the year it was created, and became its chief in 1995.

Though the agency once pursued war criminals of the Nazis and their Axis allies
exclusively, a 2004 law expanded its role to cover modern war criminals, in
places like Bosnia and Rwanda. The office's task is to detect war crimes
suspects living in the United States, prosecute them under immigration law --
seeking to denaturalize those who have obtained citizenship -- and deport them,
preferably to countries where they can be tried for the crimes alleged.

Mr. Rosenbaum says that at present, about 30 people in the United States who may
have a Nazi past are under investigation, along with some 80 possible war
criminals from more recent conflicts.

About half the office's recent litigation efforts have involved Nazi suspects,
among them John Demjanjuk, who is charged with atrocities as a concentration
camp guard in Poland. Mr. Demjanjuk was deported to Germany in May.

''It's a few years more,'' Mr. Rosenbaum said of the hunt for the last Nazis.
''I don't think that you will hear the department soon say: 'That's it. These
cases are finished.' ''

But the inevitable dwindling of the population of Nazi suspects has meant
changes for the Office of Special Investigations. Among other things, the office
historians who once researched only World War II have become experts on modern
war crimes.

Rabbi Marvin Hier, founder of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, lauded the expansion
of the office's duties, saying prompt pursuit of war criminals was essential.

''I think it's very important, because we all know that evil didn't end with the
Nazi Holocaust,'' Rabbi Hier said. ''The greatest tragedy is that the O.S.I. was
not formed in 1945'' but instead more than three decades later.

Investigating modern war crimes has required a new approach. While World War II
cases are often based on documents collected by the office historians, modern
cases rely on the testimony of witnesses.

Mr. Rosenbaum finds these cases particularly affecting.

''I had met many people who had done heroic things during World War II,'' he
said. ''But I had never had the experience of meeting people who were doing
heroic things, risking their lives, at the time that we were meeting -- people
who took some risks just in meeting with us.''

Mr. Rosenbaum recently met with Gladys Monterroso, the wife of Guatemala's human
rights ombudsman, Sergio Morales. Ms. Monterroso was tortured during a brief
abduction in March, a day after her husband issued a report on human rights
abuses that occurred in Guatemala's 35-year civil war, which ended in 1996.

''It's one of those meetings that changes you forever,'' Mr. Rosenbaum said.
''You could see the cigarette burns on her arm and legs. You could see where the
rope had been tied to her arms and ankles. We never had to experience that in
the World War II cases.''

Despite dozens of investigations, the office has undertaken only a handful of
prosecutions in the last few years. But Mr. Rosenbaum sees significance in
demonstrating that the agency will investigate war crimes suspects even if those
investigations do not lead to convictions.

''I think there's particular value,'' he said, ''in showing would-be
perpetrators that if one dares to perpetrate such crimes, there is a chance that
he or she will be pursued for the rest of his or her life to locations thousands
of miles from the locations of their crimes.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Eli M. Rosenbaum, government Nazi-hunter, and John Demjanjuk's
wartime identity papers.(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); DEMJANJUK
WAR CRIMES CASE (90%); HISTORY (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); EVIDENCE (74%); HOLOCAUST
(73%); LITIGATION (73%); WITNESSES (71%); IMMIGRATION (68%); TESTIMONY (62%);
CITIZENSHIP (55%)

PERSON: JOHN DEMJANJUK (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA (79%); POLAND (74%); GERMANY (71%); CENTRAL
EUROPE (54%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             537 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 28, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shame On Iran

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 449 words


Longer than many people might have predicted, Iran's political opposition is
continuing to challenge the ruling hard-line mullahs. The street protests that
shook the country after the bogus June 12 presidential election have faded, but
the courage to speak out against the regime's mounting abuses has not.

Earlier this month, Mehdi Karroubi, the reformist cleric who placed fourth among
the presidential contenders, stunned many Iranians by charging that some of the
thousands of men and women who were arrested for protesting after the disputed
election had been raped. Even after the government rejected the accusations as
''sheer lies,'' Mr. Karroubi was defiant. He called for an investigation and
said four people were ready to testify if their security is guaranteed. He said
that if the government continued to deny the facts and ''terrorize'' him for
truth-telling, ''I will disclose all the untold stories.''

Corroboration has come from the opposition leader Mir Hussein Moussavi. He said
''establishment agents'' were responsible for the rapes, and, on Thursday, an
unnamed parliamentarian said that an official inquiry had proved that rapes took
place. It is a sensitive topic. Rumors about sexual misconduct in Iran's prisons
have been around since the 1979 revolution, but this is the first time they have
been discussed publicly.

Oddly, the government seemed to have less trouble acknowledging that some
detainees had been tortured. Those incidents were ''mistakes,'' Qorbanali
Dori-Najafabadi, a top judiciary official, told a news conference. Iran's
Constitution and law prohibit torture; however, the 2008 State Department human
rights report cites numerous credible reports over the years in which security
forces and prison personnel tortured prisoners.

The government should be ferreting out and putting an end to these abuses.
Instead, it continues to conduct cruel mass show trials designed to intimidate
the opposition and legitimize the illegitimate -- the re-election of President
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

During Tuesday's trial  -- in which former officials, journalists and academics
were accused of fomenting a foreign-inspired ''velvet revolution'' --
prosecutors went a step further and struck at the entire reform movement by
asking the judge to ban the two reform parties.

The election and its violent aftermath have caused unprecedented fissures among
the political and clerical elite. More repression is only likely to deepen the
discontent. We hope more conservatives join the opposition in demanding
punishment for those who abused detainees and that hard-liners reconsider their
ominous threats to punish Mr. Karroubi and Mr. Moussavi for speaking out.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); IRANIAN ELECTION PROTESTS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); RELIGION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); SEX OFFENSES (76%); MISCONDUCT (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); PRISONS (74%); TESTIMONY (74%); CONSERVATISM (73%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); JOURNALISM (72%); ARRESTS (71%); WRITERS (67%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (65%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (58%); MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (58%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%)

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             540 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 5, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Federal Court Rules Against Ashcroft In 9/11 Case

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 619 words


Former Attorney General John Ashcroft may face personal liability for the
decisions that led to the detention of an American citizen as a material witness
after the Sept. 11 attacks, a federal appeals court panel ruled on Friday.

In the decision, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, was sharply critical of the Bush
administration's practice of holding people it suspected of terrorism without
charges, as material witnesses.

''We find this to be repugnant to the Constitution, and a painful reminder of
some of the most ignominious chapters of our national history,'' said the
opinion, written by Judge Milan D. Smith Jr.

The lawsuit was brought in 2005 by Abdullah al-Kidd, who was born Lavoni T. Kidd
in Kansas and converted to Islam in college. He was arrested in 2003 at Dulles
Airport as he prepared to fly to Saudi Arabia for graduate work in Islamic
studies, and was held for weeks under a law that allows the indefinite detention
of material witnesses to a crime. After his detention, he was ordered to stay
with his in-laws in Las Vegas; his travel was restricted over the next year.

Mr. Kidd, who was not called as a witness in the case in which he was detained
and was never charged with a crime, sued Mr. Ashcroft and other officials in
2005, challenging his detention as unconstitutional and saying it cost him his
marriage and his job. His lawyers argued that he was held as part of a secret
Bush administration policy to use the material witness statute as a tool to
detain and interrogate people when there was insufficient evidence to charge
them with a crime.

Mr. Ashcroft, who was represented by the Justice Department, disputed Mr. Kidd's
version of the facts and claimed his position granted him immunity.

Lee Gelernt, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union who represented Mr.
Kidd, called it ''an enormous decision'' that says ''no official, including the
attorney general of the United States, can be immune if he adopts and implements
an unconstitutional policy.''

Material witness laws,  said Ronald L. Carlson, a law professor at the
University of Georgia, have generally been used to hold witnesses briefly if
they have crucial information but are thought to be likelier to flee than to
testify. But during the Bush administration, the use of the law was expanded for
use in terrorism investigations, and ''the net swept pretty widely,'' Professor
Carlson said.

Charles S. Miller, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said, ''We're
reviewing the court's ruling.'' Mark Corallo, a spokesman for Mr. Ashcroft,
would say only that Mr. Ashcroft was reviewing the decision as well.

A report in 2005 by Human Rights Watch and the A.C.L.U. said that 70 people were
improperly detained under the material witness law after 9/11. Although the
decision could conceivably apply to those people, few, if any, of them could now
sue because of the statute of limitations, Mr. Gelernt said.

Judge Smith, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, was joined in the
majority opinion by Judge David R. Thompson, who was appointed by President
Ronald Reagan. The third judge on the panel, Carlos T. Bea, filed an opinion
that concurred in part and dissented in part. Judge Bea, who was also appointed
by President Bush, argued that Mr. Ashcroft should have immunity in the case,
and that the majority was wrong to allow Mr. Kidd ''to seek redress from the
wallet of a federal cabinet-level official.''

Unless Mr. Ashcroft appeals the decision, the case will go back to federal
district court for further hearings, which could involve extensive investigation
of the former administration's antiterrorism policies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Abdullah al- Kidd sued.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%); WITNESSES (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); IMMUNITY (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%);
PUBLIC POLICY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); RELIGION (73%); ARRESTS
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%);
INVESTIGATIONS (68%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (68%)

PERSON: MILAN D SMITH JR (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             547 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 13, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Rights of Gay Employees

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 398 words


It is remarkable how little progress gay people have made in securing the basic
protection against discrimination on the job. In 29 states, it is still legal to
fire workers for being gay. But momentum is building in Congress for the first
federal law banning such discrimination against gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender people.

Federal law has lagged behind the reality of American life. There are now openly
gay members of Congress from between-the-coasts states like Colorado and
Wisconsin. And according to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay-rights advocacy
group, 85 percent of Fortune 500 companies have policies protecting gay
employees from discrimination.

But gay rights advocates have for years faced opposition to a federal civil
rights law from the religious right, and from parts of the business community,
who argue that it would lead to a flood of litigation.

Bipartisan bills have been introduced in both the House of Representatives and
the Senate, modeled on existing civil rights laws that cover race, religion and
sex. Unlike some past bills, these include gender identity, protecting
transgender people from discrimination.

The bills were written to meet some of the concerns of opponents. The law would
not apply to religious organizations, or to businesses with fewer than 15
employees. It would not allow for quotas or ''disparate impact'' lawsuits, which
generally use statistical disparities to prove discrimination.

There is reason for cautious optimism. In 2007, the House passed a
nondiscrimination law that did not cover transgender people. The current
Congress is more Democratic, and even in the past two years, gay rights have
made significant strides. As states and localities have passed
antidiscrimination laws, it has been clear that they do not disrupt the
workplace, and they have not resulted in an enormous number of lawsuits.

Supporters in the House think they have the votes. The biggest hurdle is likely
to be winning the support of 60 senators, the de facto number now required for
most legislation because of filibuster rules.

People who believe in workplace fairness should lobby senators to get on board.
It is unacceptable that in a nation committed to equality people can still be
fired in more than half the states for being gay. Congressional leaders should
make passing the Employment Non-Discrimination Act a top priority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (96%); DISCRIMINATION (92%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (91%);
TRANSGENDER PERSONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (89%); FILIBUSTER (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); RELIGION (74%); POLITICS (74%); LOBBYING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             548 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Visas and Speech

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 384 words


It has been nearly 20 years since Congress repealed the provisions used during
the cold war to deny visas to prominent foreign intellectuals, artists and
activists because of their left-leaning politics, including the Colombian
novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda and the British
novelist Doris Lessing.

The Bush administration eagerly revived the practice, barring numerous people
from entering the country for speaking engagements or conferences or to teach at
leading universities -- all under a flimsily supported guise of fighting
terrorism.

Adam Habib, a well-known intellectual, professor and human rights activist from
South Africa, was interrogated for seven hours and told that his visa had been
revoked when he tried to enter the United States in 2006 for professional
meetings. He was later told that his exclusion was based on terrorism-related
grounds. He is challenging the action in court, but the government has yet to
explain its precise legal or factual reasoning.

In 2004, the Bush administration revoked the visa of Tariq Ramadan, a Swiss
national and Muslim scholar, who was to become a tenured professor at the
University of Notre Dame. It again denied him a visa in 2006. Two months ago, a
three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
in Manhattan unanimously reversed a lower-court ruling allowing the government's
move.

The government cited evidence that from 1998 to 2002, Mr. Ramadan contributed
about $1,300 to a Swiss-based charity that the Treasury Department later
categorized as a terrorist organization. Mr. Ramadan said that he believed the
group was involved in humanitarian projects, and that he was not aware of any
connections between the charity, the Association de Secours Palestinien, and
Hamas or terrorism, which, he said, he condemns. The evidence suggests that Mr.
Ramadan's strong criticism of United States foreign policy is what really
triggered his exclusion.

Months ago, a group of free speech advocates, including the Association of
American Publishers, the American Library Association and the American Civil
Liberties Union called on the Obama administration to end ideological exclusions
and to review dubious visa denials. We hope Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton takes heed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PASSPORTS & VISAS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); COLD WAR (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); WRITERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ACADEMIC TENURE (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (78%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (76%);
CHARITIES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (74%); BUSINESS &
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); EVIDENCE
(73%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (73%); HAMAS (70%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (68%);
APPEALS COURTS (68%); JUDGES (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (67%); FOREIGN POLICY (62%);
PUBLISHING (50%)

COMPANY: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME (55%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             550 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 20, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Gaza Report's Wasted Opportunity

BYLINE: By DAVID LANDAU.

David Landau was the editor in chief of the Israeli newspaper Haaretz from 2004
to 2008.

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


ISRAEL intentionally went after  civilians in Gaza -- and wrapped its intention
in lies.

That chilling -- and misguided  -- accusation is the key conclusion of the
United Nations investigation, led by Richard Goldstone, into the three-week war
last winter. ''While the Israeli government has sought to portray its operations
as essentially a response to rocket attacks in the exercises of its right to
self-defense,'' the report said, ''the mission considers the plan to have been
directed, at least in part, at a different target: the people of Gaza as a
whole.''

The report has produced  a storm of outraged rejection in Israel. Politicians
fulminate about double standards and anti-Semitism. Judge  Goldstone, an eminent
South African jurist and a Jew, is widely excoriated as an enemy of his people.

The report stunned even seasoned Israeli diplomats who expected no quarter from
an inquiry set up by the United Nations Human Rights Council, which they believe
to be deeply  biased against Israel. They expected the military operation to be
condemned as grossly disproportionate. They expected Israel to be lambasted for
not taking sufficient care to avoid civilian casualties. But they never imagined
that the  report would accuse the Jewish state of intentionally  aiming at
civilians.

Israelis believe that their army did not deliberately kill the hundreds of
Palestinian civilians, including children, who died during ''Operation Cast
Lead.'' They believe, therefore, that Israel is not culpable, morally or
criminally, for these civilian deaths, which were collateral to the true aim of
the operation -- killing Hamas gunmen.

It is, some would argue, a form of self-deception.

When does negligence become recklessness, and when does recklessness slip into
wanton callousness, and then into deliberate disregard for innocent human life?

But that is the point -- and it  should have been the focus of the
investigation. Judge  Goldstone's real mandate was, or should have been, to
bring Israel to confront this fundamental question,  a question inherent in the
waging of war by all civilized societies against irregular armed groups. Are
widespread civilian casualties inevitable when a modern army pounds terrorist
targets in a heavily populated area with purportedly smart ordnance? Are they
acceptable? Does the enemy's deployment in the heart of the civilian area shift
the line between right and wrong, in morality and in law?

These were  precisely the questions  that Israeli politicians and generals
wrestled with in Gaza, as others do today in Afghanistan.

It is possible, and certainly arguable, that the Israeli policymakers, or
individual Israeli field commanders in isolated  instances, pushed the line out
too far.

But Judge  Goldstone has thwarted any such honest debate -- within Israel or
concerning Israel. His fundamental premise, that the Israelis went after
civilians, shut down the argument before it began.

This is regrettable, for the report  could have stirred the conscience of the
nation. Many Israelis were dismayed at the war's casualty figures, at the
disparity between the dozen deaths on the Israeli side and the thousand-plus
deaths, many of them of noncombatants, in  Gaza.

Many Israelis were profoundly troubled by this arithmetic even though they
supported Israel's resort to arms in the face of incessant violation of their
sovereign border by Hamas's rain of rockets.

Judge  Goldstone could have contended that just as Israeli leaders themselves
have frequently called off pinpoint assassinations of terrorists because
civilians were in the line of fire, so too they should have refrained from
bombing and shelling Hamas targets in Gaza when that bombing and shelling was
bound to exact a large civilian toll.

By approaching the Gaza war, and his report, from this perspective, Judge
Goldstone could have opened debate and prompted reflection in Israel. Instead,
by accusing Israel -- its government, its army, its ethos -- of deliberately
seeking out  civilians, he has achieved the opposite effect.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(79%); HAMAS (79%); BOMBINGS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TERRORISM (76%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             554 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 24, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Says Current Law Will Support Detentions

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Obama administration has decided not to seek new legislation from Congress
authorizing the indefinite detention of about 50 terrorism suspects being held
without charges at at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, officials said Wednesday.

Instead, the administration will continue to hold the detainees without bringing
them to trial based on the power it says it has under the Congressional
resolution passed after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, authorizing the president
to use force against forces of Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

In concluding that it does not need specific permission from Congress to hold
detainees without charges, the Obama administration is adopting one of the
arguments advanced by the Bush administration in years of debates about
detention policies.

But President Obama's advisers are not embracing the more disputed Bush
contention that the president has inherent power under the Constitution to
detain terrorism suspects indefinitely regardless of Congress.

The Justice Department said in a statement Wednesday night that ''the
administration would rely on authority already provided by Congress'' under the
use of force resolution. ''The administration is not currently seeking
additional authorization,'' the statement said.

The department pointed out that courts would continue to review the cases of
those held without charges through habeas corpus hearings. The Washington Post
first reported the decision.

The legal interpretation applies to detainees whom the government concludes
should be held because they are a continuing danger to national security but who
cannot be brought to trial for various reasons, like evidence tainted by harsh
interrogations. Although it has not determined definitively how many detainees
that applies to, officials said it would probably be about 50 of the more than
200 men still held at Guantanamo. The government plans to bring the others to
trial or send them to other countries.

Officials said the decision applies only to those already held at Guantanamo.
They said it remained an open question whether the administration would seek
legislation or establish a new system for indefinite detention of suspected
terrorists captured in the future.

Justice Department officials informed representatives of human rights and civil
liberties groups about the decision not to seek the new legislation for the
current detainees at a meeting last week. Officials said Wednesday that the
position was in keeping with the evolving arguments being made by the
administration in court over recent months.

''The position conveyed by the Justice Department in the meeting last week broke
no new ground and was entirely consistent with information previously provided
by the Justice Department to the Senate Armed Services Committee,'' the
department's statement said.

Still, the position surprised some critics who had expected after a speech by
Mr. Obama in May that he would seek legislation to put the system of indefinite
detention on firmer political and legal ground. In that speech at the National
Archives, Mr. Obama said that he was considering continuing indefinite detention
in some limited cases but that he would not act unilaterally.

''We must recognize that these detention policies cannot be unbounded,'' he said
at the time. ''They can't be based simply on what I or the executive branch
decide alone.''

He said he would ''work with Congress to develop an appropriate legal regime so
that our efforts are consistent with our values and our Constitution.''

Officials said Wednesday that working with Congress did not mean the president
would seek legislation, only that he would consult lawmakers.

Given the opposition in Congress to Mr. Obama's plan to close Guantanamo,
especially if it means transferring detainees to prisons on American soil, the
prospect of writing legislation that would pass both houses appears daunting at
best.

Sarah E. Mendelson, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies who led a study about closing Guantanamo, said forgoing legislation
was ''overall a good step'' because it prevented Congress from making things
worse. ''We don't know if it closes the door definitively on efforts to
institutionalize detention without charge,'' she added, ''since the White House
might seek to do this by itself.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); HABEAS CORPUS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); TALIBAN (73%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (69%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (68%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS
(50%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             561 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 690 words


International

PALESTINIANS HALT PUSH ON WAR CRIMES REPORT

The Palestinian delegation to the United Nations Human Rights Council decided
not to forward to the Security Council a report accusing Israel of possible war
crimes. PAGE A4

SHOE FLUNG AT I.M.F. CHIEF

A student threw a shoe at the managing director of the International Monetary
Fund, who was speaking at a university in Istanbul. PAGE A4

AFGHANS SAY STRIKE KILLS 8

Afghan tribal elders said eight people, of whom at least five were civilians,
died in an airstrike in Afghanistan on Wednesday. PAGE A10

PAKISTAN TO REFOCUS BATTLE

The Pakistani military says it will move against the Taliban's main stronghold
in South Waziristan. PAGE A10

A NEW COALITION IN IRAQ

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki announced the formation of a broad political
coalition called State of Law. PAGE A12

IRISH VOTE PIVOTAL TO BOSNIA

The Lisbon Treaty may make the European Union more effective in rebuilding
Bosnia and Herzegovina. And vital to the accord's passing is Ireland. PAGE A14

Obituaries

MAHLON HOAGLAND, 87

As co-discoverer of transfer RNA, he helped explain how DNA is translated into
the proteins that carry out its genetic instructions. PAGE A23

National

AGENCY PLANS FOR VISA RUSH IF IMMIGRATION IS REVAMPED

President Obama has put off immigration reform until next year. Still,
preparations have already begun for the upsurge in visa applications that is
expected if Washington enacts a legalization program. PAGE A15

STUDY ON SOUTHEAST DROUGHT

The drought that gripped the Southeast from 2005 to 2007 resulted from random
weather events, not global warming, Columbia University researchers concluded.
PAGE A15

POLL SEES SHIFT ON ABORTION

For most of the last two decades, a clear majority of Americans has supported
the right to abortion. But a new poll suggests that the public is now almost
evenly divided over the issue. PAGE A16

GOVERNOR DEFENDS SHAKEUP

Gov. Rick Perry said his decision to replace three members of the Texas Forensic
Science Commission was not motivated by politics, as some of his opponents have
said. PAGE A16

CITY TO CONTINUE INVOCATION

The City Council in Lodi, Calif., voted unanimously that it was appropriate to
pray before meetings. PAGE A17

New York

BUILDING SO THE SCHOOL ITSELF IS A SHOW-AND-TELL LESSON

New Haven has emerged at the forefront of a movement to build schools that are
aesthetically pleasing as well as functional, with museum-worthy pieces
alongside children's' finger paintings. PAGE A24

Business

WITHOUT BANK OF AMERICA, BUT STILL WITH LEGAL WOES

The legal and political troubles that prompted Kenneth D. Lewis to resign from
his post atop Bank of America are likely to follow him. Indeed, new ones are
already on the way. PAGE B1

COMCAST SEEKS NBC STAKE

Comcast is in negotiations with General Electric to create a spinoff, merging
Comcast's programming assets with NBC Universal, according to people with
knowledge of the negotiations. PAGE B1

CHINA CLOSES FAST ON JAPAN

Many economists expect China to replace Japan as the world's second-largest
economy next year, five years earlier than forecast. PAGE B1

BAE SYSTEMS FACES CHARGES

BAE Systems, one of the world's largest weapons makers, faces charges in Britain
over bribery accusations. PAGE B2

BAYER SUED OVER LABELS

A nonprofit group has filed a lawsuit against Bayer Healthcare, charging that
its labels and commercials falsely claimed its One a Day multivitamins for men
may reduce the risk of prostate cancer. PAGE B5

Sports

N.H.L. OPENS SEASON WITH CHALLENGES UNSETTLED

On the ice, the National Hockey League has faced scrutiny for not instituting
any rules against checks to the head. Off the ice, the league's Sun Belt teams
have struggled. PAGE B9

Weekend

DOCUMENTARY PLAYS ROLE IN POLANSKI SEX-CRIMES CASE

It was barely a blip at the box office last year. But ''Roman Polanski: Wanted
and Desired'' from Marina Zenovich  and the accusations made in it have
re-emerged after Mr. Polanski was arrested in Switzerland after 31 years as a
fugitive. PAGE C3

Op-ed

PAUL KRUGMAN PAGE A31

DAVID BROOKS PAGE A31

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); DECRIMINALIZATION (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (88%); POLITICS (88%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (88%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); IMMIGRATION (79%); FORENSICS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TREATY OF LISBON (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); TALIBAN
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); BANKING & FINANCE
(76%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (74%); IMMIGRATION LAW (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); COLLEGES &
UNIVERSITIES (71%); DNA (71%); CLIMATOLOGY (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); WEATHER
(64%); ABORTION (63%); CITIES (60%); SCHOOL BUILDINGS (60%); GOVERNORS (53%);
GLOBAL WARMING (50%)

COMPANY: BANK OF AMERICA CORP (51%); GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

TICKER: BAC (NYSE) (51%); BAC (LSE) (51%); 8648 (TSE) (51%); GNE (PAR) (51%);
GEC (LSE) (51%); GE (SWX) (51%); GE (NYSE) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (51%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (51%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (51%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (51%); NAICS335222
HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATOR & HOME FREEZER MANUFACTURING (51%); NAICS335210 SMALL
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE MANUFACTURING (51%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (88%); KENNETH D LEWIS (56%); RICK PERRY (53%); BARACK
OBAMA (53%)

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); TURKEY
(92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); ISRAEL (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); IRAQ (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); EUROPE (79%); IRELAND
(76%)

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             567 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 9, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congress Moves to Require Taped Detainee Sessions

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 430 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Congress is moving to require videotaping of interrogations of detainees held by
the military, a step proponents say will prevent abuse and create a valuable
intelligence record.

The provision, which the House passed on Thursday as part of the 2010 Defense
Authorization Act conference report, would apply to interrogations of anyone
held at a Defense Department facility. Because the Central Intelligence Agency's
secret overseas prisons have been closed, it would most likely cover terrorism
suspects whether they were questioned by a military or a C.I.A. officer.

The requirement would not apply to battlefield interrogations by troops engaged
in combat.

Representative Rush D. Holt, Democrat of New Jersey, said he proposed the
videotaping requirement to protect both prisoners and interrogators, who would
be less likely to face false abuse allegations. He said his amendment would
''continue the process of putting our detainee policies back on a sound legal
footing while maintaining our ability to get actionable intelligence.''

Some intelligence experts believe that recording interrogations could be
valuable, since the tapes could be replayed for expert linguists, studied by
psychologists or reassessed in light of new information. They also could be used
for training interrogators.

The C.I.A. videotaped the 2002 interrogations of two prisoners who were
subjected to the near-drowning method called waterboarding. But the recording
was halted, and the destruction of the 92 hours of tapes in 2005 is under
criminal investigation. Today, there are neither recordings nor transcripts of
interrogations of the operatives for Al Qaeda who planned and directed the Sept.
11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

Video recording equipment was installed at the military prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, though it was rarely used, officials have said. But a court document
filed this week revealed that there were recordings of Mohammed al-Qahtani,
whose brutal treatment was described as torture by one official overseeing
military commissions.

Some law enforcement organizations routinely videotape interviews with suspects,
but others, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, do not record such
sessions.

The Defense Authorization Act, which the Senate is expected to pass next week,
also strengthens the rights of detainees who face trial before military
commissions, limiting the use of hearsay and coerced testimony and providing
defendants with greater access to evidence and witnesses. Human rights groups
welcomed the changes, but said they did not go far enough.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); TESTIMONY (79%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(78%); DEFENSE SPENDING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TORTURE (78%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); TRANSCRIPTS
(77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); WITNESSES
(75%); PSYCHOLOGY (73%); AL-QAEDA (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); HEARSAY (69%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%); AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: RUSH D HOLT (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); CUBA (85%)

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             573 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Drops Plan to Isolate Sudan Leaders

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Obama administration has formulated a new policy for Sudan that proposes
working with that country's government, rather than isolating it as President
Obama had pledged to do during his campaign.

In an interview on Friday, President Obama's special envoy to Sudan, Maj. Gen.
J. Scott Gration, retired, said the policy, to be announced Monday by Secretary
of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, would make use of a mix of ''incentives and
pressure'' to seek an end to the human rights abuses that have left millions of
people dead or displaced while burning Darfur into the American conscience.

General Gration said the administration would set strict time lines for
President Omar al-Bashir of Sudan to fulfill the conditions of a 2005 peace
agreement that his government signed with rebels in southern Sudan.

Under that agreement, independence for southern Sudan is to be put to a vote in
2011.

''To advance peace and security in Sudan, we must engage with allies and with
those with whom we disagree,'' said a statement of the policy that was obtained
by The New York Times.

General Gration said the administration's new approach was also intended to
prevent Sudan, which once provided refuge to Osama bin Laden, from again serving
as a terrorist haven.

During his campaign, Mr. Obama criticized the Bush administration for doing too
little to stop the killing.

His new policy, the result of months of vigorous and heated debate within the
administration, signals a significant shift in the president's thinking, which
his aides say is a reflection of changing facts on the ground.

In recent months, analysts from both inside and outside the United States
government have reported that ''low-intensity'' skirmishes replaced systematic
slaughter by government-supported militants on one side and rebel groups on the
other. Villages are no longer being burned down at the same rate, although some
say that is because there are few villages left to burn.

Crime has replaced warfare as the biggest threat to civilians. And intelligence
officials say Sudan has provided important cooperation in the United States'
fight against terrorists.

The Obama administration continues to use the word genocide to characterize the
killings in Sudan, and aides acknowledged that the word loomed large in their
months of deliberations.

But Michael Abramowitz, director of the Committee on Conscience at the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum, wrote on the committee's Web site, ''Now
conditions in Sudan have changed. We believe it is most accurate to place Darfur
and the rest of Sudan in our 'genocide warning' category.''

A senior administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said,
''People were wrestling with the question of how to deal with the fact that to
get to the best-case scenario -- which is to change the behavior of the Khartoum
government -- we are going to have to work with a government responsible for so
many atrocities.''

But the new administration policy is likely to inflame  an already vociferous
chorus of criticism.

In advertisements and letters to the White House, legislators, activist groups
and Sudanese rebel leaders have accused Mr. Obama of abandoning his promises to
make Sudan a priority from his first day in office and to stand tough against
President Bashir, whom the International Criminal Courtindicted this year for
crimes against humanity.

Some critics have expressed outrage over earlier statements by General Gration
in which he raised questions about the effectiveness of imposing sanctions and
suggested that a series of rewards might work better at getting Mr. Bashir's
government in Khartoum to cooperate.

In the interview, General Gration disagreed with the critics.

Summing up the administration's approach, he cited what he described as an old
African proverb. ''If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, you
have to go with someone,'' he said.

''We want to go far,'' General Gration said, ''and to do that we are going to
have to go with Khartoum.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Obama's special envoy to Sudan, Maj. Gen. J. Scott
Gration, with Sudanese officials in Khartoum in July. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASHRAF
SHAZLY/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (92%); INTERVIEWS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); TERRORISM (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); DISPLACED PERSONS (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%); HOLOCAUST (64%); MUSEUMS &
GALLERIES (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%); J SCOTT GRATION (90%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%);
OMAR AL-BASHIR (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             574 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside The Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 774 words


International

U.N. GAZA REPORT MOVES TOWARD SECURITY COUNCIL

The United Nations Human Rights Council voted to endorse a report detailing
evidence of war crimes committed by Israeli forces and Palestinian militants
during the Gaza war. PAGE A4

BEIJING'S AIR IS CLEANER

Beijing has some of the worst air pollution of any big city on earth. But the
Chinese capital is changing that. PAGE A4

IRAQI KILLS 16 IN MOSQUE

A man stood up during Friday Prayer in northern Iraq, shot the prayer leader
with an assault rifle, sprayed the kneeling worshipers and detonated a suicide
belt, killing 15 people and wounding 100 others. PAGE A6

4 U.S. DEATHS IN AFGHANISTAN

Four American soldiers were killed after their patrol vehicle hit an improvised
explosive device on Thursday in Afghanistan. PAGE A6

11 DIE IN PAKISTAN ATTACK

Suicide bombers attacked a police station in Peshawar, killing at least 11
people. It was the latest bold attack against a security installation in
Pakistan. PAGE A6

Clinton Calls Karzai Win Likely A6

Obituaries

DANIEL MELNICK, 77

A producer and studio executive, he brought an innovative and often
unconventional sensibility to films that included ''Straw Dogs,'' ''All that
Jazz'' and ''Altered States.'' PAGE A12

CULLEN BRYANT, 58

A powerful running back for the Los Angeles Rams and the Seattle Seahawks, he
played for 13 seasons in the N.F.L.  PAGE A12

National

IMMIGRATION POLICY CHANGED TO FOCUS ON SERIOUS CRIMES

The Obama administration unveiled changes to a program that allows police
officers to enforce federal immigration law. The changes are meant to focus the
program on illegal immigrants who have committed serious crimes. PAGE A9

CELEBRATING AN EARTHQUAKE

San Francisco's mayor is promoting a week's worth of events to commemorate the
1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, which killed 63 people and injured thousands. San
Francisco Journal. PAGE A8

STATE PLANS TO FREE INMATES

Because of a little-known North Carolina statute defining a life sentence as 80
years, the state is preparing to release dozens of prisoners convicted of
violent crimes in the 1970s. PAGE A9

OBAMA JOINS ELDER BUSH

President Obama joined former President George Bush to promote volunteerism at
Texas A&M University.  PAGE A9

3 PIGS MAY HAVE SWINE FLU

Three pigs at the Minnesota State Fair tested positive in late August for H1N1,
the Agriculture Department reported. If the preliminary tests are confirmed, the
pigs will be the first in the United States found to harbor the virus.  PAGE A11

New York

AFTER SENATOR'S CONVICTION, SOME WANT HIM EXPELLED

The assault conviction of State Senator Hiram Monserrate set off denunciations
from Democratic colleagues, with several prominent senators saying they would
seek to expel Mr. Monserrate from the chamber.  PAGE A13

Mayor Plans Less Lofty Goals A13

Business

FOUNDER OF HEDGE FUND ACCUSED OF INSIDER TRADING

Raj Rajaratnam, a self-made billionaire who built the Galleon Group into a giant
hedge fund, was arrested in what prosecutors called the biggest insider trading
scheme ever involving a hedge fund. PAGE B1

2ND MADOFF AIDE ACCUSED

The trustee in the Bernard L. Madoff Ponzi scheme case said that a second
employee, who was not named, was involved in the fraud and handled ''friends and
family'' accounts. PAGE B2

BANK OF AMERICA POSTS LOSS

Bank of America reported a loss of $2.24 billion -- after dividends were paid
out -- in the third quarter after robust profits in the first half of the year.
PAGE B3

DOW BACK BELOW 10,000

Stocks fell and the dollar and safe-haven government bonds regained some of the
ground they had lost earlier in the week. PAGE B7

G.E.'s Quarter Hints at Stability B3

2 Regulators Propose Resolution B3

Sports

HEAR A HELICOPTER WHIRLING? IT'S JUST THE COLLEGE SCOUT

At least eight college football programs -- Missouri, Minnesota, Kentucky,
Cincinnati, Rutgers, Maryland, Louisiana State and U.C.L.A. -- are using
helicopters to drop in on recruits' games. PAGE D1

JOSTLING IN LINE FOR FLU SHOT

Canadians reacted strongly after the chief medical officer for Canada's Olympic
team proposed to move the team near the front of the line to be vaccinated
against the H1N1 flu. PAGE D4

Wings' Franzen Has Surgery D4

Ravens' Lewis Fined for 2 Hits D6

Arts

AMAZON AND WAL-MART FIGHT ENDS IN $9 HARDCOVER BOOKS

The dust has settled on the day-long price-cutting war between Wal-Mart and
Amazon, and both are now selling hardcover books for $9. The price is so low the
publishing world is worried it will fundamentally damage the industry. PAGE C1

Op-ed

BOB HERBERT PAGE A19

CHARLES M. BLOW PAGE A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); VIOLENT CRIME (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (86%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); PRISONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(77%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (75%); EXPLOSIVES (75%); DEATHS (75%); H1N1 INFLUENZA (74%); AIR
POLLUTION (72%); AMERICAN FOOTBALL (70%); SPORTS (70%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES
(69%); PUBLIC POLICY (69%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (64%); INFLUENZA (64%);
VOLUNTEERS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);
NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE (54%); SEATTLE SEAHAWKS (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (78%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (93%); CHINA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             579 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 23, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Gaza Report Author Asks U.S. to Clarify Concerns

BYLINE: By SHARON OTTERMAN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 530 words


Richard Goldstone, the lead author of a United Nations report that found
evidence of war crimes committed by Israel and Hamas during last winter's Gaza
war, challenged the Obama administration in an interview broadcast Thursday to
explain what it has called serious concerns about his report.

In the interview  on Al Jazeera, Mr. Goldstone, a South African jurist, said
that the official American response to the 575-page report had been ambivalent.
The Obama administration, he said, ''joined our recommendation calling for full
and good-faith'' domestic investigations of the alleged crimes in both Israel
and Gaza, ''but said that the report was flawed.''

''But I have yet to hear from the Obama administration what the flaws in the
report that they have identified are,'' Mr. Goldstone said. ''I mean, I would be
happy to respond to them, if and when I know what they are.''

He added, ''Of course I'm concerned and would like to engage with the Obama
administration, at least informally.''

The report found evidence that some Israeli soldiers had intentionally killed
Palestinian civilians during the three-week conflict in violation of the laws of
war. It described the Israeli military assault on Gaza as ''a deliberately
disproportionate attack designed to punish, humiliate and terrorize a civilian
population, radically diminish its local economic capacity both to work and to
provide for itself, and to force upon it an ever increasing sense of dependency
and vulnerability.''

It also said there was evidence that the Palestinian militant rocket attacks on
towns in southern Israel constituted war crimes.

The report's recommendations were officially endorsed last week by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, which has forwarded the document to the United
NationsGeneral Assembly and Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. The United States
joined five European nations in voting against the resolution that endorsed the
report, and Israeli officials have lobbied hard to discredit it.

''People generally don't like to be accused of criminal activity, so it didn't
surprise me that there was criticism, even strong criticism, and it has come
from both sides,'' Mr. Goldstone said in the interview. ''But I do regret the
extremes to which some of the criticism has gone and the fact that it has been
so personalized.''

He then lashed out at his detractors, saying, ''I've no doubt, many of the
critics -- I would say the overwhelmingly majority of the critics -- haven't
read the report. And, you know, what proves that, I think, is the level of
criticism doesn't go to the substance of the report. There still haven't been
responses to the really serious allegations that are made.''

Obama administration officials have made more detailed criticisms of the report,
usually contending, as did Douglas M. Griffiths, the American delegate to the
Human Rights Council, that it was unfair to Israel.

Explaining his vote against endorsing the report, Mr. Griffiths said that,
''While Justice Goldstone acknowledged Hamas's crimes, in examining Israel's
response sufficient weight was not given to the difficulties faced in fighting
this kind of enemy in this environment.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RESEARCH REPORTS (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HAMAS (90%); INTERVIEWS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); ARMED FORCES (66%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); BAN KI-MOON (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES
(93%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             581 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trying Karadzic

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 427 words


Radovan Karadzic, accused of ordering some of the worst atrocities in Europe
since World War II, is still tormenting his victims. More than 160 Bosnian
Muslims traveled to the Hague for the start of the former Bosnian Serb leader's
war crimes trial on Monday only to have him boycott the proceeding.

Judges with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yuogoslavia
adjourned the session and promised to begin on Tuesday with or without Mr.
Karadzic in the dock. The trial must go ahead. After so many years of anguish,
the relatives of the thousands of who were killed deserve a chance at justice.

It took 13 years and enormous international pressure to persuade Serbian
authorities to finally arrest Mr. Karadzic. (He was living in Belgrade posing as
a New Age healer.) He faces 11 charges of war crimes and genocide, for his role
in the 43-month siege of Sarajevo, the massacre of 8,000 Muslim men and boys at
Srebrenica and the so-called ethnic-cleansing campaign against Bosnian Muslims
and Croats.

Slobodan Milosevic, the murderous former Yugoslav leader, played similar games
with the war crimes court for four years, only to die of a heart attack before a
formal verdict was rendered. Mr. Karadzic seems equally determined to mock the
court and draw things out. He refused to send a lawyer to Monday's hearing,
refused to enter pleas, demanded more time to prepare for trial and --
unsuccessfully -- claimed immunity from prosecution, asserting that he had cut a
deal with the former United States peace envoy, Richard Holbrooke, in 1996. Mr.
Holbrooke has denied this. The court must accord Mr. Karadzic appropriate
rights, but it cannot let him control the process.

Mr. Karadzic's trial is not the only unfinished business in the Balkans. His
wartime military chief, Gen. Ratko Mladic, is believed to be still hiding in
Serbia -- 14 years after his indictment. We doubt the claims of Serb officials
who say they don't know where he is. He also must be apprehended.

The war in Bosnia is thankfully over. But the peace deal enshrined a political
system that continues to promote division rather than much-needed conciliation.
The United States and European states recently proposed a comprehensive plan to
stabilize Bosnia and clear the way for the country to join the European Union --
including by breaking down official ethnic divisions and improving the rule of
law and human rights practices. Persuading Bosnia's leaders to choose that route
will be as important to exorcising the Balkan ghosts as bringing war criminals
to justice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); RELIGION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); WORLD WAR II
(78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); VERDICTS (72%); IMMUNITY
(72%); PEACE PROCESS (71%); RULE OF LAW (70%); DEATHS (70%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); EUROPE (94%); SERBIA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); CROATIA (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             586 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: January 5, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2143 words


International

IRAN CRACKS DOWN ON REFORMERS

As Iran's presidential election heats up, hard-liners are cracking down on
activists who have supported reformist candidates in the past. PAGE A6

IRANIAN PILGRIMS KILLED IN BAGHDAD

At least 40 people were killed and 72 wounded in Baghdad, many of them Iranian
pilgrims, in a suicide bombing at the doorstep of one of Iraq's holiest Shiite
shrines, government and hospital officials said. The attacker appeared to be
targeting a procession of Iranian pilgrims visiting the shrine. PAGE A6

PATIENTS SUFFER UNDER OLD LAWS

In Bulgaria, as in many former Communist countries in Europe, people with mental
disabilities are stripped of rights and sequestered without recourse under rules
left over from the Communist era. The laws give control of the patients to
guardians, often regardless of the severity of the patient's disability,
according to human rights groups. And the laws in Bulgaria and the region often
fail to ensure any oversight of the guardians. Memo from Pravda PAGE A7

RUSSIA RAISES GAS PRICE FOR UKRAINE

Gazprom, the Russian gas monopoly, raised the price it wants Ukraine to pay for
fuel again, escalating a politically tinged dispute that led to a complete halt
in supplies to Ukraine and disruptions to four other Eastern European countries.
The dispute has caught Ukraine's economy, already shaken by the global financial
crisis, at a bad time PAGE A7

Conflict in Gaza

WITH WORDS ONLY, HEZBOLLAH ASSAILS ISRAEL

The leader of Hezbollah has been delivering furious speeches in Beirut, Lebanon,
against Israel for its assault on Gaza and against Arab countries for their
passivity. But he has not ordered his own powerful militia into action, because
Hezbollah believes Hamas will emerge triumphant, and it cannot risk drawing
Lebanon into a conflict. PAGE A9

EUROPE SEEKS CEASE-FIRE

Europe, stepping into the diplomatic shoes left by the departing Bush
administration, is sending two missions to the Middle East to try to get a
cease-fire in Gaza and is offering more humanitarian aid. PAGE A10

BUSH STAYS BESIDE ISRAEL

As others called urgently for a cease-fire in Gaza, the Bush administration has
blamed Hamas for the fighting, maintaining to the end its eight-year record of
stalwart support for Israel. A News Analysis. PAGE A10

National

PELOSI MAKES ROOM

For New No. 1 Democrat

In her two years as House speaker, Nancy Pelosi has been the driving force
behind the Democratic Party, using her influence to set its course. But in the
coming months, her role will change, as she concedes the party's reins to the
next president, Barack Obama, whose success could cement her legacy as a pivotal
Congressional figure. PAGE A13

THE MALL ARCADE AS RECRUITING TOOL

The Army hopes a $13 million video arcade in Philadelphia's Franklin Mills mall
will become a model for recruitment in urban areas, where the armed services
typically have a hard time. The arcade boasts 14,500 square feet of mostly
shoot-'em-up games and three full-scale military simulators -- including of an
AH-64 Apache Longbow helicopter, an armed Humvee and a Black Hawk helicopter
with M4 carbine assault rifles. . PAGE A11

VIRGINIA GOVERNOR TO HEAD PARTY

Gov. Tim Kaine of Virginia, who was once a contender to be President-elect
Barack Obama's running mate, has been selected by Mr. Obama to become the next
chairman of the Democratic National Committee. PAGE A12

CHALLENGE TO DISCRIMINATION RULING

President-elect Barack Obama and Democrats in Congress plan to write legislation
to overturn the Supreme Court's decision in a 2007 case that made it harder for
people to challenge discrimination in employment, education, housing and other
venues. The legislation would give people more time to file charges by relaxing
the statute of limitations in various civil rights laws. PAGE A13

WITNESS'S IDENTITY SHOCKS ACTIVISTS

Brandon Darby, a community organizer from Austin, Tex., surprised fellow
activists when he announced in an open letter that he acted as a government
informant in the scheduled federal trial against two Texas men arrested during
the Republican National Convention in St. Paul. The two men are charged with
making and possessing Molotov cocktails. PAGE A14

Obituaries

PAT HINGLE, 84

A versatile character actor of stage and screen, he was used to winning the
approval of critics and the delight of the public in a career that spanned five
decades. PAGE A17

NICK SCANDONE, 42

A sailing gold medalist at the Beijing Paralympics, he was a former United
States Yachtsman of the Year. PAGE A17

Metro

TRADING SAFETY FOR PRIVACY TO END A PREGNANCY AT HOME

In the socially conservative Dominican neighborhoods of Manhattan, many Latinas
want to end their pregnancy at home. Experts offer a variety of reasons, like
mistrust of doctors and a culture where women solve their own problems. Two new
studies found reports of women mixing malted beverages with aspirin, salt or
nutmeg; throwing themselves down stairs or having people punch them in the
stomach; and drinking teas of avocado leaf, pine wood and oak bark. PAGE A15

BLOOMBERG SHOWS SUPPORT IN ISRAEL

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg went to Israel to show his support for the country
and to enhance his standing with Jewish voters back home. The mayor got a taste
of the conflict when he was touring a rocket-battered town and had to take cover
in a safe room. He emerged unscathed, calm but somber. PAGE A15

Big City: In the Attic, Newspapers From 1930 A16

Sports

THE EAGLES TOPPLE THE VIKINGS, AND GET TO MEET THE GIANTS AGAIN

For the better part of the National Football Conference wild-card game, the
Philadelphia Eagles' offense suffered an afternoon of frustration against the
Minnesota Vikings. Philadelphia led by 2 points late in the game, but the
Vikings seemed one big Adrian Peterson play away from stealing the game. Then,
with less than seven minutes to play, Brian Westbrook took a short pass, turned
upfield and dashed for a 71-yard touchdown, earning a trip to the second round,
where the Eagles will face the New York Giants. PAGE D1

Stoops Seeks His Own Legacy D2

Florida's Sun-Kissed Walk-On D2

N.B.A. PLAYERS STILL FEEL OLYMPICS

As the regular season approaches intermission, the results have been mixed for
the 25 N.B.A. stars who played in the Beijing Summer Olympics. Some of them used
the games as a springboard into the new season; half the league's top scorers
participated in Beijing. But of the 25 Olympians, 17 are scoring fewer points
this season than they did a year ago. PAGE D3

An Understudy on Center Stage

The Chargers' LaDainian Tomlinson, hobbled by a groin injury, started San
Diego's American Football Conference wild-card game against the Indianapolis
Colts, but he couldn't finish it. He stepped out of the spotlight, and his
backup, Darren Sproles, stepped into it. PAGE D4

Business

BLU-RAY FORMAT STRUGGLES

With Uncertain Prospects

At this year's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, many eyes will be on
Blu-ray, which is viewed by many in the industry as the only high-definition
heir apparent to the DVD. A growing chorus of skeptics say the window for a
high-definition disc format like Blu-raymay be closing fast as a new wave of
digital media services will soon begin flowing into living rooms. PAGE B1

CNN'S NEW YEAR'S HANGOVER

Like New Year's Eve partygoers who may have pushed the revelry a bit too far,
CNN, chasing a younger audience, may have greeted Jan. 1 with a tinge of regret.
The network's live New Year's Eve program included eyebrow-raising performances
and cringe-worthy jokes. PAGE B1

MOVIE STUDIOS COUNT BLESSINGS

As companies big and small stagger into January after a dismal 2008 -- if they
still exist at all -- Hollywood is quietly celebrating solid if not spectacular
box office sales. PAGE B1

Auto Sales Expected to Dip 30% B1

Breakingviews.com

New Year's Resolutions for Obama

The Breakingviews.com gang offers some resolutions that President-elect Barack
Obama should make. A few of them are: Raise the federal excise tax on gasoline;
offer incentives to exchange clunkers for new, green cars; and take a 10 percent
salary cut. PAGE B2

TWEETING WHILE FAMOUS

As celebrities take advantage of Internet tools like Twitter that break down the
barrier between stars and the public, they are being forced to weigh the
benefits of having intensely loyal fans deeply engaged in their daily lives
against the pitfalls of having intensely loyal fans deeply engaged in their
daily lives. PAGE B3

Universal Sells Rogue Pictures B3

A TV THAT CAN TALK TO THE INTERNET

LG Electronics, the third-largest television manufacturer in terms of United
States sales, is set to announce a line of televisions that can directly receive
Internet video in addition to satellite and cable signals. PAGE B4

Investors' View of Future Technology B4

WB'S YOUTH PULL REMAINS

Though the WB ceased to exist as a broadcast network, its brand remains potent
amongthecoveted 18-to-24-year-old demographic. Warner Brothers hopes that brand
loyalty and exclusive content will attract those young eyeballs -- and
advertisers -- to TheWB.com. PAGE B5

Arts

AMID LAYOFFS AND CUTBACKS,

A New Austerity in Publishing

For decades, the New York publishing world promised employees a romantic life of
fancy lunches and sparkling parties. If the salaries were not exactly Wall
Street caliber, well, they came with a milieu that mixed cultural swagger with
pure Manhattan high life. But amid a relentless string of layoffs and pay
freezes, book publishers are clamping down on some of the industry's cozy
traditions, and the cushy schmooze fest seems to be winding down. PAGE C1

Music Review

Bandleader Accents Cuban Roots

Cuban music is the core of the Cuban saxophonist, clarinetist and composer
Paquito D'Rivera's repertory, but he has never before now, with a first-time run
of shows at Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola, led a Cuban band in this country. Mr.
D'Rivera is a complicated performer: a virtuoso, a scholar and a gold-plated ham
in equal parts, Ben Ratliff writes. PAGE C1

REISSUING A TREASURY OF CHOPIN

A remarkable new four-CD set, ''Nadia Reisenberg: A Chopin Treasury,'' has the
potential to bring the pianist Nadia Reisenberg's musically sensitive and
technically effortless artistry to the attention of a generation of listeners
who have heard little about her since her death in 1983. In all these works, her
playing is exceptionally beautiful, distinguished by warm tone, impressive
clarity, unostentatious virtuosity and unerring musical insight, Anthony
Tommasini writes. PAGE C1

Television Review

Spinoffs Plucked From 'The Hills'

In MTV's new series ''The City,'' the person-character of Whitney Port from the
''The Hills'' moves to New York to work as a publicity assistant. She describes
it as ''an opportunity of a lifetime,'' but the job seems to require only that
she show up in good shoes. Still, its pleasures are greater than any attempted
in ''Bromance,'' which ''The City'' follows in the broadcast lineup, in which
Brody Jenner, also from ''The Hills,'' sets out to find a best friend among a
bunch of competing chumps, Ginia Bellafante writes. PAGE C1

A PARADE OF INDIAN HISTORY ON PBS

''The Story of India,'' a six-hour, three-night PBS mini-series, is the latest
television opus from the British pop historian Michael Wood, whose projects have
included ''Art of the Western World'' and ''Conquistadors.'' If you like the
idea of watching a National Geographic article brought to life, with the lush
photography, fascinating facts, sense of discovery and slight superficiality
that implies, you'll love the series, Mike Hall writes. PAGE C5

Books of the Times C4

Editorial

NO MUGS, BUT WHAT ABOUT THOSE FEES?

New pharmaceutical industry guidelines should stop most drug companies from
distributing trinkets to doctors. The rules are the industry's latest attempt to
restore public confidence that doctors are prescribing medicines in the
patient's interest, but the code still has far too many loopholes. PAGE A20

A PITCH FOR MASS TRANSIT

Barack Obama comes to the presidency with a clear appreciation of the urgent
problems of climate change and America's growing dependency on foreign oil. One
way he can address both is to give mass transit the priority it deserves and the
full financial support it needs. PAGE A20

Op-Ed

WILLIAM KRISTOL

Israel -- assuming it succeeds -- is doing the United States a favor by taking
on Hamas now. The huge challenge for the Obama administration is going to be
Iran. PAGE A21

PAUL KRUGMAN

Recent economic numbers have been terrifying. So this is our moment of truth.
Will we do what's necessary to prevent a second Great Depression? PAGE A21

RESTORE THE SENATE'S TREATY POWER

Presidents are often tempted to circumvent the requirement that treaties be
approved by two-thirds of the Senate. In an Op-Ed article, John R. Bolton and
John Yoo write that Republicans can help shape a bipartisan foreign policy by
insisting that Barack Obama obey the Constitution. PAGE A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTOS (A2)
 PHOTOS (A3) DRAWING (A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); HAMAS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);
TERRORISM (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); OIL & GAS PRICES (72%);
HOSPITALS (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); DISABLED PERSONS
(69%); ARMIES (68%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (67%); GASOLINE PRICES
(67%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (65%)

COMPANY: OAO GAZPROM (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%)

TICKER: OGZD (LSE) (69%); GAZP (RTS) (69%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS486210 PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS (69%); NAICS221210
NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (69%); NAICS213112 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR OIL & GAS
OPERATIONS (69%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (69%);
SIC4923 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (69%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS (69%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); NANCY PELOSI (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); UKRAINE (94%); EUROPE (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(94%); IRAQ (93%); LEBANON (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
BULGARIA (90%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (57%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             587 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 5, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: January 5, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2184 words


International

IRAN CRACKS DOWN ON REFORMERS

As Iran's presidential election heats up, hard-liners are cracking down on
activists who have supported reformist candidates in the past. PAGE A6

IRANIAN PILGRIMS KILLED IN BAGHDAD

At least 40 people were killed and 72 wounded in Baghdad, many of them Iranian
pilgrims, in a suicide bombing at the doorstep of one of Iraq's holiest Shiite
shrines, government and hospital officials said. The attacker appeared to be
targeting a procession of Iranian pilgrims visiting the shrine. PAGE A6

PATIENTS SUFFER UNDER OLD LAWS

In Bulgaria, as in many former Communist countries in Europe, people with mental
disabilities are stripped of rights and sequestered without recourse under rules
left over from the Communist era. The laws give control of the patients to
guardians, often regardless of the severity of the patient's disability,
according to human rights groups. And the laws in Bulgaria and the region often
fail to ensure any oversight of the guardians. Memo from Pravda PAGE A7

RUSSIA RAISES GAS PRICE FOR UKRAINE

Gazprom, the Russian gas monopoly, raised the price it wants Ukraine to pay for
fuel again, escalating a politically tinged dispute that led to a complete halt
in supplies to Ukraine and disruptions to four other Eastern European countries.
The dispute has caught Ukraine's economy, already shaken by the global financial
crisis, at a bad time  PAGE A7

Conflict in Gaza

WITH WORDS ONLY,  HEZBOLLAH ASSAILS ISRAEL

The leader of Hezbollah has been delivering furious speeches in Beirut, Lebanon,
against Israel for its assault on Gaza and against Arab countries for their
passivity. But he has not ordered his own powerful militia into action, because
Hezbollah believes Hamas will emerge triumphant, and it cannot risk drawing
Lebanon into a conflict. PAGE A9

EUROPE SEEKS CEASE-FIRE

Europe, stepping into the diplomatic shoes left by the departing Bush
administration, is sending two missions to the Middle East to try to get a
cease-fire in Gaza and is offering more humanitarian aid. PAGE A10

BUSH STAYS BESIDE ISRAEL

As others called urgently for a cease-fire in Gaza, the Bush administration has
blamed Hamas for the fighting, maintaining to the end its eight-year record of
stalwart support for Israel. A News Analysis.  PAGE A10

National

PELOSI MAKES ROOM

For New No. 1 Democrat

In her two years as House speaker, Nancy Pelosi has been the driving force
behind the Democratic Party, using her influence to set its course. But in the
coming months, her role will change, as she concedes the party's reins to the
next president, Barack Obama, whose success could cement her legacy as a pivotal
Congressional figure.  PAGE A13

THE MALL ARCADE AS RECRUITING TOOL

The Army hopes a $13 million video arcade in Philadelphia's Franklin Mills mall
will become a model for recruitment in urban areas, where the armed services
typically have a hard time. The arcade boasts 14,500 square feet of mostly
shoot-'em-up games and three full-scale military simulators -- including of an
AH-64 Apache Longbow helicopter, an armed Humvee and a Black Hawk helicopter
with M4 carbine assault rifles. .  PAGE A11

VIRGINIA GOVERNOR TO HEAD PARTY

Gov. Tim Kaine of Virginia, who was once a contender to be President-elect
Barack Obama's running mate, has been selected by Mr. Obama to become the next
chairman of the Democratic National Committee.  PAGE A12

CHALLENGE TO DISCRIMINATION RULING

President-elect Barack Obama and Democrats in Congress plan to write legislation
to overturn the Supreme Court's decision in a 2007 case that made it harder for
people to challenge discrimination in employment, education, housing and other
venues. The legislation would give people more time to file charges by relaxing
the statute of limitations in various civil rights laws. PAGE A13

WITNESS'S IDENTITY SHOCKS ACTIVISTS

Brandon Darby, a community organizer from Austin, Tex., surprised fellow
activists when he announced in an open letter that he acted as a government
informant in the scheduled federal trial against two Texas men arrested during
the Republican National Convention in St. Paul. The two men are charged with
making and possessing Molotov cocktails.  PAGE A14

Obituaries

PAT HINGLE, 84

A versatile character actor of stage and screen, he was used to winning the
approval of critics and the delight of the public in a career that spanned five
decades. PAGE A17

NICK SCANDONE, 42

A sailing gold medalist at the Beijing Paralympics, he was a former United
States Yachtsman of the Year. PAGE A17

Metro

TRADING SAFETY FOR PRIVACY TO END A PREGNANCY AT HOME

In the socially conservative Dominican neighborhoods of Manhattan, many Latinas
want to end their pregnancy at home. Experts offer a variety of reasons, like
mistrust of doctors and a culture where women solve their own problems. Two new
studies found reports of women mixing malted beverages with aspirin, salt or
nutmeg; throwing themselves down stairs or having people punch them in the
stomach; and drinking teas of avocado leaf, pine wood and oak bark.  PAGE A15

BLOOMBERG SHOWS SUPPORT IN ISRAEL

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg went to Israel to show his support for the country
and to enhance his standing with Jewish voters back home. The mayor got a taste
of the conflict when he was touring a rocket-battered town and had to take cover
in a safe room. He emerged unscathed, calm but somber. PAGE A15

Big City: In the Attic, Newspapers From 1930 A16

Sports

THE EAGLES TOPPLE THE VIKINGS, AND GET TO MEET THE GIANTS AGAIN

For the better part of the National Football Conference wild-card game, the
Philadelphia Eagles' offense suffered an afternoon of frustration against the
Minnesota Vikings. Philadelphia led by 2 points late in the game, but the
Vikings seemed one big Adrian Peterson play away from stealing the game. Then,
with less than seven minutes to play, Brian Westbrook took a short pass, turned
upfield and dashed for a 71-yard touchdown, earning a trip to the second round,
where the Eagles will face the New York Giants.  PAGE D1

Stoops Seeks His Own Legacy D2

Florida's Sun-Kissed Walk-On D2

N.B.A. PLAYERS STILL FEEL OLYMPICS

As the regular season approaches intermission, the results have been mixed for
the 25 N.B.A. stars who played in the Beijing Summer Olympics. Some of them used
the games as a springboard into the new season; half the league's top scorers
participated in Beijing. But of the 25 Olympians, 17 are scoring fewer points
this season than they did a year ago. PAGE D3

An Understudy on Center Stage

The Chargers' LaDainian Tomlinson, hobbled by a groin injury, started San
Diego's American Football Conference wild-card game against the Indianapolis
Colts, but he couldn't finish it. He stepped out of the spotlight, and his
backup, Darren Sproles, stepped into it.  PAGE D4

Business

BLU-RAY FORMAT STRUGGLES

With Uncertain Prospects

At this year's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, many eyes will be on
Blu-ray, which is viewed by many in the industry as the only high-definition
heir apparent to the DVD. A growing chorus of skeptics say the window for a
high-definition disc format like Blu-raymay be closing fast as a new wave of
digital media services will soon begin flowing into living rooms. PAGE B1

CNN'S NEW YEAR'S HANGOVER

Like New Year's Eve partygoers who may have pushed the revelry a bit too far,
CNN, chasing a younger audience, may have greeted Jan. 1 with a tinge of regret.
The network's live New Year's Eve program included eyebrow-raising performances
and cringe-worthy jokes.  PAGE B1

MOVIE STUDIOS COUNT BLESSINGS

As companies big and small stagger into January after a dismal 2008 -- if they
still exist at all -- Hollywood is quietly celebrating solid if not spectacular
box office sales. PAGE B1

Auto Sales Expected to Dip 30% B1

Breakingviews.com

New Year's Resolutions for Obama

The Breakingviews.com gang offers some resolutions that President-elect Barack
Obama should make. A few of them are: Raise the federal excise tax on gasoline;
offer incentives to exchange clunkers for new, green cars; and take a 10 percent
salary cut.  PAGE B2

TWEETING WHILE FAMOUS

As celebrities take advantage of Internet tools like Twitter that break down the
barrier between stars and the public, they are being forced to weigh the
benefits of having intensely loyal fans deeply engaged in their daily lives
against the pitfalls of having intensely loyal fans deeply engaged in their
daily lives.  PAGE B3

Universal Sells Rogue Pictures B3

A TV THAT CAN TALK TO THE INTERNET

LG Electronics, the third-largest television manufacturer in terms of United
States sales, is set to announce a line of televisions that can directly receive
Internet video in addition to satellite and cable signals. PAGE B4

Investors' View of Future Technology  B4

WB'S YOUTH PULL REMAINS

Though the WB ceased to exist as a broadcast network, its brand remains potent
amongthecoveted 18-to-24-year-old demographic. Warner Brothers hopes that brand
loyalty and exclusive content will attract those young eyeballs -- and
advertisers -- to TheWB.com.  PAGE B5

Arts

AMID LAYOFFS AND CUTBACKS,

A New Austerity in Publishing

For decades, the New York publishing world promised employees a romantic life of
fancy lunches and sparkling parties. If the salaries were not exactly Wall
Street caliber, well, they came with a milieu that mixed cultural swagger with
pure Manhattan high life. But amid a relentless string of layoffs and pay
freezes, book publishers are clamping down on some of the industry's cozy
traditions, and the cushy schmooze fest seems to be winding down.  PAGE C1

Music Review

Bandleader Accents Cuban Roots

Cuban music is the core of the Cuban saxophonist, clarinetist and composer
Paquito D'Rivera's repertory, but he has never before now, with a first-time run
of shows at Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola, led a Cuban band in this country. Mr.
D'Rivera is a complicated performer: a virtuoso, a scholar and a gold-plated ham
in equal parts, Ben Ratliff writes. PAGE C1

REISSUING A TREASURY OF CHOPIN

A remarkable new four-CD set, ''Nadia Reisenberg: A Chopin Treasury,'' has the
potential to bring the pianist Nadia Reisenberg's musically sensitive and
technically effortless artistry to the attention of a generation of listeners
who have heard little about her since her death in 1983. In all these works, her
playing is exceptionally beautiful, distinguished by warm tone, impressive
clarity, unostentatious virtuosity and unerring musical insight, Anthony
Tommasini writes.  PAGE C1

Television Review

Spinoffs Plucked From 'The Hills'

In MTV's new series ''The City,'' the person-character of Whitney Port from the
''The Hills'' moves to New York to work as a publicity assistant. She describes
it as ''an opportunity of a lifetime,'' but the job seems to require only that
she show up in good shoes. Still, its pleasures are greater than any attempted
in ''Bromance,'' which ''The City'' follows in the broadcast lineup, in which
Brody Jenner, also from ''The Hills,'' sets out to find a best friend among a
bunch of competing chumps, Ginia Bellafante writes.  PAGE C1

A PARADE OF INDIAN HISTORY ON PBS

''The Story of India,'' a six-hour, three-night PBS mini-series, is the latest
television opus from the British pop historian Michael Wood, whose projects have
included ''Art of the Western World'' and ''Conquistadors.'' If you like the
idea of watching a National Geographic article brought to life, with the lush
photography, fascinating facts, sense of discovery and slight superficiality
that implies, you'll love the series, Mike Hall writes.  PAGE C5

Books of the Times  C4

Editorial

NO MUGS,  BUT WHAT ABOUT THOSE FEES?

New pharmaceutical industry guidelines should stop most drug companies from
distributing trinkets to doctors. The rules are the industry's latest attempt to
restore public confidence that doctors are prescribing medicines in the
patient's interest, but the code still has far too many loopholes.  PAGE A20

A PITCH FOR MASS TRANSIT

Barack Obama comes to the presidency with a clear appreciation of the urgent
problems of climate change and America's growing dependency on foreign oil. One
way he can address both is to give mass transit the priority it deserves and the
full financial support it needs.  PAGE A20

Op-Ed

WILLIAM KRISTOL

Israel -- assuming it succeeds -- is doing the United States a favor by taking
on Hamas now. The huge challenge for the Obama administration is going to be
Iran. PAGE A21

PAUL KRUGMAN

Recent economic numbers have been terrifying. So this is our moment of truth.
Will we do what's necessary to prevent a second Great Depression?  PAGE A21

RESTORE THE SENATE'S TREATY POWER

Presidents are often tempted to circumvent the requirement that treaties be
approved by two-thirds of the Senate. In an Op-Ed article, John R. Bolton and
John Yoo write that Republicans can help shape a bipartisan foreign policy by
insisting that Barack Obama obey the Constitution.  PAGE A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); HAMAS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);
TERRORISM (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); OIL & GAS PRICES (72%);
HOSPITALS (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); DISABLED PERSONS
(69%); ARMIES (68%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (67%); GASOLINE PRICES
(67%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (65%)

COMPANY: OAO GAZPROM (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%)

TICKER: OGZD (LSE) (69%); GAZP (RTS) (69%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS486210 PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS (69%); NAICS221210
NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (69%); NAICS213112 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR OIL & GAS
OPERATIONS (69%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (69%);
SIC4923 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (69%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS (69%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); NANCY PELOSI (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); UKRAINE (94%); EUROPE (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(94%); IRAQ (93%); LEBANON (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
BULGARIA (90%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (57%)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             592 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Plethora of International Rules, But No Court to Enforce Them

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 290 words


International law governing warfare is based on the four Geneva Conventions,
which were revised and expanded after World War II. The fourth convention
governs the protection of civilians. The conventions were updated by two
protocols in 1977, in large part to deal with African guerrilla movements, to
govern the protection of victims in international and noninternational armed
conflicts.

Israel has not ratified the protocols, but says it has adopted the main points
into its own code of conduct.

While countries and militaries conduct internal investigations, and occasionally
courts-martial, it is unclear in what forum any international war crimes trial
would take place; neither the United States nor Israel, for example, has
accepted the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

The texts of all the Geneva Conventions and the protocols can be found on the
Web site of the International Committee for the Red Cross:
www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/CONVPRES.

To read the ethical doctrine of the Israel Defense Forces:

http://dover.idf.il/IDF/English/about/doctrine/ethics.htmFor Israel's ethical
doctrine on fighting terrorism, see:

Asa Kasher, ''The Military Ethics of Fighting Terror: An Israeli Perspective''
(with A. Yadlin); ''Journal of Military Ethics'' 4:1 (2005), 3-32, and
Responses, in the same edition, pp 71-76.

For a legal brief by Al-Haq, a Palestinian human-rights group, on the war in
Gaza:

http://www.alhaq.org/pdfs/Legal--Brief--Gaza--Cast--Lead--Jan.pdf.Two good
collections in paperback:

''Documents on the Laws of War,'' edited by Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff,
Oxford University Press, and ''The Handbook of Humanitarian Law in Armed
Conflicts,'' edited by Dieter Fleck, also Oxford University Press.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHICS (91%); LAW OF WAR (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); BOOK REVIEWS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(79%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (75%); INVESTIGATIONS
(75%); MILITARY COURTS (75%); JURISDICTION (75%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (70%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (56%)

COMPANY: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE
RED CROSS (56%); AL-HAQ (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (66%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (66%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             593 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

The Many Sources Governing Warfare

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 464 words


International law governing warfare is based on the four Geneva conventions,
which were revised and expanded after World War II. The fourth convention
governs the protection of civilians. The conventions were updated by two
protocols in 1977, in large part to deal with African guerrilla movements, to
govern the protection of victims in international and non-international armed
conflicts.

Israel has not ratified the protocols, but says it has adopted the main points
into its own code of conduct.

While countries and militaries conduct internal investigations, and occasionally
courts-martial, it is unclear in what forum any international war crimes trial
would take place; neither the United States nor Israel, for example,  has
accepted the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

The texts of all the Geneva Conventions and the Protocols can be found on the
Web site of the International Committee for the Red Cross.

* First Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded
and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (first adopted in 1864, last revision in
1949).

* Second Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded,
Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (first adopted in 1906).

* Third Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (first
adopted in 1929, last revision in 1949).

* Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War (first adopted in 1949, based on parts of the 1907 Hague Convention
IV).

Protocols

* Protocol I (1977): Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts. As
of 12 January 2007, it had been ratified by 167 countries.

* Protocol II (1977): Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed
Conflicts. As of 12 January 2007, it had been ratified by 163 countries.

To read the ethical doctrine of the Israel Defense Forces:

http://dover.idf.il/IDF/English/about/doctrine/ethics.htmFor Israel's ethical
doctrine on fighting terrorism, see:

Asa Kasher, ''The Military Ethics of Fighting Terror: An Israeli Perspective''
(with A. Yadlin); ''Journal of Military Ethics'' 4:1 (2005), 3-32, and
Responses, in the same edition, pp 71-76.

For a legal brief by Al-Haq, a Palestinian human-rights group, on the war in
Gaza, see:

http://www.alhaq.org/pdfs/Legal--Brief--Gaza--Cast--Lead--Jan.pdf.Two good
collections in paperback are:

''Documents on the Laws of War,'' edited by Adam Roberts and Richard Guelff,
Oxford University Press, and ''The Handbook of Humanitarian Law in Armed
Conflicts,'' edited by Dieter Fleck, also Oxford University Press.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (95%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); VICTIMS RIGHTS
(90%); LAW OF WAR (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHICS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (79%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORISM (77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (75%);
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); MILITARY COURTS (75%); JURISDICTION (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); POWS & MIAS (73%); BOOK REVIEWS (66%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (55%)

COMPANY: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%); PRISONERS OF WAR (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (60%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (60%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             594 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: January 19, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2063 words


International

POLITICIAN IS KILLED BY BOMBER

As Iraq Election Nears

Hassan Zaidan al-Luhaibi, a prominent Suni Arab tribal sheik and former general,
was killed by a suicide bomber after a campaign event. Mr. Luhaibi was among the
leaders of a coalition running in the coming provincial elections in northern
Iraq scheduled for the end of January. PAGE A8

ZIMBABWE LEADERS TO MEET

Zimbabwe's president, Robert Mugabe, and its prime minister in waiting, Morgan
Tsvangirai, are set to meet Monday in Harare to mediate their power sharing
deal. But they have already agreed on one thing: the deal will either come to
fruition this week or collapse. PAGE A8

Beijing Journal Scavenging for Beijing's Treasures

Beijing was one of the world's best-preserved metropolises until a merciless
wave of redevelopment gained the upper hand. But Li Songtang can often be found
poking around the rubble, looking for remnants of the city's past to preserve.
''For 50 years I've been watching the destruction of this magnificent city,'' he
said.''We've been treating history like garbage.'' PAGE A8

GROUP SAYS REBELS KILLED 620

Human rights groups said the Lord's Resistance Army, a Ugandan rebel group in
eastern Congo, had killed at least 620 people in the past month as it fled a
multinational military offensive aimed at driving it out of northeastern Congo.
PAGE A8

EX-SENATOR CONSIDERED FOR ENVOY

George J. Mitchell, a former Senate majority leader and the chairman of a Middle
East peace commission in 2001, was a leading candidate to be the Obama
administration's special envoy to the Middle East, according to sources close to
Secretary of State-designate Hillary Rodham Clinton. PAGE A10

FRAGILE CEASE-FIRE IN GAZA

The fragile cease-fire allowed Israel to begin withdrawing troops and tanks
after a devastating 22-day battle in which more than 1,300 Palestinians and 13
Israelis died. European and Arab leaders met in Egypt, where they pledged
support for rebuilding Gaza and called for an end to arms smuggling, as Israel
has demanded, and the opening of Gaza's borders, as demanded by Hamas, the
Islamic militant movement that rules Gaza. PAGE A11

CONSERVATIVE GAIN IN GERMAN VOTE

Germany's Christian Democratic Union Party, the party of Chancellor Angela
Merkel, won a state election on Sunday. The victory may augur well for
conservatives in federal elections in September. PAGE A11

National

DROP IN INTEREST RATE

Is Hurting Legal Aid Groups

Legal aid groups around the country that help poor people with noncriminal cases
are being forced to cut their staffs and services, even as requests for help
have ballooned. In an odd twist, the societies have been hit hard by the Federal
Reserve's steep reduction of its benchmark interest rate. PAGE A12

A DOWN PAYMENT ON OBAMA GOALS

The $825 billion economic recovery plan taking shape in Congress includes
billions of dollars for President-elect Barack Obama's ambitious campaign
promises, affording him an opportunity to make good that few new presidents have
had. PAGE A12

GAY MARRIAGE BAN BATTLE PERSISTS

Supporters of Proposition 8, which outlawed same-sex marriage in California, say
they have been regularly harassed since it passed and have filed suit to
override a state law that requires any donor of $100 or more to disclose
personal information. PAGE A12

UTAH OIL AND GAS LEASES BLOCKED

A federal judge blocked oil and natural gas exploration on tens of thousands of
acres of federal land in Utah, saying in a last-minute decision that the
Interior Department had not done enough environmental analysis, particularly of
how air quality might be degraded. PAGE A17

New York

HOUSING MARKET COLLAPSE MEANT FEWER STATE-TO-STATE MOVES

Fewer New York residents moved out of the state in 2007-8 than in any year in at
least a generation. The collapse of home values seems to have kept people who
may have moved in place because they couldn't afford to sell their houses and
apartments. If the trend continues, New York would lose only one seat after
Congress is reapportioned on the basis of the 2010 census. PAGE A20

COCKPIT TAPE: THUMP AND 'MAYDAY'

The cockpit voice recording from the plane that landed in the Hudson River on
Thursday captured both the sound of an impact on the US Airways jet, presumably
by birds, and the crew going through what a senior investigator called a ''very
calm, collected exercise,'' even though they were gliding lower and had no way
to reach a runway. PAGE A18

STATE PLANS CARE FOR YOUNG ADULTS

To cover more young adults between 19 and 29 with no health insurance, Gov.
David A. Paterson is preparing a plan that will allow many more of them to be
claimed as dependents on their parents' health insurance plans. The plan was
praised by some health care experts as a major step forward, but early evidence
from other states with similar programs suggests that their effectiveness has
been modest at best. PAGE A19

Obituaries

CLINT BALLARD JR.

A Texas-born songwriter, his songs, heard on 10 million records, included the
1965 hit ''The Game of Love'' and Linda Ronstadt's No. 1 single ''You're No
Good'' from 1975. He was 77. PAGE A21

Business

CHANGING THE CHANNEL

With a New Administration

Barack Obama's inauguration marks the end of an era for the Fox News Channel,
the news network of choice during the George W. Bush years. But Fox is showing
no concern about the new administration, and the media world will watch
carefully to see whether the network receives the same treatment from an Obama
White House that it received from Mr. Bush's. PAGE B1

British to Bail Out Banks Again B1

CORPORATIONS SUFFER WITH DEBT

Like consumers and homeowners, America's corporations binged on easy credit when
times were flush, racking up huge debts. Now the bills are due. PAGE B1

FRESH ATTENTION TO ARCHIVAL IMAGES

Compared with the stream of pictures being uploaded to the Internet (an
estimated three million a day on Flickr alone), the uploading of historical
photographs seems a mere trickle. Yet over the last year there have been new
efforts to put classic pictures online, both to find them new audiences and to
use those audiences to breathe new meaning into the photographs. PAGE B3

Underutilized Cellphone Features B3

CLEANING UP AT THE SOURCE

Aiming to make its pages less sexually explicit, The Source, a hip-hop magazine,
announced last week that it would no longer take what the co-publisher, L.
Londell McMillan, calls ''booty ads,'' for pornographic films, pornographic Web
sites or escort services. But those have been a mainstay for The Source -- at
times making up more than half the ads in the magazine. PAGE B7

Doors Keep Revolving at Newspapers B7

CNN Grooms New Health Experts B7

Sports

RODDICK PRESENTS CHALLENGE FOR GLOBAL COACH BACK IN THE U.S.

After nearly 15 years of coaching tennis players from other countries, Larry
Stefanki -- for the first time since working with Patrick McEnroe and his
doubles partner Jonathan Stark in 1993 -- is coaching an American: Andy Roddick.
PAGE D2

Playoff Pressure and a Violent Game D5

LANCE ARMSTRONG RACES AGAIN

Sunday's fast-paced race, the Cancer Council Classic, was essentially an
exhibition. The Tour Down Under, a six-day stage race in Adelaide, Australia,
begins in earnest on Tuesday. Nevertheless, 138,000 people turned out to see
Lance Armstrong return to elite competition. He finished 64th out of 133
starters. PAGE D7

The Inauguration

INAUGURATION EVE CONCERT

They packed themselves tight from the Lincoln Memorial all the way up the hill
to the Washington Monument for a concert that kicked off three days of
inauguration events. They danced, sang, shivered, hooted and hollered for the
man who will be America's first black president (and for Bruce Springsteen).
PAGE C1

The Times asked people why they traveled to Washington to witness the
inauguration. PAGE A14

MCCAIN TO BE GUEST OF HONOR

The post-election mending of fences between Senator John McCain and
President-elect Barack Obama will culminate in Mr. McCain's scheduled appearance
Monday night as the guest of honor at a black-tie dinner celebrating Mr. Obama's
inauguration. PAGE A16

Local Activists: Road Trip! A15

A SOUTH SIDER ON CLARINET

Before Barack Obama is sworn in as president, another South Side Chicagoan will
take the stage. He is Anthony McGill, 29, a clarinetist who will join Itzhak
Perlman, Yo-Yo Ma and Gabriela Montero to play a piece composed for the
occasion. PAGE C1

HISTORIC MOMENT, BUT NO SIGNAL

Going to the inauguration? You may want to brush up on your Morse code.
Cellphone carriers think the crowd -- which could exceed two million -- may
overwhelm their networks, and have taken the unusual step of asking people to
limit their phone calls and to delay sending photos. PAGE B1

READERS' PHOTO ALBUM

NYTimes.com is featuring a readers' album of inauguration photographs from
Washington and elsewhere. Readers are invited to send their pictures to

pix@nyt.com

Arts

FIGHTING FOR RESPECT (AND SALES), 'TYSON' MEETS SUNDANCE

''Tyson,'' directed by James Toback, screened to a packed house in Sundance. The
film tries mightily to find a redemption story for Mike Tyson, the former
heavyweight boxing champion. Still, he appears to remain more spectacle than
morality tale, and considering the purpose of Sundance is to sell documentaries
like ''Tyson,'' that may not be a completely bad thing. PAGE C1

'BIG LOVE' GETS TIE TO REAL WORLD

The HBO drama ''Big Love'' began chronicling the lives of a family of
polygamists in 2006. But last spring, the show got a jolt from real life when
law enforcement officials raided a polygamist compound in Texas and removed more
than 460 children from the ranch. PAGE C1

Theater Review

Father's Pain Marks Two Sons

The suicide of a father leaves a stealthy, ultimately devastating imprint on the
lives of his two sons in ''Leaves of Glass,'' a slow-burning but effective drama
by the British playwright Philip Ridley that features a superb cast including
the Tony nominee Euan Morton, Charles Isherwood writes. PAGE C1

Music Review:

Grateful Dead Album Reimagined C3

Dance Review

Mix of Greek Tragedy and Pop

The Moulin Rouge rubs shoulders with Aeschylus, Marilyn Monroe, Offenbach and a
brothel run by Aphrodite at the Duo Theater in Company XIV's ''Judgment of
Paris,'' an enjoyable but not entirely successful attempt at a genre that might
be described as meta music hall, Roslyn Sulcas writes. PAGE C3

Critics' Choice: New CDs C8

Books of The Times

Born to Be Good

It's a bright, entertaining book, Janet Maslin writes. In ''Born to Be Good,''
Dacher Keltner, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, puts
forth an intriguing central thesis: laughing, blushing, teasing, loving and
other not-very-scientific-seeming subjects can be analyzed in terms of their
importance to our survival. ''We are wired for good,'' he declares. PAGE C9

Editorial

ENERGY INEFFICIENT

Game-changing technologies -- from plug-in cars to carbon capture to wind farms
linked to ''intelligent'' power grids -- will play a big role in cutting
America's consumption of fossil fuels. But the Obama administration cannot
overlook the low-hanging fruit, the gains to be had from making existing
technologies more efficient. PAGE A24

U.A.E. 123

The United Arab Emirates has bested other oil-rich Persian Gulf countries by
becoming the first to conclude a nuclear cooperation agreement with the Bush
administration. It deserves even greater congratulations for forswearing uranium
enrichment and plutonium reprocessing. Those are the key processes for making
fuel for nuclear reactors -- or nuclear weapons. PAGE A24

Op-Ed

WILLIAM KRISTOL

Like President Bush before him, Barack Obama knows that the decisions he makes
as commander in chief will be his most consequential. PAGE A25

PAUL KRUGMAN

Recent news reports suggest that many influential people, possibly including
members of the incoming Obama administration, have become devotees of a new kind
of voodoo economics: the belief that by performing elaborate financial rituals
we can keep dead banks walking. PAGE A25

GUEST CONTRIBUTORS

In two Op-Ed articles for Martin Luther King Jr. Day, professors Henry Louis
Gates Jr. and John Stauffer of Harvard ask what Abraham Lincoln, a man with
complicated feelings about blacks, would have thought of Barack Obama's
election, and Jesse L. Jackson Sr., who was once an aide to the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., describes the slain civil rights leader's last birthday -- and
the lessons we can draw from it. PAGE A25

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: PHOTOS (A2)
 PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHANG W. LEE/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); LEGAL AID (83%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); SMUGGLING (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
HAMAS (67%); ARMED FORCES (65%); RELIGION (60%); INTEREST RATES (60%); ECONOMIC
NEWS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); GEORGE J MITCHELL
(56%); MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (56%); ANGELA MERKEL (50%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (96%); IRAQ (94%); ISRAEL (94%); GERMANY (92%); MIDDLE EAST
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); UGANDA (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             595 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 19, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebuilding Begins Upon a Wobbly Truce

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Robert F. Worth contributed reporting from Beirut,
Lebanon.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israeli troops and tanks began to leave Gaza on Sunday as a fragile cease-fire
opened the way for intensified international efforts to build a more durable
peace.

Small skirmishes broke out but Gaza was largely quiet after Israel, then Hamas,
announced  unilateral cease-fires, ending a devastating 22-day battle in which
more than 1,300 Palestinians and 13 Israelis died.

European and Arab leaders met in Egypt, where they pledged support for
rebuilding Gaza, and called for an end to arms smuggling, as Israel has
demanded, and the opening of Gaza's borders, as demanded by Hamas, the Islamic
militant movement that rules Gaza.

Six European leaders went on to Jerusalem, where Prime Minister Ehud Olmert told
them that Israel was interested in leaving Gaza ''as quickly as possible,'' as
soon as the circumstances allowed. A military official confirmed on Sunday
evening that a ''gradual withdrawal'' was under way.

When it embarked on the campaign, Israel said its main military objective was to
significantly reduce the Hamas rocket fire out of Gaza and to fundamentally
change the security situation in Israel's south. The results so far seem
inconclusive.

Palestinian militants in Gaza fired at least 19 rockets at southern Israel on
Sunday, including some after Hamas and other militant groups had declared a
cease-fire. Most landed without causing injury, but one struck a house in the
Israeli port city of Ashdod, lightly wounding one woman, the military said.

Israel said it carried out three airstrikes in Gaza on Sunday, one against a
group of gunmen who opened fire on its forces and two against rocket-launching
squads. There were conflicting news reports of casualties, with either one man
or one girl said to have been killed.

B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights organization, cited a Gaza resident who had
said that his brother, a farmer, was killed by Israeli fire.

In a speech broadcast Sunday night on Hamas's Al Aqsa television, the Hamas
leader Ismail Haniya, who has been in hiding for the past three weeks, claimed
victory against Israel. He pledged to provide compensation to families who
suffered damage during the war.

Gaza health officials increased the Palestinian death toll on Sunday to about
1,300 people, including 104 women and 410 children. The number is expected to
rise as more bodies are found.

Israel's cease-fire took effect early Sunday morning. About 12 hours later,
Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza announced their immediate, weeklong
cease-fire.

Hamas and its associates gave Israeli troops a week to leave the coastal
enclave. Hamas had previously said it would continue fighting  as  long as
Israeli forces remained.

Referring to the one-week deadline, Mark Regev, a spokesman for Mr. Olmert, said
Israel did not ''take dictates from Hamas.'' But he also insisted that Israel,
which began an air offensive against Hamas on Dec. 27 and sent ground forces in
a week later, had no desire to stay in Gaza for long. ''If it is quiet, it will
be easier for us to leave expeditiously,'' he said.

Israeli military and political leaders have emphasized that Israel will respond
to any attacks, but on Sunday the guns largely gave way to diplomacy.

Hamas demands the opening of the Gaza border crossings as a condition for a
lasting truce. Israel's primary condition is an internationally guaranteed
mechanism to prevent weapons smuggling across Egypt's border into Gaza.

At a summit meeting at the Egyptian Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheik on Sunday,
European and moderate Arab leaders offered their support for both goals. ''We
are ready to offer technical, diplomatic, military and marine assistance to
Israel and Egypt to stop the smuggling of weapons,'' President Nicolas Sarkozy
of France said at a news conference after the meeting.

Egypt also hopes to force Hamas into reconciliation talks with its rival, Fatah,
as a means of unifying the Palestinian leadership and eventually returning Gaza
to more moderate Palestinian Authority rule. Hamas seized control of Gaza in
2007, routing the Fatah forces loyal to the authority.

Hamas, which is classified by Israel, the United States and the European Union
as a terrorist organization, has been severely battered by the Israeli military
operation in Gaza but remains in control.

From Sharm el Sheik, the French, British, German, Spanish, Italian and Czech
leaders traveled to Jerusalem for dinner with Mr. Olmert, who told his guests
that undermining Hamas rule in Gaza depended on strengthening the Palestinian
Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah, whose power is currently confined
to the West Bank.

On Sunday, France also sent four planes carrying medical supplies, water
treatment equipment and 80 aid workers including surgeons, doctors and bomb
disposal experts to Egypt, the French Foreign Ministry said. The equipment and
personnel were on standby on the Egyptian side of the Gaza border, ready to
enter as soon as they could.

Meanwhile, competition for control of the reconstruction of Gaza seems to have
begun.

Salam Fayyad, the prime minister of the Palestinian Authority, complained that
European leaders and the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, had
proposed setting up an interim international committee to finance and organize
the reconstruction. Such a committee would cut out Hamas, but it would also
bypass the authority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Israeli soldiers left Gaza on Sunday. Hamas gave the troops a
week to leave the coastal enclave.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SEBASTIAN SCHEINER/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); HAMAS (91%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); BOMBINGS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(71%); SMUGGLING (70%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (70%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (69%); FAMILY
(65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%); RELIGION (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (59%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); EGYPT (92%);
EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             596 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thailand: U.N. Inquiry On Refugees

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 145 words


The United Nations refugee agency requested access on Tuesday to 126 refugees
from Myanmar being held in southern Thailand, amid allegations that mistreatment
by Thai security forces had led to the deaths of other refugees. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that 80 ethnic Rohingya boat people
were being held on Koh Sai Daeng island in the Andaman Sea and that the
whereabouts of 46 others, intercepted Friday on a boat and turned over to the
Thai military, were unknown. Rights groups say that hundreds of Rohingya, a
Muslim minority fleeing oppression in Myanmar, were detained by the Thai
military last month and forced back to sea with little food or water in boats
without engines. Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva of Thailand denied the claims.
''Let's be clear that Thailand has not violated the human rights of the
refugees,'' he said Tuesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); ISLANDS & REEFS (70%);
PRIME MINISTERS (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (97%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%); ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS, INDIA (70%)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (94%); MYANMAR (93%); INDIA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             597 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

OBAMA WILL SHUT GUANTANAMO SITE AND C.I.A. PRISONS

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and WILLIAM GLABERSON; Mark Mazzetti reported from
Washington, and William Glaberson from New York. Carl Hulse contributed
reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Obama is expected to sign executive orders Thursday directing the
Central Intelligence Agency to shut what remains of its network of secret
prisons and ordering the closing of the Guantanamo detention camp within a year,
government officials said.

The orders, which would be the first steps in undoing  detention policies of
former President George W. Bush, would rewrite American rules for the detention
of terrorism suspects. They would require an immediate review of the 245
detainees still held at the naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to determine if
they should be transferred, released or prosecuted.

And the orders would bring to an end a Central Intelligence Agency program that
kept terrorism suspects in secret custody for months or years, a practice that
has brought fierce criticism from foreign governments and human rights
activists. They will also prohibit the C.I.A. from using coercive interrogation
methods, requiring the agency to follow the same rules used by the military in
interrogating terrorism suspects, government officials said.

But the orders would leave unresolved complex questions surrounding the closing
of the Guantanamo prison, including whether, where and how many of the detainees
are to be prosecuted. They could also allow Mr. Obama to reinstate the C.I.A.'s
detention and interrogation operations in the future, by presidential order, as
some have argued would be appropriate if Osama bin Laden or another top-level
leader of Al Qaeda were captured.

The new White House counsel, Gregory B. Craig, briefed lawmakers about some
elements of the orders on Wednesday evening. A Congressional official who
attended the session said Mr. Craig acknowledged concerns from intelligence
officials that new restrictions on C.I.A. methods might be unwise and indicated
that the White House might be open to allowing the use of methods other the 19
techniques allowed for the military.

Details of the directive involving the C.I.A. were described by government
officials who insisted on anonymity so they could not be blamed for pre-empting
a White House announcement. Copies of the draft order on Guantanamo were
provided by people who have consulted with Mr. Obama's transition team and
requested anonymity for the same reason.

The executive order on interrogations is certain to be received with some
skepticism at the C.I.A., which for years has maintained that the military's
interrogation rules are insufficient to get information from senior Qaeda
figures like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. The Bush administration asserted that the
harsh interrogation methods were instrumental in gaining valuable intelligence
on Qaeda operations.

The intelligence agency built a network of secret prisons in 2002 to house and
interrogate senior Qaeda figures captured overseas. The exact number of suspects
to have moved through the prisons is unknown, although Michael V. Hayden, the
departing director of the agency, has in the past put the number at ''fewer than
100.''

The secret detentions brought international condemnation, and in September 2006,
President Bush ordered that the remaining 14 detainees in C.I.A. custody be
transferred to Guantanamo Bay and tried by military tribunals.

But Mr. Bush made clear then that he was not shutting down the C.I.A. detention
system, and in the last two years, two Qaeda operatives are believed to have
been detained in agency prisons for several months each before being sent to
Guantanamo.

A government official said Mr. Obama's order on the C.I.A. would still allow its
officers abroad to temporarily detain terrorism suspects and transfer them to
other agencies, but would no longer allow the agency to carry out long-term
detentions.

Since the early days after the 2001 attacks, the intelligence agency's role in
detaining terrorism suspects has been significantly scaled back, as has the
severity of interrogation methods the agency is permitted to use. The most
controversial practice, the simulated drowning technique known as
water-boarding, was used on three suspects but has not been used since 2003,
C.I.A. officials said.

But at the urging of the Bush administration, Congress in 2006 authorized the
agency to continue using harsher interrogation methods than those permitted for
use by other agencies, including the military. Those exact methods remain
classified. The order on Guantanamo says that the camp, which received its first
hooded and chained detainees seven years ago this month, ''shall be closed as
soon as practicable, and no later than one year from the date of this order.''

The order calls for a cabinet-level panel to grapple with issues including where
in the United States prisoners might be moved and what courts they could be
tried in. It also provides for a new diplomatic effort to transfer some of the
remaining men, including more than 60 that the Bush administration had cleared
for release.

The order also directs an immediate assessment of the prison itself to ensure
that the men are held in conditions that meet the humanitarian requirements of
the Geneva Convention. That provision appeared to be a pointed embrace of the
international treaties that the Bush administration often argued did not apply
to detainees captured in the war against terrorism.

The seven years of the detention camp have included four suicides, hunger
strikes by scores of detainees, and accusations of extensive use of solitary
confinement and abusive interrogations, which the Department of Defense has long
denied. Last week a senior Pentagon official said she had concluded that
interrogators at Guantanamo had tortured one detainee, who officials have said
was a would-be ''20th hijacker'' in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

The report of Thursday's expected announcement came after the new administration
late Tuesday night ordered an immediate halt to the military commission
proceedings for prosecuting detainees at Guantanamo and filed a request in
Federal District Court in Washington to stay habeas corpus proceedings there.
Government lawyers described both delays as necessary for the administration to
make a broad assessment of detention policy.

The cases immediately affected include those of five detainees charged as the
coordinators of the 2001 attacks, including the case against Mr. Mohammed, the
self-described mastermind.

The decision to stop the commissions was described by the military prosecutors
as a pause in the war-crimes system ''to permit the newly inaugurated president
and his administration time to review the military commission process generally
and the cases currently pending before the military commissions, specifically.''

More than 200 detainees' habeas corpus cases have been filed in federal court,
and lawyers said they expected that all of the cases would be stayed.

Mr. Obama had suggested in the campaign that, in place of military commissions,
he would prefer prosecutions in federal courts or, perhaps, in the existing
military justice system, which provides legal guarantees similar to those of
American civilian courts.

Some human rights groups and lawyers for detainees said they were concerned
about the one-year timetable. ''It only took days to put these men in
Guantanamo; it shouldn't take a year to get them out,'' said Vincent Warren, the
executive director of the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York, which
has coordinated detainees' lawyers.

But several groups that had criticized the Bush administration's policies
applauded the rapid moves by the new administration. Mr. Obama's actions
''reaffirmed American values and are a ray of light after eight long, dark
years,'' said Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS
(90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); MILITARY
BASES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); AL-QAEDA (76%);
NAVIES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (59%); GREG CRAIG (59%); MICHAEL
HAYDEN (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             598 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Israel Completes Gaza Withdrawal

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER and ALAN COWELL; Ethan Bronner reported from Gaza and
Alan Cowell from Paris. Michael Slackman contributed reporting from Kuwait City,
Taghreed El-Khodary from Gaza and Steven Erlanger and Isabel Kershner from
Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: GAZA


After more than three weeks of fighting, Israeli troops  completed their
withdrawal  from Gaza early on Wednesday, the military said,  but residents
reported the continued sound of what they said was naval gunfire in the waters
off the Mediterranean coastline here.

The troops did not go far: they were redeployed on the perimeter of the
war-battered enclave, where more than  1,300 Palestinians died in the Israeli
campaign against Hamas, the Islamist group that runs Gaza.  Thirteen Israelis,
including three civilians, also died during the 22-day offensive, according to
military officials.

Separately, the Israeli Army said it had begun an investigation into reports by
some non-governmental organizations that it used white phosphorous weapons
illegally during the Gaza war.

A military spokesman in Tel Aviv said such weapons were not prohibited under
international law if they were used to create smoke-screens or for marking
battlefield areas. The spokesman said Israel only used legal weapons.

Human rights groups are concerned about the Israeli use of white phosphorous,
illegal if used against civilians, because it can burn flesh like a kind of
napalm.

The Israeli spokesman said: ''in response to the claims of non-governmental
organizations and claims in the foreign press relating to the use of phosphorous
weapons, and in order to remove any ambiguity, an investigative team has been
established in the Southern Command to look into the issue.''

The spokesman said the investigation was first announced on Jan. 16 and was
repeated on Wednesday after the newspaper Haaretz reported that the military was
''investigating whether a reserve paratroops brigade made improper use of
phosphorus shells during the fighting in Gaza.''

''The brigade fired about 20 such shells in a built-up area of northern Gaza,''
the Haaretz report said. ''Aside from this one case, the shells were used very
sparingly and, in the army's view, in compliance with international law.''  The
United Nations has said its headquarters building in Gaza was hit by three such
shells, sparking a huge blaze last week.

As the Israeli troops withdrawal wound down on Wednesday, a military spokesman
in Tel Aviv, speaking in return for customary anonymity, said: ''The last troops
left Gaza this morning and they redeployed around the Gaza Strip.'' In their new
positions, he said, the troops were ''prepared for any occurrences.''

The spokesman also said reservists called up during the offensive, which ended
with  separate cease-fires declared last weekend by Israel and Hamas, were being
discharged ''little by little.''

But the spokesman had no immediate comment on what Gaza residents said seemed to
be naval gunfire that persisted Wednesday. On Tuesday, Israeli gunboats offshore
occasionally fired warning shots at boats that ventured too close.

During the offensive, Israel moved against Hamas by land, sea and air in a
campaign aimed in part at preventing Hamas from firing rockets and other weapons
out of Gaza into southern Israel.

On Tuesday, however, Israeli troops twice came under fire, and eight mortar
shells were shot at Israel, all falling short. Israel responded with air strikes
on launching sites.

On Tuesday, thousands of Palestinians supported Hamas at four rallies here while
the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, visited to express support
for those who had suffered in the war. An Arab meeting in Kuwait aimed at
helping Gaza ended in disarray.

Mr. Ban, the highest-ranking international figure to come to Gaza since the war,
visited the United Nations compound, damaged by an Israeli strike. He called the
attack ''outrageous'' and demanded an investigation. He said Israel had used
excessive force in Gaza. After touring the area, Mr. Ban called the destruction
''shocking and alarming.''

Later, he visited Sderot, the southern Israeli town that has long borne the
brunt of Hamas rocket fire, and said using rockets against civilians violated
international law. Still, he said, Israel should lift its border closing on
Gaza, strangling its economy.

The pro-Hamas rallies in Gaza, in four cities, produced a blaze of green Hamas
flags as marchers walked past the devastation from Israeli air raids. In Gaza
City, the march passed the United Nations headquarters as Mr. Ban spoke, and
Gaza's main security headquarters, now rubble, ending in front of the Parliament
building, also in ruins.

A Hamas spokesman, Ismail Radwan, told the crowd that Israel had not achieved
its goals. To several questions, the crowd roared a response. ''Have they killed
Hamas?'' he asked. ''No!'' ''Have they killed the government?'' ''No!'' ''Have
they dismantled the resistance?'' ''No!''

Tzipi Livni, Israel's foreign minister, said Israel had achieved its objectives
in the war and had sent Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group, and Iran a
message that it would respond if attacked. She opposed any dialogue with Hamas,
adding, ''It is a terrorist organization.''

The Israeli prime minister, Ehud Olmert, told the visiting Italian foreign
minister, Franco Frattini, that Israel would take part in reconstructing Gaza
only if Hamas did not lead the process.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); SHOOTINGS
(89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HAMAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(89%); MILITARY VESSELS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (57%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (92%)

STATE: MEDITERRANEAN SEA (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); MEDITERRANEAN
(90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             600 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2009 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

An Honor Guard Comes Out For Obama's Ban on Torture

BYLINE: By JIM DWYER.

E-mail: dwyer@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; ABOUT NEW YORK; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 857 words


On Thursday morning, the president's wooden desk gleamed, bare except for a dark
portfolio opened to two sheets of paper. Barack Obama glanced down and signed
his name.

''There we go,'' Mr. Obama said.

From about five feet away, James P. Cullen applauded, one among the crowd of
people around the president who had spent most of the last four years working
toward that precise moment.

Mr. Obama had just issued the first in a series of executive orders to close
secret prisons operated by the C.I.A., shut down the Guantanamo Bay detention
camp and declare that the United States would not use torture in pursuit of
intelligence.

Other than Mr. Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the faces in the
Oval Office on Thursday morning were not well known. But none of them were
likely to be hit with attacks that they were soft on terrorists. Mr. Obama was
surrounded by retired admirals and generals who came forward only after they had
shaken off the reticence of most military people toward active politics.

''Our message,'' Mr. Cullen said on Friday, ''is that we are your flank
protection.''

Drafted by the Army during the Vietnam War, Mr. Cullen left Sunnyside, Queens,
in 1969 with two credentials: a license to drive tractor-trailers, which he used
to pay for the other credential, his diploma from St. John's University School
of Law. He entered the Army as a private. He retired from the active Reserves in
1996 as a brigadier general, a one-star who served in the military justice
system, the Judge Advocate General's Corps. He is now a real estate lawyer in
Manhattan.

Early in 2004, when pictures emerged of Iraqi prisoners being abused by soldiers
at Abu Ghraib, General Cullen said he quickly put the cruelty down as the
aberrant acts of a few twisted individuals, and a failure of their direct
commanders. ''I wanted to believe that,'' he said. ''Then l began to hear
similar reports coming out of Guantanamo and Bagram in Afghanistan. There was a
pattern -- the sexual humiliation, the abuse. This kind of pattern is not a
coincidence.''

This, General Cullen said, was the inevitable result of a pronouncement by Dick
Cheney on Sept. 16, 2001 -- that the United States would need more than a
conventional military response to 9/11: ''We also have to work, though, sort of
the dark side, if you will.''

For young soldiers, General Cullen said, such remarks were the equivalent of
''the dissolute uncle up there winking, telling him he's got license.''

A wide circle of former military officers, he said, were shocked by the
treatment of prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan and at Guantanamo. ''We were
muttering to ourselves in the closet,'' he said. ''We knew this was not the
military we left. Especially after the draft ended, people were in the services
because they wanted to be -- to better themselves and serve their country. A
wonderful group of people who are receptive to training.''

The son of Irish immigrants, General Cullen, who will be 63 on Tuesday, had been
active as a civil rights monitor in Northern Ireland, and through that work he
had become friendly with Michael Posner, the president of Human Rights First. In
discussing Iraq and Afghanistan, ''I told him how disturbed we were by the
breakdown in values,'' General Cullen said. ''He hadn't known about my military
service before then.''

Two other retired flag officers were separately in touch with Human Rights
First, Gen. Harry E. Soyster, the former director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency, and Rear Adm. John D. Huston. With support from Mr. Posner's
organization, about 40 retired military people met quietly in Virginia in 2004.

''I saw one four-star general in my 27 years,'' General Cullen said. ''Then this
group formed. Rear admirals, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs.''

It took a while for many of them to overcome their reluctance to speak out on
policies directed by the country's civilian leadership, General Cullen said.

During the 2008 presidential primaries, the group sought meetings with every
candidate. The ground rules were that the candidates could discuss the meetings
publicly, but that the officers would not, and they would not make endorsements.
Any officers who wanted to publicly support a candidate would have to withdraw
from the group.

Their purpose was to show that following humane procedures would not weaken the
country's defense, he said, but strengthen it. They spoke about the example of
the ticking time bomb -- that a suspected terrorist could be tortured to save
lives.

''It's a false question from a classroom and from television shows like '24,' ''
General Cullen said, because an actual terrorist could steer his interrogators
wrong, or because people under intense pressure will say anything to make it
stop. ''Another terrorist attack is going to happen. We feel certain of that.
It's not going to be because we ended torture. We will get better intelligence
without it. And we keep our values.''

On Thursday, with his pen poised over the executive orders, President Obama
spoke about the people standing around him: ''They have made an extraordinary
impression on me.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 28, 2009



CORRECTION: The About New York column on Saturday, about James P. Cullen, a
retired Army brigadier general who witnessed President Obama's signing of an
executive order banning torture, misstated the surname of another former
military officer who has spoken out against the use of torture in gathering
intelligence. He is Rear Adm. John D. Hutson, not Huston.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: James P. Cullen, a retired brigadier general, in his Manhattan
law office. He was in the Oval Office this week when President Obama signed an
order banning torture. ''Our message is that we are your flank
protection.''(PHOTOGRAPH BY RUBY WASHINGTON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); PRISONS (75%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(72%); LAW SCHOOLS (69%); TERRORISM (68%); VIETNAM WAR (67%); REAL PROPERTY LAW
(64%)

ORGANIZATION: ST JOHN'S UNIVERSITY (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); DICK CHENEY (58%); JOE BIDEN (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ (92%); CUBA (57%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             606 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 2, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: April 2, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2139 words


CORRECTION APPENDED

International

MILITANTS KILL 13 IN KANDAHAR AT AN AFGHAN PROVINCIAL OFFICE

Five suicide bombers attacked an Afghan provincial office in Kandahar with
assault rifles and hand grenades, killing 13 people and wounding 14. The Taliban
claimed responsibility. The assault by multiple gunmen continued a pattern of
militant attacks in the region recently. PAGE A5

RIGHTS ACTIVIST IS BEATEN IN MOSCOW

The leader of a prominent Russian human rights group was beaten by a group of
men outside his Moscow home, in an attack that the police and colleagues say was
probably linked to his professional activities. PAGE A5

World Briefings A6

DOLPHINS FEARED DYING THRIVE

Biologists working in Bangladesh found a thriving population of 6,000 Irrawaddy
dolphins, a species that marine mammal experts had worried was vulnerable. PAGE
A8

64 Get Hepatitis C at China Hospital A8

Damascus Journal A8

MISSILES KILL AT LEAST 10 IN PAKISTAN

Missiles fired from a suspected American drone struck a militant training camp
in northwest Pakistan. The attack was apparently aimed at one of the area's most
important Taliban leaders, Hakimullah Mehsud. He escaped unhurt, an intelligence
official said. PAGE A10

PETRAEUS CITES THREAT TO PAKISTAN

Gen. David H. Petraeus, the top American commander for Iraq and Afghanistan,
warned a Senate panel that militant extremists in Pakistan could collapse the
state from within if left unchallenged. PAGE A10

National

EDUCATION SECRETARY OFFERS TRADE: STIMULUS AID FOR NEW DATA

Secretary of Education Arne Duncan told the nation's governors that in exchange
for a second payment of billions of dollars in education aid, he wants new
information about the performance of their public schools. The data is likely to
show that many states dumb down their tests to inflate students' scores. PAGE
A15

LAWSUIT CALLS TOLL DISCOUNTS ILLEGAL

Is E-ZPass unconstitutional? Not in itself, but two new lawsuits filed in
federal courts claim that toll discounts for in-state drivers violate the
Constitution. Massachusetts and Rhode Island give these discounts to their
residents with transponders. The lawsuits contend that this practice defies the
Constitutional provisions that prohibit burdens on interstate commerce and
promise equal treatment under the law. PAGE A15

DOCTORS URGE END TO FINANCIAL TIES

A group of prominent physicians and researchers urged professional medical
groups to ''wean'' themselves from industry support and move toward a complete
ban on corporate money. PAGE A16

G.O.P. Unveils Alternative Budget A17

A Setback for Environmentalists A17

Allies Support Besieged Obama Pick A17

PLAN TO RESTORE EVERGLADES SHRINKS

Its belt tightened by the shrinking economy, Florida will significantly scale
back its $1.34 billion deal to restore the Everglades by buying 180,000 acres
from the United States Sugar Corporation. PAGE A18

FIVE-DAY DASH FOR TEMPORARY VISAS

The yearly five-day scramble by employers for temporary visas for foreign
scientists and engineers has begun. The authorities expect fewer petitions
because of the recession and new restrictions on rescued financial companies.
PAGE A19

Obituaries

ANDREA MEAD LAWRENCE, 76

As a 19-year-old newlywed, Ms. Lawrence rocketed down the Norwegian slopes with
pigtails, flying to win two gold medals in Alpine skiing at the 1952 Olympics, a
feat not yet matched by any American. PAGE A21

NEW YORK

QUALIFIED ENLISTEES FIND

A Fast Track to Citizenship

Under a new program that is intended to raise the number of highly skilled
soldiers, the American military is allowing some temporary immigrants with
medical expertise and foreign language skills to enlist. As an enticement, the
military is offering an expedited path to citizenship and will waive
naturalization fees. Above, Gen. George W. Casey Jr., the Army chief of staff,
led a swearing-in ceremony in Times Square. PAGE A21

JUDGE CONDEMNS STING OPERATION

A Brooklyn judge issued a stern denunciation of a mother's attempt to overturn
her son's murder conviction, saying her covert efforts to elicit incriminating
statements from a juror in her son's trial amounted to ''vigilante'' behavior.
PAGE A23

Grocery Workers Back Bloomberg A25

BUSINESS

MASSACHUSETTS SUES FUND

Over Madoff Investments

The top securities regulator of Massachusetts has accused a Connecticut
investment firm of fraud in misrepresenting its lack of knowledge about the
business operations of the disgraced money manager Bernard L. Madoff. PAGE B1

State of the Art

Reminders From Out of the Blue

Amid the ruins of the financial system, some green shoots are popping forth. One
is called Reqall, a personal reminder system that transcribes your utterances
into text and collates them at Reqall.com, David Pogue writes. PAGE B1

A BLEAK MARCH FOR CARMAKERS

Sales of new vehicles in the United States fell sharply in March but picked up
in the month's final week, giving automakers reason to believe the market may be
at or near its bottom. PAGE B1

ULTRA-THIN AND DIRT-CHEAP

Get ready for the next stage in the personal computer revolution. By the end of
the year, we're likely to see laptops the size of a thin hardcover book that can
run all day on a single charge and cost $99. PAGE B1

Small Medical Companies Feel Pinch B7

2ND QUARTER BEGINS WITH RALLY

Wall Street continued to rally, lifting shares from some of their worst levels
in more than a decade. Investors seemed to shrug off a report that said the
economy had lost 742,000 jobs in the private sector in March and focused instead
on an increase in the number of pending home sales. PAGE B10

Sports

METS AND YANKEES FOLLOW TREND, DESIGNING NEW (OLD) STADIUMS

The Mets and the Yankees' new retro ballparks, like so many other new-generation
stadiums, were designed to reflect the quirky parks of the past. Citi Field has
an asymmetric design, 16-foot walls in left field and deep power alleys. The
Yankees preserved all the oddities of their old stadium in the new one. PAGE B12

VOICE OF YANKEES MAY RETIRE

Bob Sheppard's authoritative voice will not be emanating from the public address
system in the Yankee's new stadium. Paul Doherty, an agent who is one of
Sheppard's friends, said Sheppard's son Paul told him that Sheppard, 98, was
planning to retire. PAGE B15

Arts

MANIPULATION OF HEARTS AND MINDS

For a Better World, Not Profits

The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is well known for its philanthropic works.
It is less known for its efforts to raise awareness through television shows.
The foundation has paid to develop scripts that showcase certain issues. Now, in
an expanded version, it is in talks with Viacom for message placement: H.I.V.
awareness instead of Coke Zero. Page C1

A DELIBERATE RISE TO STARDOM

Paul Dano began his career as a child actor, but you'd never know it. He
exhibits none of the breed's tics or rampant eagerness to please. Now, he seems
determined to continue his normal life and still pursue a successful career, and
he's in demand for a string of high-profile projects. Page C1

OPERA TO BEGIN FIVE-SHOW SEASON

Hoping for a calm season and looking to shed financial and administrative
troubles, the Metropolitan Opera has announced its first operatic season since
closing a year ago. But it will be a conservative season, a tasting menu really,
with five productions symbolic of its traditions. Page C1

Music Reviews

A Three-Star Salute

A Mendelssohn concert given by Emanuel Ax, Yo-Yo Ma and Itshak Perlman at
Carnegie Hall was a celebration of the Mendelssohn bicentennial, Vivien
Schweiter writes, but it was also a reminder of these musicians' unabated
staying power. Page C6

FROM A MASTER OF IMPROVISATION

The alto saxophonist Lee Konitz played his first show at the Village Vanguard
since 1983. With the ensemble Minsarah, his unaccompanied prelude voiced the
suggestion of many unanswered questions, Nate Chinen writes. Page C7

Jazz-Pop With a Couple's Repartee C7

Home

On Location

A 1908 Synagogue With a Green Apartment

The top floor of the Beth Hamedrash Hagadol Anshe Ungarn, a synagogue built in
1908, eventually became the environmentally friendly apartment of Dominique
Camacho, 40, and Gary Hirschkron, 51. But it took several steps to get there.
PAGE D1

THE STARTER GARDEN

The recession garden seems to be enjoying a revival during these bad times. That
said, there is a name for folks with the knowledge and experience to
successfully grow food: farmers. The first-time gardener faces a number of
knotty choices. PAGE D1

The Fix

Upgrading a Mattress

My bed is just a box spring and a mattress. What's the easiest way to upgrade it
without spending a lot of money? PAGE D2

Currents D3

Shopping With

The Tools for Fixing It Yourself

Mag Ruffman, a television actress in Ontario, is also a home-repair expert. (Her
hammer collection stands at 44.) She also has a blog where the goal, she said,
is to motivate people to tackle projects themselves. On a recent trip to
Manhattan, Ms. Ruffman went shopping for the tools a beginner fix-it-yourselfer
needs. PAGE D4

Homeless Man in Love, and Indoors D6

Styles

Skin Deep

Alone in the Ring for 7 Years, Botox May Soon Have a Challenger

If the government approves Reloxin, an injectable made from the botulinum toxin,
Botox will face a serious threat. The buzz among doctors is that Reloxin works
more quickly and lasts longer than Botox. But does the truth match the early
expectations? PAGE E1

For Some, Voice Mail Is Losing Allure E1

Wife/Mother/Worker/Spy E2

Critical Shopper

The East's View of the West's Style

The publicity material on Amalga, a new shop on Wooster Street, proclaims that
its focus is on ''Japanese brands that are kind of exclusive in New York.'' It
does not disappoint, Cintra Wilson writes. PAGE E4

A Clear-Eyed Indie Arts Magazine E4

Extending Fashion to the Bicycle E8

Physical Culture: Lacrosse Gear Test E8

Editorial

THE FORGOTTEN RICH

The Senate budget debate began against a backdrop of war and recession, rising
unemployment and surging foreclosures. But for Senators Blanche Lincoln and Jon
Kyl, the most pressing issue is clear: America's wealthiest families need help.
Now. The two senators are expected to propose an amendment to deeply cut estate
taxes for the fraction of 1 percent of the population still subject to those
levies. PAGE A26

MILES TO GO ON E-HEALTH RECORDS

President Obama is counting on electronic records to help modernize the nation's
dysfunctional health care system, improve the quality of care and reduce its
cost. There is a long way to go. PAGE A26

EARMARKS OF SCANDAL

Speaker Nancy Pelosi should listen to the Democrats who are pushing for an
ethics inquiry into the far too cozy relationship between lawmakers and the PMA
Group of superlobbyists. If the House majority doesn't police itself, it will
lose credibility all the way to the next election. PAGE A26

Op-Ed

NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

As of a few years ago, the 500 richest people earned more than the 400 million
poorest. The first group, while partly responsible for the global economic mess,
will get by fine; the latter will suffer the worst consequences. That's why
world leaders at this week's Group of 20 summit meeting must address the needs
of the most indigent. PAGE A27

GAIL COLLINS

Who better to set us straight about whether the nation really approves of what
Barack Obama has been doing than a nearly 200-mile-long district that was
gerrymandered so carefully for the Republicans that it wound up looking like an
outline of Bart Simpson doing a swan dive? Or perhaps a designer boot with fire
coming out the toe. PAGE A27

TO BEAT A DICTATOR, IGNORE HIM

B. R. Myers, a researcher of North Korean ideology and propaganda at Dongseo
University in South Korea, writes that the best way to undermine the regime of
Kim Jong-il is to ignore his next missile test. PAGE A27

The Group of 20

FRANCE AND CHINA MEET TO SEEK END TO TIBET DISPUTE

President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and President Hu Jintao of China met
Wednesday night in London before the Group of 20 summit meeting after months of
friction over China's handling of Tibet. PAGE A12

China, Hurting Least, Walks Tall A12

OBAMA AND MEDVEDEV MEET

President Obama and President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia, in their first
meeting, vowed a ''fresh start'' in relations and said they would cooperate on a
variety of issues, beginning with a new arms control treaty. PAGE A13

Hillary Clinton Takes a Back Seat A14

PROTEST TURNS VIOLENT IN LONDON

A peaceful march of about 4,000 protesters in London's financial district turned
suddenly into a pitched battle between 40 to 50 riot police officers on foot and
horseback and a few hundred protesters. PAGE A14

Correction: April 3, 2009, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A capsule
summary on Thursday for an article in The Arts about next season's productions
by a New York opera company that has faced financial and administrative turmoil
misidentified the company. It is New York City Opera, not the Metropolitan
Opera.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (pg. A2
 pg. A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
LITIGATION (88%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SHOOTINGS
(78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); MARINE
BIOLOGY (74%); MAMMALS (74%); MARINE MAMMALS (74%); MAMMALOGY (74%); WILDLIFE
(74%); BIOLOGY (74%); GOVERNORS (73%); FIREARMS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (71%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (71%);
ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HEPATITIS (70%); EDUCATION FUNDING
(69%); BUDGETS (69%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (69%); HEPATITIS C (68%); INTERSTATE
COMMERCE (67%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (67%); TOLL ROADS & TURNPIKES (67%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%); SCHOOL PERFORMANCE (64%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
(63%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (63%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (60%)

COMPANY: UNITED STATES SUGAR CORP (60%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS311314 CANE SUGAR MANUFACTURING (60%); SIC2061 CANE SUGAR EX.
REFINING (60%)

PERSON: DAVID PETRAEUS (65%); ARNE DUNCAN (50%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (91%); BANGLADESH (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             610 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Britain Defends Court Ruling in Secrecy Case

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER; Alan Cowell contributed reporting from London

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Facing criticism from political foes and human rights advocates, the British
government on Thursday defended a court's decision not to release information
about a British terrorism suspect who says he was tortured in American custody.
The court said it reached its decision because of what it called a threat from
the United States to reconsider sharing intelligence with the country.

In a highly unusual criticism, the court on Wednesday expressed dismay that a
democracy ''governed by the rule of law'' would seek to suppress evidence
''relevant to allegations of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
politically embarrassing though it might be.''

The case has been a source of considerable diplomatic tension between the United
States and Britain.

At issue in Wednesday's ruling were seven paragraphs that the court had redacted
in an earlier opinion in the case, and that it suggested lent credence to the
torture allegations by the suspect, Binyam Mohamed, who is now in prison at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Mr. Mohamed is an Ethiopian who had become a legal
resident of Britain. The case has rekindled concerns among some Britons about
the claimed use of torture in terrorism cases.

The court said the paragraphs summarize reports by the United States to
Britain's intelligence services about the treatment of Mr. Mohamed. It said it
had removed the text at the request of the British Foreign Office, which was
responding to a ''threat'' from the Bush administration.

The court said the Bush administration had made the threat in a letter to the
Foreign Office last September. It called on the Obama administration to reverse
that position.

In Parliament on Thursday, Britain's foreign secretary, David Miliband, denied
that the United States had threatened to break off intelligence cooperation with
Britain. But, he acknowledged, release of the documents against American wishes
would cause ''real and significant damage to the national security and
international relations of this country.''

''The issue at stake is not the content of the intelligence material but the
principle at the heart of all intelligence relationships -- that a country
retains control of its intelligence information and it cannot be disclosed by
foreign authorities without its consent,'' he said. ''That is a principle we
neglect at our peril.''

''For the record, the U.S. authorities did not threaten to 'break off'
intelligence cooperation with the U.K.,'' he said.

''What the U.S. said, and it appears in the open public documents of this case,
is that the disclosure of these documents by order of our courts would be
'likely to result in serious damage to U.S. national security and could harm
existing intelligence information-sharing between our two governments,''' Mr.
Miliband said. ''That's a simple affirmation of the facts of intelligence
cooperation.''

But some opposition figures took issue with the government position. Ed Davey, a
spokesman for the opposition Liberal Democrats, said Britain had ''rolled over
in the face of a barely credible threat from a friend'' and accused Mr. Miliband
of standing ''in the way of allowing justice to take its course.'' William
Hague, the foreign affairs spokesman of the larger opposition Conservatives,
urged Mr. Miliband to press the Obama administration to change its approach. But
Mr. Miliband rejected the suggestion.

In a statement on Wednesday, the State Department said that the United States
''thanks the U.K. government for its continued commitment to protect sensitive
national security information'' and that ''the United States investigates
allegations and claims of torture, and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
such as those raised by Binyam Mohamed.''

After being seized by American and British intelligence officials in Pakistan in
2002, Mr. Mohamed was taken to Morocco, where he was held for 18 months,
according to earlier court rulings and American and British officials. The court
said the summary was ''highly material'' to Mr. Mohamed's allegations ''that he
had been subjected to torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.''

Acting on a request from the court last November, several news media
organizations, including The New York Times, had asked the court to restore the
redacted paragraphs.

The two-judge panel left no doubt that it thought the paragraphs should be in
the public domain. There was nothing in them that would expose any intelligence
agents, the court said.

But the judges said they had no legal authority to overrule the Foreign Office,
which they said took seriously the ''gravity of threat'' by the United States to
cut off intelligence sharing.

Mr. Mohamed, who had lived in the United States for several years as a teenager,
went to Afghanistan in 2001. He said he had wanted to get off drugs. British and
American officials have said he trained with Al Qaeda.

After Mr. Mohamed was captured, then-Attorney General John Ashcroft said that he
had been complicit with Jose Padilla to detonate a ''dirty bomb'' in the United
States. Mr. Padilla was not charged with the plot, but was convicted on other
terrorism-related charges by a federal court in 2007. Last year, the Justice
Department said it was dropping the dirty-bomb charges against Mr. Mohamed, and
last October all charges against him were dropped.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (91%); TORTURE (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); PRISONS (72%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (78%); DAVID MILIBAND (50%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             612 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Professor Is Accused Of Genocide in Rwanda

BYLINE: By IAN URBINA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: TOWSON, Md.


A professor at a Maryland college  has been accused of genocide in his home
country, Rwanda, and faces deportation, federal immigration officials said
Friday.

The professor, Leopold Munyakazi, 59, taught French at Goucher College in this
city north of Baltimore until he was suspended with pay in December after the
college learned that he had been indicted on murder and several genocide-related
charges in Rwanda, according to court papers.

Dr. Munyakazi has denied the accusations, which stem from 1994, when more than
500,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu were killed in Rwanda after the plane of the
president, a Hutu, was shot down as he returned from negotiating with Tutsi
rebels. Dr. Munyakazi is Hutu.

''There are many details and nuances surrounding this case,'' Sanford J. Ungar,
the president of Goucher, said Friday. ''And at this time, there is no evidence
that would either convict or exonerate Dr. Munyakazi, or, if there is, I have
not seen it.

''However, considering the seriousness of the allegations, I felt it to be in
the best interests of the college community to remove Dr. Munyakazi from his
teaching duties until we could investigate further.''

Dr. Munyakazi was arrested Tuesday at his home in Towson for overstaying his
visa, said Brandon A. Montgomery, an Immigration and Customs Enforcement
spokesman. Mr. Montgomery said that Dr. Munyakazi was released from custody on
the condition that he wear a monitoring device and that he faced a deportation
hearing in April.

Dr. Munyakazi did not respond on Friday to requests for comment. He has
vehemently denied any involvement in  genocide and has provided university
officials with what he says is evidence that he helped many Tutsi flee Hutu
killers.

Mr. Ungar said the indictment, which claims that Dr. Munyakazi was directly
involved in genocide, was apparently prepared in 2006.

University officials also pointed out that the indictment was prepared a month
after Dr. Munyakazi gave a controversial talk in Delaware while he was a
professor at Montclair State University in New Jersey. In that speech, Dr.
Munyakazi questioned the Rwandan government's official account of events during
the genocide.

''I refer to it as civil war, not genocide; it was about political power,'' Dr.
Munyakazi said in that speech, according to a University of Delaware news
release from October 2006. ''Ethnicity is not really understood about Rwanda. In
Rwanda there are no tribes. There are social groups. They are one single
people.''

A Goucher spokeswoman, Kristen Keener, said Mr. Ungar consulted with an expert
on genocide, Alison Des Forges, who is a senior adviser to the Africa program at
Human Rights Watch, before deciding to suspend Dr. Munyakazi.

According to college officials, Ms. Des Forges said she did not find the
indictment convincing and especially doubted its claim that Dr. Munyakazi
organized a militia associated with a party opposed to the party with which he
was affiliated.

But Ms. Keener said the charges were too severe not to suspend Dr. Munyakazi.

Max Temkin, 22, a senior philosophy major at Goucher, said the matter was
''coming up in classes and in the cafeteria, but mostly students are keeping a
wait-and-see attitude.''

''Most agree he should have been suspended,'' Mr. Temkin continued, ''but they
aren't passing judgment beyond that.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: In December, Leopold Munyakazi was suspended with pay from his
teaching job at Goucher College in Towson, Md.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ROB CARR/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%);
IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (76%); ARRESTS (73%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (71%); POLITICS (70%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (69%); MURDER (58%)

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (73%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (94%); DELAWARE, USA (90%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             614 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2009 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Judges Approve Warrant for Sudan's President

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Marlise Simons reported from The
Hague, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Judges at the International Criminal Court have decided to issue an arrest
warrant for President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, brushing aside diplomatic
requests to allow more time for peace negotiations in the conflict-riddled
Darfur region of his country, according to court lawyers and diplomats.

It is the first time the court has sought the detention of a sitting head of
state, and it could further complicate the tense, international debate over how
to solve the crisis in Darfur.

Ever since international prosecutors began seeking an arrest warrant last year,
opponents have pressed the United Nations Security Council to use its power to
suspend the proceedings. But a majority of Council members have argued that the
case should go forward, saying Mr. Bashir has not done enough to stop the
bloodshed to deserve a reprieve.

Many African and Arab nations counter that issuing a warrant for Mr. Bashir's
arrest could backfire, diminishing Sudan's willingness to compromise for the
sake of peace. Others, including some United Nations officials, worry that a
warrant could inspire reprisal attacks against civilians, aid groups or the
thousands of international peacekeepers deployed there.

The precise charges cited by the judges against Mr. Bashir have not been
disclosed. But when the court's chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, first
requested an arrest warrant in July, he said he had evidence to support charges
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide related to a military
campaign that ''purposefully targeted civilians'' and had been ''masterminded''
by Mr. Bashir.

Lawyers familiar with the case said the court had already sought to freeze the
president's assets but had found his possessions to be hidden behind other
names.

The decision to issue a warrant against him, reached by a panel of judges in The
Hague, has been conveyed to the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon,
and is expected to be formally announced at the court, officials at the United
Nations said.

The prosecutor became involved in the case after the Security Council asked him
to investigate the conflict in Darfur, where massacres, disease and starvation
have led to the deaths of up to 300,000 people and driven millions from their
homes.

Although there has been sporadic fighting in Darfur for decades, the conflict
significantly intensified in 2003, when rebel groups demanding greater autonomy
for the region attacked Sudanese forces. The Arab-led government responded with
a ferocious counterinsurgency campaign, which the court's prosecutor called a
genocidal strategy against Darfur's black African ethnic groups.

Relations between Mr. Ban and Mr. Bashir continue to be strained by Sudanese
government actions in Darfur and by Mr. Ban's refusal to deal with Mr. Bashir
directly.

But on Sunday the two men had an unscheduled encounter at a summit meeting in
Ethiopia. Diplomats described it as ''a stormy meeting'' and ''a shouting
match'' in which Mr. Bashir vented his anger at the court, though it is
independent of the United Nations. Mr. Ban, in turn, insisted on the safety of
United Nations staff members and peacekeepers, and demanded that Mr. Bashir stop
the attacks on civilians.

The prospect of an arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir has already caused a diplomatic
rift, with the African Union and members of the Arab League asking the Security
Council to exercise its right to postpone any moves against the president for a
year, arguing that he might still help bring a settlement in Darfur. Once an
arrest warrant is issued, the Council can request that it be postponed.

There is broad concern that removing Mr. Bashir from power could threaten a
landmark peace treaty between the Sudanese government and rebels in the southern
part of the country. The treaty was signed in 2005 to end a civil war in which
2.2 million people died, far more than in Darfur.

Mr. Bashir fought members of his own party to approve that peace deal, and it is
widely seen as critical to holding the country together.

On Wednesday, the Sudanese ambassador to the United Nations, Abdalmahmood
Abdalhaleem, dismissed the court's decision as ''not deserving the ink used to
print it.'' The ambassador accused the court of being a political tool of mostly
Western powers that want to fragment Sudan.

Mr. Abdalhaleem contended that in separate talks at the United Nations last fall
with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and top European officials, Sudan was
promised that Western powers would support a suspension of the prosecution if
the country cooperated with United Nations peacekeeping efforts, pursued peace
talks and more aggressively pursued war criminals.

''We are moving on all those tracks,'' he said, though human rights groups and
diplomats disagree.

A top United Nations official said Mr. Ban's advisers were now struggling to
forge a policy that supports the court's pursuit of justice but avoids wrecking
Sudanese cooperation with the complex missions there.

The court has issued two other arrest warrants in connection with the Darfur
conflict, one for a former government minister, Ahmad Harun, and another for Ali
Kushayb, a leader of a government-backed militia. Neither has been arrested.

The prosecutor has also accused three rebel leaders of the killing of 12 African
Union peacekeepers. They have said publicly that they will surrender to the
court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (93%); ARRESTS (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); JUDGES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); LAWYERS (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); ETHNIC GROUPS (68%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (60%);
ETHNICITY (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (74%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); NETHERLANDS (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             615 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Warrant Is Approved For Leader Of Sudan

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Marlise Simons reported from The
Hague, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Judges at the International Criminal Court have decided to issue an arrest
warrant for President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, brushing aside diplomatic
requests to allow more time for peace negotiations in the conflict-riddled
Darfur region of his country, according to court lawyers and diplomats.

It is the first time the court has sought the detention of a sitting head of
state, and it could further complicate the tense, international debate over how
to solve the crisis in Darfur.

Ever since international prosecutors began seeking an arrest warrant last year,
opponents have pressed the United Nations Security Council to use its power to
suspend the proceedings. But a majority of Council members have argued that the
case should go forward, saying Mr. Bashir has not done enough to stop the
bloodshed to deserve a reprieve.

Many African and Arab nations counter that issuing a warrant for Mr. Bashir's
arrest could backfire, diminishing Sudan's willingness to compromise. Others,
including some United Nations officials, worry that a warrant could inspire
reprisal attacks against civilians, aid groups or peacekeeping troops.

The precise charges cited by the judges against Mr. Bashir have not been
disclosed. But when the court's chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, first
requested an arrest warrant in July, he said he had evidence to support charges
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide related to a military
campaign that ''purposefully targeted civilians'' and had been ''masterminded''
by Mr. Bashir.

Lawyers familiar with the case said the court had already sought to freeze the
president's assets but had found his possessions to be hidden behind other
names.

The decision to issue a warrant against him, reached by a panel of judges in The
Hague, has been conveyed to the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon,
and is expected to be formally announced at the court, officials at the United
Nations said.

The Security Council had asked the prosecutor to investigate the conflict in
Darfur, where massacres, disease and starvation have led to the deaths of up to
300,000 people and millions have been driven from their homes.

Although there has been sporadic fighting in Darfur for decades, the conflict
significantly intensified in 2003, when groups demanding greater autonomy for
the region attacked Sudanese forces. The Arab-led government responded with a
ferocious counterinsurgency campaign, which the court's prosecutor called a
genocidal strategy against Darfur's black African ethnic groups.

Relations between Mr. Ban and Mr. Bashir continue to be strained by Sudanese
government actions in Darfur and by Mr. Ban's refusal to deal with Mr. Bashir
directly.

But on Sunday the two men had an unscheduled encounter at a summit meeting in
Ethiopia. Diplomats described it as ''a stormy meeting'' and ''a shouting
match'' in which Mr. Bashir vented his anger at the court, though it is
independent of the United Nations. Mr. Ban, in turn, insisted on the safety of
United Nations staff members and peacekeepers, and demanded that Mr. Bashir stop
the attacks on civilians.

The prospect of an arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir has already caused a diplomatic
rift, with the African Union and members of the Arab League asking the Security
Council to exercise its right to postpone any moves against the president for a
year, arguing that he might still help bring a settlement in Darfur. Once a
warrant is issued, the Council can request that it be postponed.

There is broad concern that removing Mr. Bashir from power could threaten a
peace treaty between the Sudanese government and rebels in the southern part of
the country. The treaty was signed in 2005 to end a civil war in which 2.2
million people died.

Mr. Bashir fought members of his own party to approve that peace deal, and it is
widely seen as critical to holding the country together.

On Wednesday, the Sudanese ambassador to the United Nations, Abdalmahmood
Abdalhaleem, dismissed the court's decision as ''not deserving the ink used to
print it.'' The ambassador accused the court of being a political tool of mostly
Western powers that want to fragment Sudan.

Mr. Abdalhaleem contended that in separate talks at the United Nations last fall
with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and top European officials, Sudan was
promised that Western powers would support a suspension of the prosecution if
the country cooperated with United Nations peacekeeping efforts, pursued peace
talks and more aggressively pursued war criminals.

''We are moving on all those tracks,'' he said, though human rights groups and
diplomats disagree.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (93%); ARRESTS (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); LAWYERS (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); APPROVALS (78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (68%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (67%); ARMED FORCES (67%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (60%); ETHNICITY
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (74%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); NETHERLANDS (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             616 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 Years After Black History Panel's Birth, Its Work Is Still Deferred

BYLINE: By WINNIE HU

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 690 words


Nearly four years after New York State passed a law creating a commission to
promote the teaching of black history in public schools, the commission has
never met, and 5 of its 19 seats have yet to be filled. For many educators and
parents, the Amistad Commission, named after a slave ship seized by its
captives, has become a modern-day symbol of bureaucratic inertia.

''New York, a pivotal state in African-American history, has not taken the lead
here and we're languishing,'' said Manning Marable, a Columbia University
professor of history and public affairs who was the first member appointed to
the Amistad Commission. ''It's not just for black people, it's for everyone. You
can't teach the history of this country effectively without teaching the
contributions and experiences of black people.''

The Amistad Commission was modeled after a similar state commission in New
Jersey that was established by a 2002 law requiring state schools to make black
history part of the required curriculum. At least five other states -- Florida,
Arkansas, Illinois, Colorado and Michigan -- have also adopted legislation
requiring or encouraging the teaching of black history in schools, often along
with the experiences of other minority groups, according to the Education
Commission of the States.

The ''Amistad'' name comes from a schooner that was carrying a cargo of African
slaves who revolted and killed the captain and cook in 1839. The slaves were
captured and charged with murder, but with the help of former President John
Quincy Adams, won their freedom through a United States Supreme Court ruling and
returned to their homeland. The slave revolt was the basis for a popular movie,
''Amistad,'' in 1997.

In New York, the Amistad Commission is charged with surveying school curriculums
to find out how much is included about ''the African slave trade and slavery in
America'' and to make recommendations for improvement. Currently, schools are
required to cover slavery, including the Underground Railroad and the freedom
trail, as part of instruction in human rights issues for grades 8 to 12,
according to the state education officials.

''That's kind of laughable,'' said Dr. Marable, the Columbia professor, who has
been developing a Web site on black history for educators and parents with
$240,000 in grants from the Ford Foundation. The Web site, known as the Amistad
Resource, will feature texts, documents, and film and audio clips of civil
rights demonstrations and other events.

Assemblyman Keith L. Wright, who sponsored the law creating the Amistad
Commission, said that far too many students still ''think of slavery as a
Southern institution that happened below the Mason-Dixon line.''

''I don't think enough black history is taught,'' he said. ''It's too bad that
Black History Month is the shortest month of the year, but it is what it is.''

The Amistad Commission is to be led by Secretary of State Lorraine A.
Cortes-Vazquez, with Education Commissioner Richard P. Mills as vice chairman,
and will include the chancellor of the State University of New York. Of the
remaining 16,  who are not paid, eight are to be chosen by the governor and four
each by the Assembly and the Senate.

As of last week, the Assembly still had not named two commissioners and Gov.
David A. Paterson still had three to name, though a spokeswoman for the governor
said the administration was vetting candidates.

Joel Barkin, a spokesman for the Department of State, said he expected the
commission to hold its first meeting within a month.

Vivian E. Isom, who teaches a black history class at Roosevelt High School, a
predominantly black school on Long Island, said the commission's work was
important because students need to learn more about their past. Her class covers
topics from African life and the slave trade to  hip-hop and gang culture.

''What gets me is how much students are expected to know about European history
on the Regents exam when they ask only a few questions about African-American
history,'' she said. ''But if it's not been set up after four years, it makes me
wonder how serious they are about it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Vivian E. Isom teaches a black history class. A state panel,
which has never met, is charged with improving education.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHY
KMONICEK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (94%); LEGISLATION (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); EDUCATION
SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); SLAVERY (89%); CURRICULA (89%); EDUCATION
DEPARTMENTS (89%); MURDER (86%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); SPONSORSHIP (78%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (78%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); GRANTS & GIFTS (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (66%); SUPREME COURTS (63%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (63%); WEB
DEVELOPMENT (60%); FOUNDATIONS (60%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EDUCATION COMMISSION OF THE STATES (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (79%);
ARKANSAS, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             619 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Switzerland: 'War On Terror' Hurts International Law, Panel Says

BYLINE: By NICK CUMMING-BRUCE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 125 words


Countries that have adopted a ''war on terror'' response to terrorism have done
''immense damage'' to international law and human rights, according to a special
panel set up by the International Commission of Jurists, a Geneva-based group of
lawyers and judges. The panel -- including Mary Robinson, the former Irish
president, and legal experts from South Africa, Switzerland and the United
States -- held 16 hearings covering more than 40 countries over three years.
Their findings were presented at the start of a series of meetings in Europe and
the United States to call for international action to restore laws on war and
human rights around the world. The panel said increasingly secretive action was
becoming widespread in democratic states.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); LAW OF WAR (88%); LAWYERS (86%); JUDGES (70%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(53%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF JURISTS (58%)

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRELAND (86%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             620 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama's War on Terror May Resemble Bush's in Some Areas

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Even as it pulls back from harsh interrogations and other sharply debated
aspects of George W. Bush's ''war on terrorism,'' the Obama administration is
quietly signaling continued support for other major elements of its
predecessor's approach to fighting Al Qaeda.

In little-noticed confirmation testimony recently, Obama nominees endorsed
continuing the C.I.A.'s program of transferring prisoners to other countries
without legal rights, and indefinitely detaining terrorism suspects without
trials even if they were arrested far from a war zone.

The administration has also embraced the Bush legal team's arguments that a
lawsuit by former C.I.A. detainees should be shut down based on the ''state
secrets'' doctrine. It has also left the door open to resuming military
commission trials.

And earlier this month, after a British court cited pressure by the United
States in declining to release information about the alleged torture of a
detainee in American custody, the Obama administration issued a statement
thanking the British government ''for its continued commitment to protect
sensitive national security information.''

These and other signs suggest that the administration's changes may turn out to
be less sweeping than many had hoped or feared -- prompting growing worry among
civil liberties groups and a sense of vindication among supporters of Bush-era
policies.

In an interview, the White House counsel, Gregory B. Craig, asserted that the
administration was not embracing Mr. Bush's approach to the world. But Mr. Craig
also said President Obama intended to avoid any ''shoot from the hip'' and
''bumper sticker slogans'' approaches to deciding what to do with the
counterterrorism policies he inherited.

''We are charting a new way forward, taking into account both the security of
the American people and the need to obey the rule of law,'' Mr. Craig said.
''That is a message we would give to the civil liberties people as well as to
the Bush people.''

Within days of his inauguration, Mr. Obama thrilled civil liberties groups when
he issued executive orders promising less secrecy, restricting C.I.A.
interrogators to Army Field Manual techniques, shuttering the agency's secret
prisons, ordering the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,  closed within a year and
halting military commission trials.

But in more recent weeks, things have become murkier.

During her confirmation hearing last week,  Elena Kagan, the nominee for
solicitor general, said that someone suspected of helping finance Al Qaeda
should be subject to battlefield law -- indefinite detention without a trial --
even if he were captured in a place like the Philippines rather than in a
physical battle zone.

Ms. Kagan's support for an elastic interpretation of the ''battlefield''
amplified  remarks that Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. made  at his own
confirmation hearing. And it dovetailed with a core Bush position. Civil
liberties groups argue that people captured away from combat zones should go to
prison only after trials.

Moreover, the nominee for C.I.A. director, Leon E. Panetta, opened a loophole in
Mr. Obama's interrogation restrictions. At his hearing, Mr. Panetta said that if
the approved techniques were ''not sufficient'' to get a detainee to divulge
details he was suspected of knowing about an imminent attack, he would ask  for
''additional authority.''

To be sure, Mr. Panetta emphasized that the president could not bypass
antitorture statutes, as Bush lawyers claimed. And he said that waterboarding --
a technique that induces the sensation of drowning, and that the Bush
administration said was lawful -- is torture.

But Mr. Panetta also said the C.I.A. might continue its ''extraordinary
rendition'' program, under which agents seize terrorism suspects and take them
to other countries without extradition proceedings, in a more sweeping form than
anticipated.

Before the Bush administration, the program primarily involved taking indicted
suspects to their native countries for legal proceedings. While some detainees
in the 1990s were allegedly abused after transfer, under Mr. Bush the  program
expanded and included transfers  to third countries -- some of which allegedly
used torture -- for interrogation, not trials.

Mr. Panetta said the agency is likely to continue to transfer detainees to third
countries and would rely on diplomatic assurances of good treatment -- the same
safeguard the Bush administration used, and that critics say is ineffective.

Mr. Craig noted that while Mr. Obama decided ''not to change the status quo
immediately,'' he created a task force to study ''rendition policy and what
makes sense consistent with our obligation to protect the country.''

He urged patience as the administration reviewed the programs it inherited from
Mr. Bush. That process began after the election, Mr. Craig said, when military
and C.I.A. leaders flew to Chicago for a lengthy briefing of Mr. Obama and his
national security advisers. Mr. Obama then sent his advisers to C.I.A.
headquarters to ''find out the best case for continuing the practices that had
been employed during the Bush administration.''

Civil liberties groups  praise Mr. Obama's early executive orders on national
security, but say other signs are discouraging.

For example, Mr. Obama's Justice Department last week told an appeals court that
the Bush administration was right to invoke ''state secrets'' to shut down a
lawsuit by former C.I.A. detainees who say a Boeing subsidiary helped fly them
to places where they were tortured.

Margaret Satterthwaite, a faculty director at the human rights center at the New
York University law school, said, ''It was literally just Bush redux -- exactly
the same legal arguments that we saw the Bush administration present to the
court.''

Mr. Craig said Mr. Holder and others reviewed the case and ''came to the
conclusion that it was justified and necessary for national security'' to
maintain their predecessor's stance. Mr. Holder has also begun a review of every
open Bush-era case involving state secrets, Mr. Craig said, so people should not
read too much into one case.

''Every president in my lifetime has invoked the state-secrets privilege,'' Mr.
Craig said. ''The notion that invoking it in that case somehow means we are
signing onto the Bush approach to the world is just an erroneous assumption.''

Still, the decision caught the attention of a bipartisan group of lawmakers. Two
days after the appeals court hearing, they filed legislation to bar using the
state-secrets doctrine to shut down an entire case -- as opposed to withholding
particular evidence.

The administration has also put off taking a stand in several cases that present
opportunities to embrace or renounce Bush-era policies, including the
imprisonment without trial of an ''enemy combatant'' on domestic soil, Freedom
of Information Act lawsuits seeking legal opinions about interrogation and
surveillance, and an executive-privilege dispute over Congressional subpoenas of
former White House aides to Mr. Bush over the firing of United States attorneys.

Addressing the executive-privilege dispute, Mr. Craig said: ''The president is
very sympathetic to those who want to find out what happened. But he is also
mindful as president of the United States not to do anything that would
undermine or weaken the institution of the presidency. So for that reason, he is
urging both sides of this to settle.''

The administration's recent policy moves have attracted praise from outspoken
defenders of the Bush administration. Last Friday, The Wall Street Journal's
editorial page argued that ''it seems that the Bush administration's antiterror
architecture is gaining new legitimacy'' as Mr. Obama's team embraces aspects of
Mr. Bush's counterterrorism approach.

Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union,
said the sequence of ''disappointing'' recent events had heightened concerns
that Mr. Obama might end up carrying forward ''some of the most problematic
policies of the Bush presidency.''

Mr. Obama has clashed with civil libertarians before. Last July, he voted to
authorize eavesdropping on some phone calls and e-mail messages without a
warrant. While the A.C.L.U. says the program is still unconstitutional, the
legislation reduced legal concerns about one of the most controversial aspects
of Mr. Bush's antiterror strategy.

''We have been some of the most articulate and vociferous critics of the way the
Bush administration handled things,'' Mr. Craig said. ''There has been a
dramatic change of direction.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Leon F. Panetta opened a loophole in the Obama administration's
interrogation restrictions while testifying before a Senate panel this month.
Last month, protesters called for the closing of the prison at Guantanamo Bay.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL TEMCHINE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
PRISONS (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ARMIES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); KAGAN SUPREME COURT
NOMINATION (77%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); LAWYERS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); RULE OF LAW (76%);
LITIGATION (75%); ARRESTS (71%); TORTURE (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); INTERVIEWS
(70%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (58%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (90%); GREG CRAIG (77%); ELENA KAGAN
(57%); ERIC HOLDER (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); CUBA (85%); PHILIPPINES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             621 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Unfinished Case of Maher Arar

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 466 words


The troubled world economy will almost certainly top the agenda when President
Obama meets Thursday with Canada's prime minister, Stephen Harper, in Ottawa. We
hope the two leaders will also take the time to discuss the painful case of
Maher Arar.

Mr. Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian, is the most well-known victim of the Bush
administration's notorious policy of extraordinary rendition, or the outsourcing
of interrogations to foreign governments known to use torture. Former President
George W. Bush and his aides stubbornly refused to admit the grave injustice
done to Mr. Arar. President Obama must do better.

Mr. Arar was seized at Kennedy International Airport in 2002 as he tried to
change planes on his way home to Canada from a family vacation. He was held in
solitary confinement and subjected to harsh questioning before being sent to
Syria. He was tortured there and imprisoned for nearly a year in an underground
cell the size of a grave until the Syrians finally let him go.

In 2007, Mr. Harper's government set an admirable example of decency. After an
extensive investigation that concluded Mr. Arar had no ties to terror, Canada
offered him a formal apology and compensation worth millions of dollars for
providing the unsubstantiated information to American officials that helped
trigger his nightmare.

By contrast, the Bush administration stonewalled the Canadian inquiry and
brushed off Mr. Harper's request that the United States, which bears the bulk of
responsibility for Mr. Arar's abuse, acknowledge ''inappropriate conduct.'' When
Mr. Arar sued the United States for denying him his civil rights, the Bush
administration -- predictably -- argued that for reasons of national security
the case should never be allowed to come to trial.

The question of whether those and other similarly unconvincing claims are
sufficient to block Mr. Arar from having his case tried is now pending before
the full Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan.

Last week, in a rendition case argued in San Francisco, Mr. Obama's Justice
Department sent a troubling signal of continuity by embracing the extravagant
state-secrets claims pioneered by the Bush administration. In Mr. Arar's case,
the secrecy claims are even more baseless in light of the widespread publicity
about his treatment, and the published findings by the Canadians.

Mr. Harper should press the American president on Mr. Arar's behalf. President
Obama can demonstrate his commitment to human rights and the rule of law by
addressing Mr. Arar's case. He should pledge to review the case, including any
questions raised by security officials. His administration should also issue a
full report on Mr. Arar's mistreatment, along with an apology, and an offer to
compensate him for his injuries. All are long overdue.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TORTURE
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); RULE OF LAW (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); AIRPORTS
(74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (66%); SUITS & CLAIMS (65%); CIVIL RIGHTS (64%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (63%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (62%); APPEALS COURTS (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); STEPHEN HARPER (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); SYRIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             622 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terrorism Trial for Figure In Zimbabwe Opposition

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER; A reporter in Mutare, Zimbabwe, contributed to this
article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


A magistrate in Zimbabwe on Wednesday ruled that Roy Bennett, the
third-highest-ranking member of the political opposition, should be tried on
terrorism charges and remain in prison for at least the next three weeks.

Mr. Bennett, who was to be sworn in Wednesday as deputy agriculture minister in
the new power-sharing government of the opposition and President Robert Mugabe's
party, was taken back to a prison cell, clad in the white shorts and khaki shirt
issued to inmates. He and his party have denied the charges against him.

His case has become the highest-profile test of whether the opposition party and
its leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, the new prime minister, will have the clout to
insist on a return to democracy and the rule of law. Over the years, Zimbabwe's
judicial system has been compromised by threats of violence against judges who
went against Mr. Mugabe's wishes, and by gifts of land and other luxury goods to
compliant judges.

Mr. Bennett, who after three years in exile returned only recently  to Zimbabwe
because his party agreed to join the government, sadly shook his head, with his
hand over his mouth, when the provincial magistrate, Livingstone Chipadze,
announced that the state had sufficient grounds to hold him on charges of
possessing unlicensed firearms with the intent to commit acts of terrorism and
sabotage against the state.

Mr. Bennett's lawyers said they would appeal the ruling.

Even as his case took a discouraging turn for his party, another opposition
official who had faced treason charges that were only recently withdrawn, Tendai
Biti, the new finance minister, announced that the government would pay 130,000
soldiers, teachers and civil servants $100 a month in American dollars. Mr. Biti
hopes it will get them back to work, but the move also seems intended to help
win their loyalty to the new government.

Zimbabwe has one of the most astronomical rates of inflation in world history,
and it has rendered the pay of public employees virtually worthless.

The United States and Britain, which have been the largest donors of food and
other humanitarian aid to Zimbabwe, have said they will wait and see whether Mr.
Mugabe is genuinely willing to share power before committing large amounts of
money to help rebuild the country's shattered economy.

They have been closely watching the treatment of imprisoned human rights and
opposition activists who have been held for weeks or months without bail, as
well as Mr. Bennett's case.

Mr. Tsvangirai said over the weekend that the arrest of Mr. Bennett, the party's
treasurer, was a political act engineered by elements of Mr. Mugabe's party,
ZANU-PF, that are bent on undermining the political settlement.

Mr. Tsvangirai won more votes than Mr. Mugabe in March elections, but quit
before a presidential runoff after more than 100 of his supporters were murdered
and thousands beaten in state-sponsored attacks.

Mr. Bennett is a white farmer who was elected earlier to Parliament by a rural,
black constituency in the Manicaland Province, where he is now imprisoned. He
fled the country three years ago after he was linked to an arms cache the state
alleged was to be used in acts of sabotage, and, before his recent return,  had
lived  in exile in Johannesburg.

Hundreds of his supporters have kept a vigil outside the police station and
court house since he was brought to Mutare on Friday after his arrest. They
listened quietly Wednesday as the provincial opposition chairman, Senator
Patrick Chitaka, told them the news about Mr. Bennett's case.

''We don't want you to cause any violence,'' he said. ''Let's show them we're
the government now ruling.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MAGISTRATES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%);
ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); RANKINGS (78%); TREASON (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (77%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (77%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (77%); CIVIL SERVICES
(76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (73%); APPEALS (73%); BANKING &
FINANCE AGENCIES (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE (72%); LAWYERS (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(66%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (65%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (63%); HISTORY
(61%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (78%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             625 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fresh Paint and Flowers At Iraqi House of Horrors

BYLINE: By SAM DAGHER; An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed
reporting from Mosul.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


Iraq's Ministry of Justice allowed reporters rare access on Saturday to the Abu
Ghraib prison, which has been partly renovated by the Iraqis and now holds about
400 prisoners after a new influx on Friday.

The Iraqi government has forged ahead in reopening the prison despite the stigma
from years of torture and abuse there, both under American control and during
Saddam Hussein's rule. The government has said it needs Abu Ghraib, which can
hold up to 15,000 prisoners, to ease severe overcrowding at other detention
centers. Officials plan to bring the total here up to about 3,000 as a first
step.

Officials were eager to highlight a different face of Abu Ghraib, one they
emphasized was more focused on reforming prisoners. The prison's outer walls
were painted a bright cream color, and Iraqi flags fluttered at the entrance.
The driveway to the main gate was spruced up and lined with colorful lampposts,
flowers and other plants.

Large billboards identified the prison compound by its new name, the Baghdad
Central Prison. Jailers were dressed in their finest navy uniforms and hats and
made to stand frozen in formation along a red carpet laid down for the occasion.
It led into the cellblocks that make up the prison's so-called hard site.

Inside, the hallways reeked of fresh paint: lavender, cream and light blue.
Glittering party decorations hung on the walls, and pots of plastic flowers
lined the corridors. Slogans in ornate Arabic calligraphy filled the walls.
''Respecting the dignity of the internees is one of the noble goals of the Iraqi
correctional services,'' proclaimed one.

There were no prisoners to be seen. All 400 of them  were moved to a section
beyond the sight of reporters behind a shuttered and heavily guarded metal gate
covered with blue sheets. The total rose on Friday after 120 were transferred
from Basra, said the head of the ministry's correctional services department,
Sharif al-Murtadha.

The cellblocks that were once the scene of prisoner torture, abuse and
humiliation by American soldiers and contractors in 2003 and 2004 were newly
painted. Freshly painted Arabic numbers identified the individual cells, which
were empty except for neatly made bunk beds. Large flat-screen televisions were
placed in the corridors outside the cells; one was showing a popular cooking
program on a government channel.

Posters with the words ''No to torture'' above close-up photos of bodies
battered with bruises and cuts were hung on the wall.

''It was damp; you really felt the horror,'' said Saad Sultan, an official at
the Ministry of Human Rights, as he walked through the same cellblocks that he
visited numerous times starting in May 2004 after the American abuse scandal at
Abu Ghraib became public. ''Now there is more light, much more light.''

Iraqi officials walked reporters through the prison's amenities. They included a
barbershop, a library, a computer lab, a sewing workshop, a gym and a playground
for inmates to spend time with their children on visitation day. ''Most
prisoners want to trim their beards now,'' said Haidar Kadhim, 29, one of the
barbers.

But not everyone was convinced by the Abu Ghraib remake, including many of the
jailers. ''It reminds me of the past,'' said one jailer who requested anonymity
because he had been prohibited from speaking to reporters. ''I hate this place.
It is depressing.''

In northern Iraq on Saturday, a security official in Mosul said Iraqi forces
arrested 75 people during raids on several neighborhoods on the east side of the
city. The official said that at least 25 of them were being sought in terrorism
investigations.

Iraq's antiterrorism law provides wide leeway in arresting and convicting
terrorism suspects. Critics say it undermines reconciliation efforts and puts
pressure on courts and prisons.

A man and his son were later killed in a roadside bombing in the Karama
neighborhood  on Mosul's east side, a police official said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: A flat-screen television at the Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, where
inmates were once tortured. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEHAD NGA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); SCANDALS (76%); CONTUSIONS
(71%); ARMED FORCES (66%); TELEVISION EQUIPMENT (50%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (59%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             626 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 23, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee to Return to Britain, as Efforts to Prove Torture Claims Continue

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: LONDON


A Guantanamo detainee whose case has drawn international attention because of
his assertions that he was tortured while in C.I.A. custody is scheduled to
arrive back in Britain on Monday, according to his lawyers and British
officials.

The detainee, Binyam Mohamed,  has been in American custody for nearly seven
years, held and interrogated first in Pakistan, then for 18 months in Morocco,
and also in Afghanistan, before being sent to the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, prison
camp.

His return will end an 18-month standoff between the United States and Britain,
which has been seeking his release since August 2007.

It will not, however, end an effort by Mr. Mohamed's lawyers and some members of
Parliament here to obtain photographs that Mr. Mohamed said were taken by an
American woman and showed his injuries, according to notes of his conversations
with his lawyer, who provided the notes to The New York Times.

At the time of his arrest, in April 2002, American officials said that Mr.
Mohamed, who has a brother and two sisters living in the United States, was part
of a conspiracy to detonate a dirty bomb on American soil. But all charges
against him were dismissed.  ''I am confident he will be home tomorrow,'' said
his lawyer, Clive Stafford Smith, ''and it is not a moment too soon.''

A British government official who declined to be identified confirmed  Mr.
Mohamed's expected return but would give no other details. On Friday, the
British Foreign Office issued a statement that final arrangements were under way
for his release.

American Embassy officials in London refused to comment on the situation, saying
that as a matter of policy they could not talk about Guantanamo releases that
had not yet happened. A spokesman for the Pentagon, which oversees the prison
camp, would not comment about his release or his claims of abuse.The British
government began concentrated efforts for Mr. Mohamed's return in August 2007,
but it was rebuffed by the Bush administration.

One stumbling block was the restrictions to be put on him when he was released.
The British government said it could not impose the conditions wanted by the
United States, which included electronic surveillance and an official control
order, because they violated British and European human rights laws.

Mr. Mohamed has agreed to voluntary restrictions, including a lifetime
prohibition on travel to the United States, according to people who have seen
the restrictions. Those people spoke on condition of anonymity, and they gave no
more details about the restrictions because the terms of Mr. Mohamed's release
had not been publicly disclosed.

Mr. Mohamed was born in Ethiopia, but his family fled for political reasons in
the early 1990s. He moved to Britain in 1994, where he was unemployed and into
drugs, his lawyer said. In 2000, he went to Afghanistan to get off drugs -- the
Taliban had a strict policy against domestic drug use -- and to decide whether
it was a ''good Islamic country or not,'' he told his lawyer.

American officials have said that he attended military training camps in
Afghanistan. Mr. Mohamed has said he was training to fight in support of Muslim
insurgents in Chechnya, not to carry out terrorist attacks in the United States.

After the fighting broke out between the United States and the Taliban in late
2001, Mr. Mohamed fled Afghanistan. He was caught in Karachi, Pakistan, trying
to get on a plane to Britain with a false British passport. He said his had been
lost.

After several months of interrogation in Pakistan, he was secretly taken on a
C.I.A.-chartered plane to Morocco, according to the plane's flight logs and
British officials. The C.I.A. has repeatedly declined to say if he was ever held
in Morocco and has steadfastly denied that Mr. Mohamed, or anyone else in its
custody, was ever tortured.

At a news conference here last week, his military lawyer, Lt. Col. Yvonne
Bradley of the United States Air Force, said that what Mr. Mohamed endured at
Guantanamo ''makes waterboarding look like child's play.''

For 18 months, ''I never went outside, I never saw the sun, not even once,'' Mr.
Stafford Smith quoted Mr. Mohamed as saying during one of their many sessions at
the prison camp. Immediately after each interview, Mr. Stafford Smith would
write down what he had been told and submit it to the military for clearance.

Mr. Stafford Smith provided The Times with a 25-page memorandum of his
interviews with Mr. Mohamed, which had been cleared by the military.

Interrogators in Morocco showed him pictures of various leaders of Al Qaeda  and
asked him if he knew them, Mr. Stafford Smith said. Mr. Mohamed  insisted he did
not.

One night, three men in black masks and military trousers came in, he told his
lawyer. ''One stood on each of my shoulders and the third punched me in the
stomach,'' Mr. Mohamed said.

Other times, he said, they tied him to a wall, his feet just off the floor. They
brought in women, ''naked or part naked,'' he said.

On one occasion, while tied to the wall, his clothes were taken off, he said.
Then a man took a scalpel and made cuts on his chest. Then they cut his
genitals, Mr. Mohamed said.

''I suffered the razor treatment about once a month,'' Mr. Mohamed said,
according to Mr. Stafford Smith's declassified notes of the interview.

In January 2004, five soldiers wearing face masks and Timberland boots dragged
him from his cell and stripped him. He heard an American accent. There was a
woman in the group. She took pictures of his wounds with a digital camera, he
said. He was taken to the American-run Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan, his
lawyer said, where more photographs were taken. One of the soldiers told him it
was ''to show Washington it's healing,'' Mr. Mohamed told his lawyer.

Mr. Mohamed's lawyers have been trying to obtain the photographs and documents,
which they say support Mr. Mohamed's allegations. A British court has said that
classified documents support Mr. Mohamed's assertions, but the American and
British governments have objected to their release.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Binyam Mohamed (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - GETTY
IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); TORTURE (89%); PRISONS (78%); BOMBINGS (76%); TALIBAN
(76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
CONSPIRACY (72%); ARRESTS (67%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (50%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (97%); MOROCCO (92%); PAKISTAN
(92%); AFGHANISTAN (91%); CUBA (91%); ETHIOPIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             638 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tyrants, Take Note

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 182 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Warrant Issued for Sudanese Leader Over Darfur War Crimes'' (news article,
March 5):

The International Criminal Court's decision to issue a warrant for the arrest of
a sitting head of state should be welcomed by all as a historic milestone in the
effort to end the impunity under which some national leaders hope to operate.

Regardless of the local tumult it may temporarily create, or the difficulties
involved in actually arresting President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, the
court's decision to uphold the preservation of human rights over sovereign
immunity sets an essential precedent.

We cannot let concern for temporary difficulties outweigh the long-term benefits
of the I.C.C.'s action. Let tyrants around the world take note. Let them bear
this in mind when considering persecution of their own minorities. Let them
understand that in the 21st century, they will be called to account for such
misdeeds.

Most of all, let our country join in wholehearted support for the court and its
historic efforts.

James Tyson Hamilton Township, N.J.  March 5, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); IMMUNITY (72%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             639 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times,: March 7, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2854 words


International

IN A DISPUTED MIDEAST LAND,

Rocks and Sand Turn Precious

The land of the West Bank is, of course, disputed. Israel occupies it, and the
Palestinians want it for a future state. But more and more of it is being
quarried by Israeli companies, crushed into gravel and sand, and sold for
building materials all across Israel, a practice that is the focus of a new
legal challenge by the Israeli rights group Yesh Din.  PAGE A5

ZIMBABWE LEADER'S WIFE DIES

The prime minister of Zimbabwe, Morgan Tsvangirai, was injured and his wife,
Susan, above,was fatally injured in a car crash about 45 miles south of the
capital. The crash has stirred deep suspicions in his party, coming less than a
month after he was sworn in as prime minister in a tense power-sharing
government with his rival, President Robert Mugabe. PAGE A5

THE OUTBREAK AT THE FAT DUCK

The Fat Duck in Bray, Berkshire, which has three Michelin stars and is perhaps
Britain's most celebrated restaurant, is now closed after a mysterious outbreak
caused hundreds of people in the last month to report becoming violently sick
with projectile vomiting, sudden diarrhea and flulike symptoms.  PAGE A6

AVIATION THREAT STIRS SOUTH KOREA

South Korea lashed out after a warning from North Korea appeared to threaten
civilian planes traveling through the region. While hectoring comments, often in
inflammatory language, are routinely made by North Korea, the threat caused
enough uncertainty that three airlines announced they were rerouting some
flights.  PAGE A6

BUILDING A BASE FOR INDIA'S WOMEN

Ela Bhatt is a Gandhian pragmatist fighting for women at the bottom of India's
social ladder who are striving for economic freedom. She opened the country's
first women's bank, helped artisans sell their handiwork to new urban department
stores, and lent working capital to entrepreneurs to open beauty salons in the
slums.  PAGE A6

A U.S. GIFT LOST IN TRANSLATION

The United States and Russia tried to mend their frayed relationship by having
their top diplomats sit down to dinner. Before the appetizer was served, the
diplomatic first date had gotten off to an awkward start because of a gag gift
gone awry.  A7

DEADLOCK OVER SUDAN

The Security Council deadlocked on Friday over taking any action amid the
tempest that erupted over the indictment of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of
Sudan on war crimes charges and his subsequent expulsion of 13 aid
organizations.  PAGE A8

INQUIRY INTO DEATHS IN KENYA

The United States and a senior United Nations official have called for an
independent investigation into the murder of two prominent human rights
activists in Kenya, shot to death at close range while their car was blocked in
heavy traffic in Nairobi. PAGE A8

National

SUPREME COURT LIMITS AUTHORITY

Of President on Detainees

The Supreme Court wiped away one of the Bush administration's greatest victories
in the lower courts, a 2008 ruling that expanded the limits of executive
authority to combat terrorism by allowing indefinite military detentions of
legal residents of the United States.  PAGE A9

GOVERNOR'S CONVICTION UPHELD

A federal appeals court panel in Atlanta unanimously upheld the bribery
conviction of former Alabama Gov. Don Siegelman, adding weight to a prosecution
that Democrats have contended was an example of the political use of the courts
during the Bush administration. The three-judge panel said there was enough
evidence to convict Mr. Siegelman of bribery for having appointed a campaign
contributor to a state hospital licensing board.  PAGE A9

OBAMA SALUTES JOBS

President Obama traveled to Columbus, Ohio, to salute the hiring of 25 police
recruits whose jobs were saved by the $787 billion  recovery plan he signed into
law last month. The visit came amid another grim report on jobs, and he braced
Americans for tougher weeks ahead. PAGE A10

FACING STUBBORN OPPOSITION

Democrats in Congress have been stymied by Republicans and a few Democratic
defectors in what began as a fairly routine push to enact overdue spending
bills, providing them with a quick and humbling lesson in the limits of their
new power. A news analysis. PAGE A11

CHANGING TACK ON HEALTH CARE

Two labor unions, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees and the Service Employees International Union, have pulled out of a
broad coalition seeking agreement on major changes in the health care system --
illustrating the difficulty of reaching agreement on some of the debate's
knottiest issues.  PAGE A12

LAWYERS PUSH FOR CASE'S DISMISSAL

Lawyers for the Obama administration struggled to persuade a federal judge to
throw out an unusual civil lawsuit brought by Jose Padilla, an American citizen
who was held in isolation for three years as an enemy combatant, against John C.
Yoo, the former government lawyer whose memorandums on torture had been used by
the Bush administration to justify sweeping policies on detention and
interrogation.  PAGE A13

DEBATE OVER WOLF'S STATUS

The Obama administration announced that it would take the gray wolf off the
endangered species list in Montana and Idaho, but would leave the animal under
federal protection in Wyoming. The move has split ranchers and
environmentalists, who disagree over whether populations are robust enough to
allow hunting. PAGE A13

Man Takes Life After Killings A14

New York

DEMOCRATIC STRATEGISTS AGONIZE

But Defect to Bloomberg

Some of the nation's top Democratic strategists recruited by Mayor Michael R.
Bloomberg's re-election campaign are finding that even in an era of supposedly
postpartisan city politics, a decision to cross party lines can be wrenching.
The hiring underscores how unsettled some Democrats feel about the state of
their party in a liberal bastion where they outnumber Republicans but have not
controlled City Hall in 15 years.  PAGE A15

SALES OF HOME SAFES BOOM

A big expensive cube to store cash and valuables might not seem high on a
recessionary shopping list. But sellers of safes said that business was up as
customers were confronting new fears, be they losing money in failing banks or
being robbed by desperate fellow New Yorkers.  PAGE A15

Business

AGREEMENT SETS STAGE

For Madoff Plea Deal

Taking one step closer to his day in court, the money manager Bernard L. Madoff
has agreed to waive his right to a formal grand jury review of accusations that
he conducted a worldwide Ponzi scheme. The agreement sets the stage for a plea
agreement between Mr. Madoff and federal prosecutors, who have been negotiating
with his lawyers since his arrest.  PAGE B1

PARENTS SUE OVER SCHOOL'S CLOSING

After the trustees of the Conserve School in Wisconsin said they were
essentially shutting down their program because of the dismal economy, parents
have banded together to challenge the action in a lawsuit, contending that the
school's underlying financial condition did not look so dire and that the
trustees were instead acting out of their own interests. PAGE B1

RETAILERS STRUGGLE TO PRESENT CALM

The chiefs of the nation's retail chains face a dilemma in telling investors the
truth about their abysmal sales and eroding profit margins. But to avoid
provoking a panic, some are giving the performances of their lives, striving to
instill confidence not only among skittish stock-market investors but also among
the suppliers who keep them alive by shipping them merchandise on faith.  PAGE
B1

FAR CRY FROM INDIA'S ASCETIC FATHER

Favoring cowboy hats, imported cigars, Mercedes and Jaguars, Vijay Mallya, the
chairman of the conglomerate UB Group, seems an unlikely go-between for property
belonging to the spiritual father of independent India. An airline and liquor
tycoon, Mr. Mallya bought Gandhi's personal effects in a controversial auction
in New York but said he planned to give the items to the Indian government.
PAGE B2

ROCHE RAISES BID FOR GENENTECH

The Swiss drug giant Roche raised its hostile offer to buy out the biotechnology
company Genentech to $93 a share, from $86.50.  PAGE B3

Arts

NONPROFIT MAGAZINE CARRIES TORCH

Through Print's Dark Times

Mother Jones, the left-leaning nonprofit magazine, has viewed itself as a
defender of independent journalism free from corporate meddling. But in the
current economic downturn and plight of print industry, Mother Jones, although
suffering itself, sees itself as a defender of journalism, period.  PAGE C1

ANOTHER TRIP TO BYGONE BRITAIN

''Life on Mars,'' the 1970s moody British paranormal police show has spawned a
sequel, ''Ashes to Ashes.'' Occurring eight years later, when Britain is
arguably a lot more interesting, the show engages the mounting antipathies of
the working class, the growth of privatization and development, and the fury
over nuclear armament, Ginia Bellafante writes.  PAGE C1

PH.D'S ANTICIPATE HARD TIMES

Full-time faculty jobs have not been easy to come by, but this year, a new crop
of Ph.D. candidates is finding a worse time than ever. Public universities are
bracing for severe cuts and private colleges' endowments are plunging in the
financial recession, causing a chill at many higher education institutions,
where partial or full-fledged hiring freezes have been imposed. PAGE C1

ART FAIRS ADJUST TO THE ECONOMY

As a newly sober art world sizes up this weekend's Armory Show, many are
wondering about the fates of the concurrent smaller fairs: What prospects do
Volta, Pulse and Scope have in a crippled economy? Those that remain are
employing new strategies, some of which seem more capitalistic than avant-garde.
PAGE C1

CRIME SOLVERS WITH CHEMISTRY

''Castle,'' a new drama on ABC, is about a by-the-book cop who must work with a
devil-may-care novelist researching his next book. It is one of the newest
twists on a formula that has plenty of company on television these days: pairing
of opposites with a healthy dose of sexual tension  PAGE C1

Inside Reviews

Pirouetting with Attitude C3

POWER, CLARITY AND RANGE AT PIANO

Just getting used to the pianist Evgeny Kissin's power and clarity can be
overwhelming, but the recital he gave at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night,
devoted half to music by Prokofiev and the other half by Chopin, revealed an
orchestral range of colors and a nearly imperceptible sensation of breathy
flexibility, Steve Smith writes.  PAGE C5

BLENDING JAZZ WITH CLASSICAL

Michel Legrand, the French jazz pianist and composer as well as multiple Oscar
winner is playing a rare New York engagement at Birdland, and Stephen Holden
writes, it's an unwieldy mixture of classical, jazz and Hollywood.  PAGE C5

Spirals at the Guggenheim  C5

Spotlight on Real-Life Extras  C6

Sports

MINDFUL OF PAST UPSET,

U.S. Prepares for Canada

Chipper Jones, Derek Jeter and their American teammates have had three years to
live down their loss to Canada in the first round of the first World Baseball
Classic in 2006, and the Canadians have had three years to exult about sticking
it to the Yanks. Now the United States gets its chance again on Saturday, this
time in the hub of Canada, George Vecsey writes.  PAGE D1

A KNACK FOR HOOKING RATTLERS

Unlike many snake hunters, Eric Carl Timaeus carries no weapon, preferring to
coax live prey into his bag with a dull metal hook in the manner of a charmer.
For such sport,  Timaeus has been rewarded with utter dominance and he has
compiled nine consecutive titles in the length competition at the Sweetwater
Jaycees Rattlesnake Roundup, founded in 1958 and held each March in West Texas.
PAGE D1

ROOTED IN CENTRAL PARK'S SANDLOT

An All-Star for the Chicago Cubs and one of the best young catchers in baseball,
Geovany Soto will play his next significant game this weekend for Puerto Rico in
the World Baseball Classic. But long before Soto burst upon the major leagues,
batting .285 with 23 home runs and 86 runs batted in and winning Rookie of the
Year honors, his first years playing were in Central Park in Manhattan.  PAGE D2

FROM YANKEE TO PANAMA'S ENVOY

Yankees pitcher Mariano Rivera, recovering from shoulder surgery, cannot play in
the World Baseball Classic. But he still traveled to San Juan, P.R., for two
days to don the uniform and to warm up with Panama for the 16-team tournament.
PAGE D3

STAR DRIVES HUSKIES CLOSE TO TITLE

The height-challenged University of Washington Huskies basketball team, ranked
16th, is not known for its defense or outside shooting. But if they beat
Washington State on Saturday, aided by the endearing engine of an unlikely
champion, the 6-foot-7 forward Jon Brockman, they will win the Pac-10 title
outright for the first time since 1953.  PAGE D5

N.C.A.A. PENALIZES FLORIDA STATE

The N.C.A.A. has ruled that Florida State was guilty of major violations in a
widespread academic fraud case involving 61 athletes, uncovered in 2007, and
announced that it would strip scholarships from 10 teams and force those teams
to vacate all of the victories in 2006 and 2007 in which the implicated athletes
participated. In addition, the college was placed on probation for four years.
PAGE D5

Obituaries

JAMES BELLOWS, 86

In a newspaper career that spanned 34 years, his insistence on stylish writing
and bold, clean graphics promoted the New Journalism movement while he was the
editor of three major newspapers, including The New York Herald Tribune.

PAGE A19

Editorial

WHEN JOBS GO MISSING

The numbers in the jobs report for February were bad, but the trends were worse.
It's fortunate, then, that the nation's first line of defense against rising
joblessness -- unemployment insurance -- was reinforced in the stimulus law that
passed last month. Congress and the Obama administration must also be prepared
to do more as unemployment worsens, as it inevitably will. PAGE A20

HOLDING MR. BASHIR ACCOUNTABLE

After the International Criminal Court this week issued an arrest warrant
against Sudan's ever-ruthless leader on war crimes, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, he
ordered the expulsion of international aid groups, which keep millions of
Sudanese alive with food and medical care. If Mr. Bashir does not reverse the
expulsion, it should be considered added proof of his guilt.  PAGE A20

THE ROVE-MIERS DEAL

The House Judiciary Committee has hammered out what appears to be a good deal to
compel Karl Rove and Harriet Miers to testify about the United States attorneys
scandal. It makes a few unfortunate concessions. The agreement is strong where
it matters -- requiring the two former Bush administration officials to testify
under oath.  PAGE A20

Op-Ed

BOB HERBERT

President Obama is being hammered from the left, right and center. But miracles
take time.  PAGE A19

GAIL COLLINS

One of Michael Steele's most profound problems is a conviction that the
Republican Party can become cool. The Democratic Party is barely cool, and it
has Barack Obama.  PAGE A21

CHARLES M. BLOW

The percentage of Americans who view the Republican Party positively is at an
all-time low, and Republican leaders are doing themselves no favors by bickering
and cowering.  PAGE A21

HOME-GROWN POWER

President Obama is wise to push renewable energy and new ''smart grids'' for
distributing it, Ian Bowles, the Massachusetts secretary of energy, writes in an
Op-Ed article. But Congress should not add costly cross-country power lines to
the president's plan, because it will be less expensive to produce renewable
energy in every part of the country and distribute it locally.  PAGE A21

This Weekend

TRAVEL

Some of the romance of train travel in America might have faded, but there are
still benefits to riding the rails. A cross-country trip on an Amtrak train
allows one man a chance to reconnect with his country and the people living in
it.  Page 1

THE MAGAZINE

The next stage of the national foreclosure crisis is how towns and cities will
deal with blocks of empty houses, abandoned neighborhoods and trolling
pillagers. Cleveland got there first, and that's Tony Brancatelli's problem.
Page 28

ARTS & LEISURE

Dwayne Johnson has a little ways to go before his name outlives his current
legacy as the action star and former professional wrestler The Rock. But the
strategy is already in motion to land Mr. Johnson on Hollywood's top tier.  Page
1

When the British artist Steve McQueen set out to direct his first feature film,
he chose Bobby Sands, an imprisoned Irish nationalist who starved himself to
death. The viscera of protest and imprisonment are laid open, and the film
accomplishes something much starker than a conventional docudrama, Dennis Lim
writes. Page 11

T:  MEN'S FASHION

It's all about ... Martin Kippenberger, Jesus sandals, the return of the
windbreaker, machine-parts furniture, Harri Peccinotti, design-worthy sound
systems, posh squatters and William S. Burroughs.  Page 37

BOOK REVIEW

''The Vagrants,'' by Yiyun Li, takes place in Mao Zedong's China. Beginning with
an execution, the book has an unrelenting eye that follows a few typical people.
This is an anthology of horror stories, but not of the monster variety. Rather,
here are the consequences of a society gone mad. Page 1

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); WOMEN (89%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); WAR CRIMES (86%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (79%); SAND & GRAVEL MINING (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (76%); SLUM DWELLINGS (76%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (75%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES
(75%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); RETAILERS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); SHOOTINGS (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(67%); RESTAURANTS (67%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (66%); AIRLINES (66%);
INDICTMENTS (64%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (60%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (60%);
MURDER (55%); WORKING CAPITAL (50%); PERSONAL CARE SERVICES (50%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (55%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); KENYA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(92%); INDIA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (77%)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             647 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Show About the Universe Raises Questions on Earth

BYLINE: By GINIA BELLAFANTE

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1033 words


Earlier this week, in advance of the grandly anticipated conclusion of
''Battlestar Galactica'' on Friday, the United Nations convened a panel to
discuss the show's treatment of terrorism, human rights abuses and religious
conflict.

Despite the obviousness of the public relations piggybacking, the United Nations
occasion only further legitimized the political seriousness of a series that has
explored the post-9/11 consciousness by examining the costs of wartime moral
relativism. While a show like ''Gossip Girl'' might also be said to have
ambitions -- broadly, to address the injustices of class disparity, let's say --
it is unlikely that the name Blair Waldorf has ever come up at the coffee cart
around which the Council of Economic Advisers gathers.

''Battlestar Galactica,'' which during its four seasons has elevated the image
of the otherwise campy and unambitious Sci Fi channel, has -- like most science
fiction -- conducted an experiment in supposition. Ideas of faith, coexistence
and democracy have been delivered with an air of intellectual rigor and a
vagueness that has allowed the series to exist as a tabula rasa on which nearly
any strain of speculative meaning might viably take shape.

The series began with the premise that the human race had been extinguished by a
robot tribe, the Cylons, it had created to enslave. The Cylons, who devoutly
follow a single god, have been understood, quite reasonably, as stand-ins for
the robotic, prescriptive aspects of religious extremism; they are Islamic
fundamentalists in one view, the politically aggressive factions of the
Christian right in another. They are literally born and born again.

But toward the show's finale, as the differences between the Cylons and the
remaining humans began to dissolve, the opportunity for a more acutely
contemporary symbolism emerged. It became easier to regard the series as an
argument for the imperatives of shared interest in a post-racial world.

In another, if fringier, analysis, the show's focus on the struggles of a
contained brigade of human survivors in a post-apocalyptic galaxy is a loose
parable for the events in the Book of Mormon: Gaius Baltar (James Callis), the
venal scientist turned collaborator turned false prophet turned savior equated
not with Jesus or a hundred televangelists but with Joseph Smith. (The original
''Battlestar Galactica'' of the late 1970s was created by a member of the Church
of Latter-day Saints, lending the thesis a certain currency online.)

At the same time, it would hardly seem illogical to read the series, right now
at least, as a housing-crisis metaphor: thousands of displaced people without a
safety net in search of a home.

Since the revived ''Battlestar Galactica'' first made its appearance as a
mini-series in 2003 it has been celebrated for its moral ambiguity, which seems
empty praise, given how much bad television has been created in the name of a
gray area and how little anything worthwhile is ever made without it.

But the series has been far more remarkable for the ways in which its
characters' principles and value systems have evolved. Most notable has been the
change in Gaius, whose self-regarding penchant for expedience finally gives way
to a moving and incalculably consequential display of rectitude in the final
episode.

In the end, his self-serving rationalism comes to accommodate a genuine
commitment to faith, one that seeks to resolve the show's theological tensions,
if not with the kind of pungence one might have hoped for. The humans have been
worshiping multiple deities, but the longstanding battle between monotheism and
polytheism is irrelevant, Gaius warns his adversary in philosophical summation.

''Whether we want to call that God or Gods or some sublime inspiration or a
divine force that we can't know or understand doesn't matter,'' he says. ''God
is a force of nature beyond good and evil.''

Atheism is the real enemy of mankind's progress; salvation seems to lie in a
vague belief in angels and higher powers, as if the series thought of itself as
a promotional appendage of Alcoholics Anonymous.

I'm not sure that in the most fleeting sense, it hasn't. The final three hours
of the series devote considerable time flashing back to the lives of the
survivors before the fall, who are all shown drinking to the point of physical
and psychological compromise.

Though Laura Roslin (Mary McDonnell) seems able to imbibe with a semblance of
moderation, we encounter her, in prehistory, learning that her father and two
sisters have been killed by a drunken driver on the way home from a baby shower
she has given. The scene poignantly contextualizes the calm that Roslin has
demonstrated with a mesmerizing consistency throughout her tenure as president
of the remaining colony of humans: her own world already evaporated a long time
ago.

Roslin's relationship with the fleet's military leader, Adama (Edward James
Olmos), one built on respect and shared sorrows and a profound inclination to
give care, has provided one of the sublime, bittersweet pleasures of the final
season. There has been no better or quieter rendering of love in midlife on
television. ''Battlestar Galactica'' has upheld certain liberal pieties without
the utmost subtlety. (Why should we abstain from waging biological warfare on
annihilators? Because then it makes us no better than our enemies.) But it has
drawn the need for, and the sustenance of, emotional connection with a nuanced
and deeply felt authenticity.

''Battlestar Galactica'' has aspired during its reign more toward the science
fiction of Ursula K. Le Guin than toward the science fiction of ''Stargate
Atlantis'': the show's taste for gender neutrality seems plucked from her 1969
novel, ''The Left Hand of Darkness.''

But the show could not break with the genre's tradition of hokey, hopeful
earnestness. Landing finally on a pastoral facsimile of Earth, the human-Cylon
partnership vows to start anew with pledges not to let science outpace
soulfulness. One hundred fifty thousand years later, a city of neon stands on
the green terrain -- as well as the assumption that we won't make all of the
same mistakes over again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Battlestar Galactica (TV Program); Battlestar Galactica (TV Program)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Tricia Helfer, as Number Six, and James Callis, as Gaius
Baltar, in the final episode of ''Battlestar Galactica,'' shown on
Friday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLE SEGAL/SCI FI)(C1)
 Midlife romance: Edward James Olmos and Mary McDonnell in ''Battlestar
Galactica.''(PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLE SEGAL/SCI FI)(C9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); MORMONS & MORMONISM (89%); RELIGION (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); FUNDAMENTALISM (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); SCIENCE FICTION LITERATURE (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS (56%)

STATE: EARTH (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             652 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mr. Obama and Turkey

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 517 words


President Obama has wisely decided to visit Turkey during his first official
trip to Europe. The United States needs Turkey's cooperation -- in Iraq and
Afghanistan as well as with Iran and efforts to broker Middle East peace. But
there are also very worrying trends in Turkey's relationship with Europe and its
internal politics.

Mr. Obama must do all he can to help reverse those trends and anchor Turkey more
firmly in the West.

The Justice and Development Party scored an impressive re-election in 2007 after
pursuing market-oriented policies that brought economic growth and more trade
ties with the European Union. That conservative Muslim party also expanded human
rights and brought Turkish law closer to European standards.

Those reforms have since stalled -- partly because of opposition from civilian
nationalists and generals who still wield too much clout. (The trial of 86
people accused of plotting a military coup is a reminder of the dark side of
Turkish politics.) But Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan also seems to have
lost enthusiasm for the European Union bid and the reforms that are the price of
admission. President Nicolas Sarkozy of France has been especially unhelpful,
making clear that he will do all he can to keep Turkey out of the European
Union. Mr. Obama must persuade Mr. Sarkozy and others that admitting Turkey -- a
Muslim democracy -- is in everyone's interest. And he must persuade Ankara that
the required reforms will strengthen Turkey's democracy and provide more
stability and growth.

We are concerned about Mr. Erdogan's increasingly autocratic tendencies. His
government's decision to slap the media mogul Aydin Dogan with a $500 million
tax bill smacks of retaliation against an independent press that has
successfully exposed government corruption. Ankara's willingness to help rebuild
schools in Afghanistan is welcome. But the situation there is dire, and NATO
also needs more troops and needs access to Turkish military bases to facilitate
the transport of American soldiers and equipment into Afghanistan and out of
Iraq.

Ankara has played a positive role, mediating indirect talks between Israel and
Syria. With Washington's encouragement, Mr. Erdogan could also use his
relationships with Iran, Sudan and Hamas to encourage improved behavior.

Turkey's cooperation with Iraqi Kurds has vastly improved. There are also
reports that Turkey and Armenia may soon normalize relations.

We have long criticized Turkey for its self-destructive denial of the World War
I era mass killing of Armenians. But while Congress is again contemplating a
resolution denouncing the genocide, it would do a lot more good for both Armenia
and Turkey if it held back. Mr. Obama, who vowed in the presidential campaign to
recognize the event as genocide, should also forbear.

The Bush administration's disastrous war in Iraq fanned a destructive
anti-Americanism in Turkey. Mr. Obama's visit is likely to soothe hostile
feelings. But he must go beyond that to secure a relationship with an important
ally and an important democracy in danger of backsliding.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); POLITICS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); WAR
& CONFLICT (86%); ELECTIONS (79%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (79%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); COUPS (77%); CONSERVATISM (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(76%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (75%); CORRUPTION (74%); MARTIAL LAW (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); ECONOMIC GROWTH
(70%); TAX LAW (69%); HAMAS (69%); WORLD WAR I (68%); MILITARY RULE (68%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (78%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (59%);
AYDIN DOGAN (58%)

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (93%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%);
IRAQ (94%); ARMENIA (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); FRANCE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             654 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru: Ex-Leader Ends Testimony

BYLINE: By ALEXEI BARRIONUEVO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 91 words


Former President Alberto K. Fujimori concluded his defense on Friday in his
trial on human rights violations, arguing that prosecutors had not proven that
he was responsible for the killings and kidnappings of terrorist suspects
belonging to the Shining Path and Tupac Amaru guerrilla movements in the 1990s.
Prosecutors argued that he had failed to stop his forces from carrying out those
crimes. Mr. Fujimori, 70, said the evidence ''does not show any sign of my
involvement.'' Judge Cesar San Martin said a verdict would be announced Tuesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); VERDICTS
(88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%)

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (57%)

COUNTRY: PERU (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             655 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel: U.N. Picks Gaza Investigator

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 83 words


The United Nations Human Rights Councilappointed a widely respected Jewish South
African judge on Friday  to lead a high-level mission to investigate allegations
of war crimes committed by Israel in connection with the conflict in the Gaza
Strip that ended Jan. 18.

The judge, Richard J. Goldstone, left, is a former judge of the South African
Constitutional Court and the former United Nations chief prosecutor for war
crimes in Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Israel has not said whether it will cooperate.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (87%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%); RWANDA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             656 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghanistan Would Get Few Troops From NATO

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER and HELENE COOPER; Stephen Castle contributed
reporting from Strasbourg.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: STRASBOURG, France


With protesters raging outside, NATO leaders on Saturday gave a tepid troop
commitment to President Obama's escalating campaign in Afghanistan, mostly
committing soldiers only to a temporary security duty.

To a global audience concerned with an exit strategy, Mr. Obama used his most
explicit language yet in detailing a narrowed war mission: emphasizing intense
action against Al Qaeda even above instilling Western democracy and rights
sensibilities.

''We want to do everything we can to encourage and promote rule of law, human
rights, the education of women and girls in Afghanistan, economic development,
infrastructure development,'' he said. ''But I also want people to understand
that the first reason we are there is to root out Al Qaeda, so that they cannot
attack members of the alliance.''

Answering a reporter's question about whether the troop escalation would be
contingent on whether the Afghan government rescinded a proposed family law that
the United Nations has likened to legalizing rape within marriage , Mr. Obama
replied that the law should not deter the United States from its military goal.

''I think this law is abhorrent. Certainly the views of this administration have
been and will be communicated to the Karzai government,'' he said. But he added,
repeating for emphasis: ''I want everybody to understand that our focus is to
defeat Al Qaeda.''

For a NATO summit meeting marking the 60th anniversary of the alliance and
intended to be without drama, the event has been fractious both inside the hall
and outside it.

Thousands of protesters clashed with the riot police and set a hotel and a
border post on fire in Strasbourg during the session. And although NATO leaders
finally reached an agreement on a new secretary general -- the Danish prime
minister, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, 56 -- the deal came only after days of hard
negotiations to overcome Turkey's opposition.

The Afghan war, too, remained a dividing line for alliance leaders. Despite a
glowing reception and widespread praise for Mr. Obama's style and aims, his
calls for a more lasting European troop increase for Afghanistan were politely
brushed aside, as they had been in negotiations leading up to the meeting.

As expected, European allies agreed to provide up to 5,000 new troops for
Afghanistan, the White House said Saturday. But 3,000 of them are to be deployed
only temporarily to provide security for the August elections in Afghanistan.

A further 1,400 to 2,000 soldiers will be sent to form embedded training teams
for the Afghan Army and the police.

Mr. Obama is raising the number of American troops this year to about 68,000
from the current 38,000, which will significantly Americanize the war. The new
strategy, which the Europeans have pressed for, is aimed at creating larger and
better-trained Afghan security forces that can defend the country and allow the
West to leave.

Much of Mr. Obama's Afghanistan strategy review, which he formally presented to
NATO leaders this weekend,  reflects the view of a number of administration
officials, particularly Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., that the United
States should set limited, achievable goals in Afghanistan.

''No one will say this publicly, but the true fact is that we are all talking
about our exit strategy from Afghanistan,'' a senior European diplomat said
Saturday. ''We are getting out. It may take a couple of years, but we are all
looking to get out.'' He spoke on the condition of anonymity under diplomatic
rules.

For Mr. Obama, in many ways, the two months since he took office have been a
reality check on the difference between Europe's vocal support and action.

In January, Obama administration officials expressed optimism that they would
receive strong backing from European allies on a large number of additional
troops for Afghanistan.

In February, Mr. Biden, appearing at the Munich Security Conference, said the
administration was introducing a ''more for more'' strategy, by which it would
give Europe more of what it wanted, by promising to shut the military prison at
Guantanamo Bay and not to engage in torture.

In return, Mr. Biden said, the United States would expect more from Europe.

The Europeans have given more, but not much, and largely limited to the period
around the August election. Germany said it would send an additional 600 troops.
Spain offered 600; Britain, 900. European nations also offered more financing,
promising about $100 million more to support the training mission and an
additional $500 million in humanitarian aid.

Before the NATO meeting on Saturday, leaders walked across a sweeping bridge
over the Rhine between Germany and France to symbolize Europe's unity. But soon
after, masked protesters were battling police officers from both countries on
another bridge nearby, called the Bridge of Europe, or Pont de l'Europe.

The tensions were reflected inside the meeting hall as well. And NATO leaders
struggled to choose the alliance's new secretary general, driving negotiations
on Saturday hours past schedule.

NATO works by consensus, and the European-favored candidacy of Mr. Rasmussen was
publicly opposed by Turkey.

Turkey, NATO's only Muslim country, said that Mr. Rasmussen was insensitive to
Muslim concerns during the scandal over the Danish newspapers' publication in
2005 of cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, and that while NATO was fighting in
Muslim Afghanistan, the symbolism would be all wrong.

Mr. Rasmussen has also said he does not think Turkey will ever become a full
member of the European Union.

Efforts to sway Turkish officials over the leaders' lavish dinner Friday at a
casino in Baden-Baden, Germany, failed, as did a telephone call by Prime
Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy to Turkey's prime minister, Recep Tayyip
Erdogan.

But behind closed doors, the deal was done. According to senior European
diplomats, Turkey was given at least two NATO jobs, including a deputy to the
deputy secretary general, who is an Italian.

Turkey was also promised that two blocked chapters of its accession agreement to
join the European Union would move forward, and that Mr. Rasmussen would
publicly address the concerns of the Muslim world about his response on the
cartoons, possibly as soon as Monday.

Mr. Obama was said to be important to the Turkish decision to concede, meeting
with President Abdullah Gul of Turkey and Mr. Rasmussen for an hour before the
main session.

Saturday's meeting began with niceties, with President Nicolas Sarkozy of France
confirming his country's return to full membership in NATO, and with President
Obama welcoming Albania and Croatia to the alliance. Mr. Obama added that he
expected Macedonia to join soon and that NATO's door remained open to other
countries.

But he made no specific mention of Georgia and Ukraine, whose increasingly
distant accession to NATO has contributed to a rift in Russia's relations with
the West. At last year's NATO meeting in Romania, President George W. Bush
pushed hard for membership for Georgia and Ukraine, but he was rebuffed by
European leaders.

While the United States has since then given lip service to continued support
for NATO membership for Georgia and Ukraine, Obama administration officials have
privately indicated that they do not plan to put membership for those two
countries at the top of the American agenda.

''The door to membership will remain open for other countries that meet NATO's
standards and can make a meaningful contribution to allied security,'' Mr. Obama
said.

In DNA, the Strasbourg newspaper, Jean-Claude Kiefer wrote: ''More than his
charisma, it is the style of Barack Obama that seduces Europeans. His speech
ignores the 'wooden tongue,' this sad political specialty of Old Europe, and
goes always, without detours, without populist or tortured formulas, to the
essential.''

Mr. Sarkozy and Mrs. Merkel, the hosts, praised Mr. Obama. ''We are very pleased
to work with him,'' Mr. Sarkozy said. ''We trust him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen of Denmark, the next NATO
secretary general.(PHOTOGRAPH BY HORACIO VILLALOBOS/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO
AGENCY)(A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%);
ELECTIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ARMIES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); RULE OF LAW (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(77%); ANNIVERSARIES (77%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); WOMEN
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (72%); FAMILY (70%); RIOTS (69%); FAMILY LAW (68%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (68%); MARRIAGE (68%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%); AL-QAEDA (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN (84%); HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); DENMARK (92%);
FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             658 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan's Chief Justice Assails Attorney General Over Taliban Flogging

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


The newly restored chief justice of Pakistan displayed his reputation as a human
rights advocate and a prod to the government on Monday, when he hauled the
attorney general and other officials before the Supreme Court and rebuked them
over the flogging of a 17-year-old woman in the Taliban-controlled area of Swat.

The chief justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, assailed the officials for
laziness and self-importance, and challenged them for not taking up the case
until it became a national scandal in recent days, when a video showing the
woman pinned to the ground and repeatedly whipped by a Taliban commander was
broadcast on Pakistani television.

''Before the video became public, what were you doing, why couldn't you find out
what had happened?'' Mr. Chaudhry asked the attorney general, Sardar Latif
Khosa.

By choosing to highlight the terror in Swat, Mr. Chaudhry, who has been back on
the bench about two  weeks after two years of enforced limbo, immediately
returned to his role of shaming an acquiescent government and military into
acting in the face of wrongdoing.

Last week, Mr. Chaudhry and his seven fellow judges demanded that the officials
bring the woman, known as Chand, before the court as part of an investigation
into what had happened.

When the officials failed to produce her Monday, the hearing turned into a
critical public airing of the government's decision to enter a peace deal in
February that effectively gave the Taliban control over Swat, just 100 miles
from the capital, Islamabad.

The attorney general, Mr. Khosa, aware that the situation was embarrassing for
the government, asked at the outset that the hearing be held behind closed
doors, a request Mr. Chaudhry batted away.

From the volley of exchanges between the judges and the officials, and an
impassioned account by a prominent lawyer before the court of the terror in
Swat, it became clear that the Taliban ran the area with impunity.

Chand was singled out for the punishment after she declined a Taliban fighter's
proposal for marriage, the head of the Peshawar Bar Association, Abdul Latif
Afridi, said after the hearing.

After her refusal to marry, an electrician visited the family home, and,
according to Mr. Afridi's account, the scorned Taliban suitor saw her leave the
house with the workman. She was flogged on March 7, accused of consorting with
the electrician as an unmarried woman, the lawyer said.

Since the video was first shown on Pakistani television stations last Thursday,
it has set off an emotional  national debate.

Some commentators and political leaders have defended the flogging  as being
within the bounds of Islamic law. The leader of the right-wing Islamist party
Jamaat Islaami said the flogging was unimportant compared to the missile strikes
against militants in the tribal areas by American drones.

Samar Minallah, a rights activist, distributed the video to news outlets after
receiving it from a contact in Swat, where it is available in markets. Ms.
Minallah said she wanted the nation to know what was going on in the area that
federal and provincial officials had  been too afraid to visit since the
February peace deal.

The atmosphere of fear and the absence of law was most vividly described to the
judges by Mr. Afridi, the Peshawar lawyer, who appeared separately from the
government officials.

A seven-month operation by the Pakistani Army against the Taliban from last July
until February had resulted ''in a total surrender'' and the killing of hundreds
of people by Pakistani soldiers, he said.

Now, he said: ''The most fundamental rights are violated every second of every
day. People are being ejected from their houses, courts are closed, 300 schools
have been demolished.''

More than 900 police officers had deserted the force of 1,600 in Swat, and now
the Taliban were on the verge of taking over the neighboring area of Dir, Mr.
Afridi said.

After listening to the grim assessment,  Mr.  Chaudhry asked the attorney
general what he was doing about Swat.

A ''high-powered committee'' had been appointed, the nation's senior lawyer
replied. ''We are trying to retrieve the writ of the government,'' he said.

Mr. Chaudhry complained that the police, instead of filing a formal complaint on
the flogging the same night the video had first been shown, had waited several
days. Had the woman appeared before any court, he asked.

''If she has, it's in front of a kangaroo court,'' replied Malik Naveed Khan,
the inspector general of police in the North-West Frontier Province.

Then  Mr. Chaudhry turned his attention to the senior official in the Interior
Ministry, Kemal Shah, who reached retirement age two years ago but was given an
indefinite extension by Pervez Musharraf, the president at the time, to serve as
secretary of the Interior Ministry.

Why had the secretary not been to Swat, the chief justice asked, a question that
was a clear challenge to the government's impotence in an area where even the
military fears to operate.

Faced with silence, the judge ordered: ''You go to Swat yourself. You must be
very bright. You go yourself. We command you do it and report to us what is
happening.''

After the hearing, a journalist from Swat, Ehsan Haqqani, who reports for The
Associated Press of Pakistan, said he was pleased that the Supreme Court had
brought attention to a situation most others had ignored.

''We were the forgotten people,'' said Mr. Haqqani, who has edited a collection
of essays, ''The Plea of Swat,'' published by Shoaib Sons Publishers in Mingora,
Swat. ''The government was only a silent spectator. Now the Supreme Court is
forcing the government to take notice. That is encouraging for us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Students in Lahore, Pakistan, protested against the flogging of
a 17-year-old woman in the Taliban-controlled area of Swat. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAHAT
DAR/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (78%);
BOMBINGS (77%); SCANDALS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (74%);
PEACE PROCESS (67%); MARRIAGE (66%); POLITICAL DEBATES (60%); RELIGION (50%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             667 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 15, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women, Extremism and Two Key States

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 558 words


There have been two recent reminders of the cost of extremism. In Afghanistan,
President Hamid Karzai signed a law that effectively sanctions marital rape. In
Pakistan, a video surfaced of the Taliban in the Swat Valley publicly flogging a
young woman screaming for mercy. Pakistan's government compounded the indignity
on Monday by giving in to Taliban demands and formally imposing Shariah law on
the region.

Such behavior would be intolerable anywhere. But the United States is heavily
invested in both countries, fighting Al Qaeda and the Taliban and financing
multibillion-dollar military and development programs. The cases represent an
officially sanctioned brutality that violates American values and international
human rights norms. They also sabotage chances of building stable healthy
societies in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

In Afghanistan, particularly venal politics are at work. Mr. Karzai, whose
popular support plummeted because of government ineptitude and corruption, is
running for re-election in August. The new law, which affects family matters for
the Shiite minority, seems a bald, particularly creepy, pander.

It says of Shiite women: Unless she is ill, ''a wife is obliged to fulfill the
sexual desires of her husband.'' That is licensed coercion.

If let stand, we fear such rules -- reminiscent of decrees issued when the
Taliban ruled Afghanistan in the 1990s -- could also have a negative impact on
laws affecting the majority Sunni population. Instead of defending the law as he
did, Mr. Karzai must ensure that it is rewritten to reflect principles of
freedom and dignity for women.

In Pakistan, the video of the woman's flogging proves the bankrupt nature of the
army's strategy. Failing to defeat the Taliban on the battlefield, the army
tried to appease them with a peace deal in February. It ceded the insurgents
control of Swat, 100 miles from Islamabad, and allowed free rein for their
repressive ways. The woman was beaten after declining a Taliban fighter's
marriage proposal, the head of the Peshawar Bar Association told reporters.

After resisting for weeks, President Asif Ali Zardari capitulated to political
pressure and signed a regulation formally imposing Islamic law on Swat as part
of the peace deal. We seriously doubt this will bring peace, and it will
certainly not make life better for Pakistani women. It is unlikely that Mr.
Zardari's wife -- the slain former prime minister, Benazir Bhutto -- would have
ever consented to such a craven sellout.

The one encouraging sign came last week, when Pakistan's recently reinstated
chief justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, publicly rebuked the attorney general
and other officials at a court hearing for inaction in the flogging case. We
hope this was not just grandstanding and that he and his supporters will find a
way to make as powerful a case for this victim's rights as they did for Mr.
Chaudhry's return to the Supreme Court.

Many Pakistanis have wasted their time decrying the video as a conspiracy
intended to defame Islam and Pakistan. They should be demanding that the army --
Pakistan's strongest and most functional institution -- defend against an
insurgency that increasingly threatens the state. Like their military and
political leaders, Pakistan's people are in a pernicious state of denial about
where the real danger lies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEX
OFFENSES (89%); WOMEN (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%); TERRORISM (78%); LEGISLATION (78%);
MARRIAGE (78%); POLITICS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); ARMIES (76%); RELIGION (76%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (70%); CORRUPTION (69%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
(69%); PEACE PROCESS (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (63%); SUPREME COURTS (60%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (89%); ASIF ALI ZARDARI (58%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (57%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (73%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             678 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Malicious Intent

BYLINE: By LOUISE RICHARDSON.

Louise Richardson, the principal and vice chancellor at the University of St.
Andrews in Scotland, is the author of ''What Terrorists Want.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1358 words


BLOOD AND RAGE

A Cultural History of Terrorism

By Michael Burleigh

Illustrated. 577 pp. Harper/HarperCollins Publishers. $29.99

Michael Burleigh's ambitious cultural history of terrorism is indeed suffused
with blood and rage. The blood is provided in graphic, detailed, often
nauseating descriptions of the vicious brutality of terrorists ranging from the
Irish Fenians to Al Qaeda. The rage, on the other hand, is in the pen of the
author, and it is equally wide ranging. Burleigh rages against terrorists and
all their apologists: ''unserious'' academics, ineffably polite interrogators,
colluding human rights lawyers and those scourges of the modern age, the
multiculturalists.

Behind the blood and the rage, this is a learned and erudite book. Burleigh's
broad survey provides detailed descriptions of many of the most important
terrorist movements and the sociopolitical contexts in which they have operated
since the mid-19th century. He seamlessly synthesizes vast amounts of historical
material and provides often riveting accounts of terrorist atrocities and the
literary and political environments where they took place. He treats Russian
nihilists, European anarchists, Fenians of both the 19th- and 20th-century
variety, Algerians, Palestinians, South Africans, the Italian Red Brigades, the
German Red Army Faction and the Basque ETA before coming to his real interest,
Islamic terrorism. A less ambitious author might have given his readers two
books, as there is little direct connection between the various parts other than
the unstated point that Islamic terrorism is just the most recent manifestation
of an old phenomenon. The implication is that, like its precursors, it too will
pass.

Burleigh is a respected historian widely known for his work on the Third Reich,
and with ''Blood and Rage'' he has written a deeply idiosyncratic book. He
provides no explanation for why he includes some terrorist organizations and not
others; important groups like the Colombian FARC, the Shining Path of Peru and
the Tamil Tigers of Sri Lanka receive little or no mention, nor do most other
Latin American or Asian groups. Burleigh's interest remains Europe.

Neither does he have any time for defining terrorism. He concludes his book by
forgoing any academic definition, substituting instead a heartbreaking account
of the suffering of a victim of the July 7, 2005, attacks on the London
underground -- though the description could equally apply to anyone facing an
unexpected death. Definitions are in fact useful in helping us decide what to
include. Burleigh gives long accounts, for example, of the sabotage and
guerrilla activities of the African National Congress and the assassination
campaigns of the 19th-century anarchists while suggesting that these are not
really acts of terrorism. He writes about them anyway.

Burleigh asserts the motive of terrorists to be the creation of a climate of
fear ''in order to compensate for the legitimate political power they do not
possess.'' He may be right (though I don't think so), but in any event he would
be more persuasive if he argued the point rather than asserting it. He insists
that terrorists are ''morally insane,'' whatever that means, and that they are
driven by perceived slights or abstract grievances into hysterical rage. One
does not have to be an apologist for terrorism to recognize that many of these
grievances -- occupation, political disenfranchisement, confinement in refugee
camps -- may be quite concrete and far from slight. One has only to read the
statements or listen to the audiotapes of terrorist leaders to detect more cold
calculation than what Burleigh terms obsessional killing rage.

It is a great shame that Burleigh could not bring himself to provide sources for
most of the remarkable material he presents. He derides academics for providing
footnotes to ''prove earnestness.'' In fact most academics provide footnotes
because they don't presume that theirs is the last word on a subject and want to
encourage their readers and their students to delve further. Not Burleigh.

At times his account is thoughtful and nuanced, as in his discussion of the role
of torture in the French campaign in Algeria, but on other occasions he
generalizes with breathtaking self-confidence. Speaking about a fifth of the
world's population, he asserts that ''Muslims liked to point out'' and ''Muslim
girls toe the line at home'' and ''most Muslims do not seem to grasp the fact
that.'' Sometimes he is quite funny, as when he compares Osama bin Laden to
''superannuated rock stars'' like Bono and Bob Geldof, though it is not always
clear that he means to be.

To appreciate the virtues of this book (it is, in its way, an exceptional
synthesis), one has to make a conscious and concerted effort to ignore the
condescending tone, the incessant sneering, the unsupported assertions and the
gross generalizations. Few escape Burleigh's ire. He describes Sartre as a
''loathsome academic'' at one point and an ''aged useful idiot'' at another.
Foucault is a ''silly Western intellectual.'' Chernyshevsky's utopian novel,
''What Is to Be Done?,'' is ''execrable,'' and liberal artists are idiots. He
complains of ''the sanctimonious ethos'' of The New York Times and describes
students at the London School of Economics as ''Eurotrash and Americans doing
'Let's See Europe.' '' There is certainly a lot of rage here, but quite what it
has to do with terrorism is often hard to tell.

Clearly, Burleigh's hyperbole is designed to stamp out any shred of residual
sympathy for terrorists. But at times, apparently, he's trying to be
gratuitously offensive, as when he describes as ''undiplomatic'' the suggestion
that all Jews be thrown into the sea, or says the undisciplined Black and Tans
introduced ''a certain indiscriminate vigor,'' or attributes the decline in the
Protestant population of the Republic of Ireland to something approaching
''ethnic cleansing.''

On other occasions he seems unaware of his prejudices. This is particularly the
case when it comes to his treatment of the crimes of women. The Russian nihilist
Vera Figner became alienated from her husband ''notwithstanding his having given
up his career for her,'' while the German Gudrun Ensslin ''used her fiance to
sire a son.'' Horrors! When he wants to ridicule Osama bin Laden, Burleigh cites
a description of his having weak hands and a simpering smile ''like a girl's.''

In several instances, Burleigh seems to lose his critical faculties altogether
in order simply to be offensive. Rather than arguing the quite reasonable point
that the discrimination against Catholics in Northern Ireland under the Stormont
government was not egregious and was better than the treatment of blacks in the
American South, he writes: ''Protestant friends of mine from Dungannon say that
they often dated Catholic girls, who tended to be more feminine than the butch
Unionists. Unlike the U.S. Deep South, they could do this without fear of being
lynched.'' He then goes on to miss the point about the Catholic civil rights
movement in Northern Ireland. For the first time Catholics were claiming rights
within Northern Ireland rather than demanding the overthrow of the state, and it
was the inflexible government's blindness to this opportunity -- and the
consequent emergence of violent republicanism -- that had such tragic
consequences for the province.

Having worked himself up into a red-hot rage in the course of his book over
Islamic terrorism and its apologists in the British liberal elite, Burleigh ends
with what is actually a reasoned analysis and with quite moderate prescriptions.
He calls for more financing for public diplomacy, development aid, strengthening
of democratic institutions and reliance on intelligence over armed force --
prescriptions that are not that much different from those of the liberal elite
he castigates. Had Burleigh written with less self-regard and with more regard
for his readers, and had he written with less simplistic snideness and more of
the sophisticated synthesis at which he excels, ''Blood and Rage'' could have
been a very good book.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Blood and Rage (Book); Blood and Rage (Book)

GRAPHIC: DRAWING: Anarchists bombed the Liceo Opera House in Barcelona in
1893.(ILLUSTRATION FROM ART MEDIA/HERITAGE IMAGES
 FROM ''BLOOD AND RAGE'')

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); HISTORY (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BOOK
REVIEWS (90%); WRITERS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
LITERATURE (78%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%); BASQUE
HOMELAND & FREEDOM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); POLITICS
(67%); RELIGION (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

COMPANY: HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); NAICS451211 BOOK STORES (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); SRI LANKA (79%); COLOMBIA (79%); EUROPE
(79%); SPAIN (75%); GERMANY (55%); LATIN AMERICA (53%)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             687 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 7, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Debate: The Missing Voices

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 552 words


Last month's release of memos prepared by the Bush Justice Department and the
disclosure of a report by the International Committee of the Red Cross on the
brutal treatment of detainees expanded public knowledge of an ignominious
chapter in the nation's history.

But these and other related disclosures do not provide a complete record of the
government's abuse of detainees. One missing element is the words of those
prisoners subjected to waterboarding and other brutality.

Those voices remain muffled by a combination of Bush-era resistance to a
reasonable Freedom of Information Act request by the American Civil Liberties
Union, and the gag order imposed on lawyers representing Guantanamo detainees.
Attorney General Eric Holder needs to promptly repudiate both.

For two years, the A.C.L.U. has been seeking complete transcripts of the
hearings at Guantanamo for 14 men who were previously in C.I.A. custody,
including Abu Zubaydah, who has been described as an operative of Al Qaeda and
was waterboarded at least 83 times. But the publicly released version of these
transcripts deleted all detainee statements about their ordeals.

The A.C.L.U. is appealing an ill-considered ruling by a federal trial judge in
the District of Columbia, who refused to review the sought-after material before
blindly upholding the bogus Bush administration claim that disclosure would
damage national security.

Rather than simply adopt the Bush stand, the Justice Department has obtained a
filing extension and is weighing what to do. Plainly, the right thing to do is
to release the transcripts with the redacted portions filled in. The Bush team's
national security claim always had the odor of a cover-up. The interrogation
program it was protecting has been discontinued, and crucial details are known.
It is unsupportable to blank out grim details.

The same considerations apply to the protective order that prohibits lawyers for
Guantanamo detainees from speaking publicly about their clients' treatment
unless they receive the government's permission or the information otherwise
becomes public. Disclosure of the torture memos and the Red Cross report gives
detainee lawyers more leeway, but they should not have to parse their words
under a threat of prosecution.

Destruction of the C.I.A.'s interrogation videos has eliminated crucial evidence
of the horrors heaped on key detainees. It is unclear exactly when the torture
began, and whether the procedures followed stayed within the limits set forth by
the Bush legal team. That makes it all the more important for the Obama
administration to let detainees' voices be heard.

While such accounts are suppressed, culpable ex-officials are busily trying to
rewrite history. Consider a recent chat at a college reception between a student
and Condoleezza Rice, who as White House national security adviser was deeply
involved in the development of the authorization of brutality and torture.

Among the many absurd things Ms. Rice did was to offer this argument that
waterboarding is legal: ''By definition, if it was authorized by the president,
it did not violate our obligations under the Convention Against Torture.''

That notion is just as ludicrous today as it was when Richard Nixon used it more
than 30 years ago to excuse his own brand of lawbreaking.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (78%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (78%); HISTORY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (70%); JUDGES (69%); RESTRAINING ORDERS (58%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (84%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (84%); AL-QAEDA (56%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (57%)

PERSON: ERIC HOLDER (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             690 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

As U.N. Reports 'Blood Bath' in Sri Lanka, Aid Agencies Place Blame on Both
Sides

BYLINE: By MARK McDONALD and THOMAS FULLER; Mark McDonald reported from Hong
Kong, and Thomas Fuller from Bangkok.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


As the United Nations said a ''bloodbath'' was taking place in Sri Lanka, a
leading group of aid agencies said Monday that both the government and the Tamil
rebels it is fighting had shown a ''wanton disregard for human life.''

''The U.N. has consistently warned against the bloodbath scenario as we've
watched the steady increase in civilian deaths over the last few months,''
Gordon Weiss, the United Nations spokesman in Sri Lanka, said Monday. ''The
large-scale killing of civilians over the weekend, including the deaths of more
than 100 children, shows that that bloodbath has become a reality.''

A government doctor said at least 378 civilians -- and perhaps as many as 1,000
-- had been killed and more than 1,100 wounded on Saturday and Sunday during
intensive shelling of the combat zone on Sri Lanka's northeastern coast, a boggy
sliver of beachfront where Sri Lankan troops have surrounded Tamil separatist
fighters.

''There were many who died without medical attention,'' the doctor, V.
Shanmugarajah, told The Associated Press. ''Seeing the number of wounded and
from what the people tell me, I estimate the death toll to be around 1,000.''

Concern for civilians trapped in the zone has grown in recent weeks. The area of
fighting, which at one time had been set aside by the government as a ''no-fire
zone,'' has shrunk to about 2.5 square miles. About 50,000 civilians, mostly
Tamils, are thought to be caught there, along with a holdout force of between
200 and 500 rebel fighters.

Some relief groups and the government have assailed the rebels, known as the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or L.T.T.E.,  for holding the civilians as
human shields. Many of the same agencies and some foreign governments have
accused the government of shelling the area -- along with the civilians inside
-- despite pledges to no longer use heavy weapons, artillery or airstrikes. The
government and the rebels have blamed each other for the deaths.

The statement from the group of aid agencies was sent by Amnesty International,
Human Rights Watch, the International Crisis Group and the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect.

Food, water and shelter are in short supply inside the battle zone, according to
accounts from some of those who have escaped the fighting there. An official
with a Catholic relief group said Monday that only one field hospital remained
in operation, with doctors and other medical staff members fearful of leaving
the bunkers where they live because of periodic shelling by the army.

On a pro-rebel Web site, the L.T.T.E. accused the Sri Lankan military of having
killed more than 3,200 civilians  Sunday and Monday using artillery, mortars and
heavy machine-gun attacks.

The government, in a statement by the Defense Ministry, said Monday that the
rebels were ''bombarding their own civilians.'' ''Hopefully, in their
calculation, this will attract the foreign countries to throw a lifeline to save
their souls. L.T.T.E. is desperate with the security forces closing on them.
Lives of the L.T.T.E. leadership are hanging on a thread. They know they are
running out of time.''

Independent verification of various charges by the government and the rebels has
been impossible because the military has banned journalists from the area around
the war zone and from refugee camps.

Dr. Shanmugarajah said Sunday's attacks resulted in the worst carnage he had
witnessed in the military's intensifying campaign to wipe out the rebels.

''We are doing the first aid and some surgeries as quickly as we can,'' Dr.
Shanmugarajah, who works from a field hospital in the combat zone, was quoted by
The A.P. as saying. ''We are doing what is possible. The situation is
overwhelming; nothing is within our control.''

Mr. Weiss, the United Nations spokesman, said Monday, ''To the best of our
knowledge, the government doctors trapped with these civilians have proven
consistently reliable.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tamil refugees Sunday on Sri Lanka's northeastern coast, where
many civilians remain trapped by intensive fighting.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); ARMIES (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); MILITARY
HOSPITALS (67%); ARMED FORCES (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             695 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Images, The Law And War

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


-- It was a hypothetical question in a Supreme Court argument, and it was posed
almost 40 years ago. But it managed to anticipate and in some ways to answer
President Obama's argument for withholding photographs showing the abuse of
prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan.

What if, Justice Potter Stewart asked a lawyer for The New York Times in the
Pentagon Papers case in 1971, a disclosure of sensitive information in wartime
''would result in the sentencing to death of 100 young men whose only offense
had been that they were 19 years old and had low draft numbers?'' The Times's
lawyer, Alexander M. Bickel, tried to duck the question, but the justice pressed
him:

''You would say that the Constitution requires that it be published and that
these men die?''

Mr. Bickel yielded, to the consternation of allies in the case. ''I'm afraid,''
he said, ''that my inclinations of humanity overcome the somewhat more abstract
devotion to the First Amendment.''

And there it was: an issue as old as democracy in wartime, and as fresh as the
latest dispute over pictures showing abuse of prisoners in the 21st century. How
much potential harm justifies suppressing facts, whether from My Lai or Iraq,
that might help the public judge the way a war is waged in its name?

The exchange also contained more than a hint of the court's eventual calculus:
The asserted harm can't be vague or speculative; it must be immediate and
concrete. It must be the sort of cost that gives a First Amendment lawyer pause.

As it happened, Mr. Bickel's response outraged the American Civil Liberties
Union and other allies of the newspaper in the Pentagon Papers case, which
concerned the Nixon administration's attempt to prevent publication of a secret
history of the Vietnam War. They disavowed Mr. Bickel's answer and said the
correct response was, ''painfully but simply,'' that free people are entitled to
evaluate evidence concerning the government's conduct for themselves.

Which is a good summary of the interest on the other side: Scrutiny of abuses by
the government enhances democracy because it promotes accountability and prompts
reform.

Justice William O. Douglas, in a 1972 dissent in a case about Congressional
immunity, described his view of the basic dynamic. ''As has been revealed by
such exposes as the Pentagon Papers, the My Lai massacres, the Gulf of Tonkin
'incident,' and the Bay of Pigs invasion,'' he wrote, ''the government usually
suppresses damaging news but highlights favorable news.''

Indeed, the Nixon administration successfully opposed the use of the Freedom of
Information Act to obtain the release  of documents and photographs concerning
the killings of hundreds of South Vietnamese civilians in 1968 at My Lai. (The
decision led Congress to broaden that law.)

Disclosure of abuses can also provoke a backlash. The indelible images that
emerged from the Vietnam War helped turn the nation against the war, and may
have steeled America's enemies. And earlier photographs of abuse at the Abu
Ghraib prison in Iraq were used for propaganda and recruitment by insurgents
there.

How, then, to apply the lessons of history and law to the possible disclosure of
additional images of prisoner mistreatment by Americans in the current wars?

On Wednesday, when Mr. Obama announced that the government was withdrawing from
an agreement to comply with court orders requiring release of the images, he
said there was little to learn from them and much to fear. But he offered
speculation on both sides of the balance.

''The publication of these photos would not add any additional benefit to our
understanding of what was carried out in the past by a small number of
individuals,'' he said. ''In fact, the most direct consequence of releasing
them, I believe, would be to further inflame anti-American opinion and to put
our troops in greater danger.''

The first assertion, which the Bush administration also made, is not universally
accepted. In a 2005 decision ordering the release of the images, Judge Alvin K.
Hellerstein of the Federal District Court in Manhattan said they may provide
insights into whether the abuses shown were indeed isolated and unauthorized.

And the claim that harm would follow disclosure -- that terrorists, for example,
would exact revenge -- is hard to measure or prove. ''The terrorists in Iraq and
Afghanistan do not need pretexts for their barbarism,'' Judge Hellerstein wrote.
In the Pentagon Papers case, too, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of
publication, saying, in essence, that speculation about potential harm was not
sufficient.

There are, of course, profound differences between the two cases. One concerned
the constitutionality of a prior restraint against publishing information
already in the hands of the press; the other is about whether civil rights
groups are entitled to obtain materials under the Freedom of Information Act.
But both involve contentions that serious harm would follow from publication.

Justice Stewart's answer, in his concurrence in the 6-to-3 decision, was that
assertions are not enough. ''I cannot say,'' he wrote, that disclosure  ''will
surely result in direct, immediate and irreparable damage to our nation or its
people.'' In other contexts, too, the Supreme Court has endorsed limits on
speech only when it would cause immediate and almost certain harm to
identifiable people. More general and diffuse consequences have not done the
trick.

In 1949, for instance, the court overturned the disorderly conduct conviction of
a Chicago priest whose anti-Semitic speech at a rally had provoked a hostile
crowd to riot. Free speech, Justice Douglas wrote, ''may indeed best serve its
high purpose when it induces a condition of unrest, creates dissatisfaction with
conditions as they are or even stirs people to anger.''

Fear of violence, however, was enough to persuade many people that publication
of cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad should be discouraged or forbidden.

Andrew C. McCarthy, a former federal prosecutor who has handled terrorism cases,
said the only prudent course in the current case is to withhold the images. ''If
you're in a war that's been authorized by Congress, it should be an imperative
to win the war,'' he said. ''If you have photos that could harm the war effort,
you should delay release of the photos.''

But Jameel Jaffer, a lawyer with the civil liberties union, said history favored
disclosure, citing the 2004 photographs from Abu Ghraib and the 1991 video of
police beating Rodney King in Los Angeles.

But the touchstone remains the Pentagon papers case. It not only framed the
issues, but also created a real-world experiment in consequences.

The government had argued, in general terms, that publication of the papers
would cost American soldiers their lives. The papers were published. What
happened?

David Rudenstine, the dean of the Cardozo Law School and author of ''The Day the
Presses Stopped,'' a history of the case, said he investigated the aftermath
with an open mind.

''I couldn't find any evidence whatsoever from any responsible government
official,'' he said, ''that there was any harm.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: MY LAI, 1968: Richard Nixon blocked the release of photos and
documents concerning a massacre by American soldiers in a Vietnamese village.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY RONALD S. HAEBERLE/TIME & LIFE PICTURES -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUPREME COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (87%); NEWS BRIEFS (84%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
LAWYERS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
VIETNAM WAR (77%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (76%); SENTENCING (73%); IMMUNITY
(73%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); RICHARD NIXON (77%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); VIET NAM (77%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             696 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebels Routed In Sri Lanka After 25 Years

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA and SETH MYDANS; Somini Sengupta reported from New
Delhi, and Seth Mydans from Bangkok.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The ethnic Tamil separatist rebels of Sri Lanka, one of the world's most feared
and enduring guerrilla movements, acknowledged Sunday that their war of more
than a quarter-century for a homeland had ''reached its bitter end.''

The announcement by their group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, coming as
the Sri Lankan military said it was conducting final mop-up operations on a tiny
sliver of coast that had been the rebels' last refuge, paves the way for the
conclusion of Asia's longest-running civil war.

It does not, however, eliminate the possibility of guerrilla strikes. The
L.T.T.E., as the rebels are often called, are known for suicide bombings. And
the statement by their spokesman, Selvarasa Pathmanathan, posted on the
pro-rebel Web site, TamilNet, pointed to the group's ''fearless and unending
commitment to this cause.''

''This battle has reached its bitter end,'' Mr. Pathmanathan said. ''We have
decided to silence our guns.'' The statement made no mention of surrender and
did not concede defeat, but the acknowledgment of finality suggested that the
rebels knew the war was over.

Assertions about fighting and casualties in the Sri Lanka war cannot be verified
because the government severely restricts access by independent journalists.
Several, including two  from The New York Times, have been prohibited from
entering the country, and one who flew late Sunday to Colombo, the capital,  was
ordered to leave on a return flight.

The Sri Lankan president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, declared victory over his foes even
before his military announced the end of fighting, saying the rebels had been
''finally defeated.''

Speaking in Jordan on Saturday, he said: ''I will be going back to a country
that has been totally freed from the barbaric acts of the L.T.T.E.'' He is
expected to make a formal announcement to  Parliament  on Tuesday.

The government said Sunday that all civilians had escaped from the war zone. The
Tamil Tigers said 3,000 had been killed in the preceding 24 hours, compelling
the rebels to halt fighting.

There is no doubt that Mr. Rajapaksa's government appears poised to achieve what
none of his predecessors managed in 25 years: to rout the Tamil Tigers, who
controlled nearly a fourth of the island, and destroy their ranks as a
conventional army.

As the war's climax approached, both sides had rebuffed repeated calls from the
United Nations and several foreign countries to spare civilians caught in the
war zone. The United Nations estimates that at least 7,000 have died since
January.

The government has been pressed to stop shelling known civilian sites, including
hospitals. The rebels have been accused of holding their own people hostage. No
amount of international pressure has worked, not even appeals from Sri Lanka's
powerful neighbor, India, where Tamil refugees have trickled in, via flimsy
fishing boats.

It was unclear whether the leaders of the rebellion, including its elusive
founder, Vellupillai Prabhakaran, were still trapped in rebel territory, had
fled or had bitten into the cyanide tablets they carry around their necks in
case of capture.

On Monday, according to The Associated Press, the military said that government
troops had found the bodies of four senior rebels, including of  Mr.
Prabhakaran's eldest son, Charles Anthony, who was said to be the head of the
rebels' air wing.  The other bodies, the military said,  were of the rebels'
political wing leader, the head of their peace secretariat and one of their  top
military leaders.

Even if the Tamil Tigers have been effectively neutralized, the government will
still face the challenge of engaging in serious negotiations on power-sharing
with the island's Tamil minority.

Since early this year, the remnants of the rebel force have been cornered in a
tiny enclave on the coastline, and human rights groups say both sides have
fought with a disregard for large-scale casualties among civilians trapped
there.

The rebels once ran their own police force and court system, collected taxes and
erected monuments to fallen fighters. A 2002 cease-fire held out promise of a
negotiated settlement, but the Tamil Tigers dragged out the talks, and almost
immediately after Mr. Rajapaksa's election three years ago, they began provoking
his government by ambushing the military.

Their suicide bombers unsuccessfully attacked the army chief, Lt. Gen. Sarath
Fonseka, and then Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the president's brother, an American
citizen who serves as the powerful secretary of defense. With generous financial
support from a Tamil diaspora, the rebels fielded a conventional army with
artillery units, a tiny air force and a sizable navy that, according to the Sri
Lanka military, even included homemade submarines.

The Tigers were weakened by several factors: a global war on terror that pinched
its ability to raise money overseas; a split in their ranks; and what, in
hindsight, seem to have been devastating strategic errors on Mr. Prabhakaran's
part, including helping to lift Mahinda Rajapaksa to an election victory.

Mr. Prabhakaran had urged Tamils to boycott the  elections  three years ago,
effectively vaulting Mr. Rajapaksa, who was backed by ethnic Sinhalese
nationalists and whose campaign pledge was to end the war, to power.

By that time, a large and important faction of the Tamil Tigers had seceded. It
promptly joined the government in pushing Mr. Prabhakaran's forces from the
island's east. All the while, the Rajapaksa administration managed to amass
better weapons, corral political support to quash the Tamil Tigers, crush
dissent, and dismiss any international criticism of human rights as pro-rebel
propaganda.

Last year, after repeated failures, the military broke through rebel lines and
began an offensive that drove the rebels from areas in the north that they had
controlled for decades.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In Colombo, Sri Lanka, on Sunday, a man celebrated the end of
the long civil war. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERANGA JAYAWARDENA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A1)
Mr. Rajapaksa at Colombo airport on Sunday. He said Saturday in Jordan that the
rebels were ''finally defeated.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)
 Sri Lankans rejoicing Sunday after President Mahinda Rajapaksa declared victory
in a quarter-century war against separatists. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERANGA
JAYAWARDENA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(89%); ARMIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TERRORISM (74%); DEATHS
(74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (58%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             699 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka Says Leader Of Rebels Has Died

BYLINE: By THE NEW YORK TIMES; Mark McDonald contributed reporting from Hong
Kong, and Alan Cowell from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


The Sri Lankan authorities declared a final victory in their 26-year war with
the Tamil Tiger rebels on Monday. In a state television broadcast, the
government said the leader of the insurgents was among 250 fighters killed in a
final bloody battle for the last sliver of rebel-held territory.

The government information service sent a text message to cellphones across the
country on Monday saying that Vellupillai Prabhakaran, the elusive rebel chief
who had come to define the Tamil Tigers, was dead, and state television broke
into regular programming to announce the news.

The news provoked celebrations among the Sinhalese majority across the land,
with people taking to the streets of the capital here, singing, dancing and
setting off firecrackers. People in cars and clusters of people on the streets
waving the national flag could be seen here early Tuesday morning, though the
heavy presence of soldiers at major checkpoints into the city center appeared to
have dampened the celebrations.

Hours later, though, a rebel spokesman overseas denied Mr. Prabhakaran's death,
according to news services. On the pro-rebel Web site TamilNet, the spokesman,
Selvarasa Pathmanathan, wrote: ''Our beloved leader is alive and safe. He will
continue to lead the quest for dignity and freedom for the Tamil people,''
Agence France-Presse reported. The Web posting  provided no support for the
statement.

The government's account appeared to signal the end of Asia's longest civil war,
and of one of the world's most enduring insurgencies. The rebels once controlled
a quarter of Sri Lanka's territory as they pressed their campaign for an
independent homeland for the country's Tamil minority.

Mr. Prabhakaran's death could  mean the end of the rebel movement. A  secretive
figure whose whereabouts were rarely known,  he built himself into the leader of
a powerful guerrilla force that was known for its strong internal discipline and
brutal tactics, including suicide bombing.

His personality held the Tamil Tigers together over the years, but his critics
likened him to a cult figure grasping for power, and he is not known to have
groomed a successor.

Acknowledging their impending defeat, and encircled by government forces, the
rebels  said Sunday that their struggle had ''reached its bitter end.'' On
Monday, the Sri Lankan military said it had crushed the rebels as its  troops
advanced into an ever-narrowing strip of land measuring no more than half a
square mile in the northeast of the country.

''We have successfully ended the war,'' the defense secretary, Gotabaya
Rajapaksa, told the president on Monday in a nationally televised ceremony.

Lt. Gen. Sarath Fonseka, Sri Lanka's army commander, said on state television
that the military was still trying to identify Mr. Prabhakaran's body among the
corpses on the battlefield. ''Prabhakaran's body is among the 300 terrorist
bodies that we captured,'' General Fonseka said.

Outsiders continued to register concerns about the way the battle had been
fought. Foreign ministers of the European Union, meeting in Brussels, said they
were appalled by reports of high civilian casualties. They urged an independent
inquiry into allegations of violations of international human rights law by both
sides.

The Sri Lankan president, Mahinda Rajapaksa, said he would address Parliament on
Tuesday in what was expected to be a formal declaration of victory.

In a day of fast-moving developments, the Sri Lankan military reported Monday
that it had killed seven senior leaders of the guerrilla group, known formally
as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, including the leader of the movement's
political wing, Balasingham Nadesan. It said soldiers also found a body they
believed  to be that of Charles Anthony, the older of Mr. Prabhakaran's two
sons.

It was not possible to verify whether the men had been killed in last-ditch
fighting or had taken their own lives using the cyanide capsules that some
rebels have worn in vials around their necks.

Sri Lankan state television also broadcast images of a corpse said to be
Charles Anthony's. A military spokesman, speaking in return for customary
anonymity, said ''the entire area'' once under rebel control had ''now been
liberated.''

In the final battle, Mr. Prabhakaran was surrounded early Monday with the last
of his fighters, The Associated Press said, citing military officials. In a
two-hour firefight, he and his senior lieutenants drove in an armor-plated van
accompanied by a bus filled with armed rebels toward approaching Sri Lankan
forces.

The battle ended when troops fired a rocket at the van, the  officials said.
Contrary to General Fonseka's account, the officials, who were not identified,
said troops had pulled Mr. Prabhakaran's body from the van and identified it.

Confirmation of government claims has been impossible because the military has
barred independent journalists, most aid agencies and human rights monitors from
the battle zone and refugee-settlement areas.

Daily dispatches from rebel sources inside the war zone and posted on TamilNet
dwindled Monday. A report in the early hours said that ''initial reports
indicate a determined massacre by the Sri Lanka Army.''

International concern has grown over tens of thousands of civilians who were
trapped along with rebel fighters in the ever-shrinking war zone. Ron Redmond, a
spokesman for the United Nations refugee agency in Geneva, said Monday that an
estimated 65,000 civilians fled the conflict zone in recent days, bringing the
total displaced by the fighting  in the past several months to 265,000.

The displaced are being housed in 42 government-run camps, which ''are already
buckling under the pressure,'' Mr. Redmond said.

The Sri Lankan authorities released a list of  senior rebels  they said had been
killed, including those in charge of intelligence and the police, along with
military and political officials. Their titles reflected earlier days when the
rebels ran a de facto government in the region they controlled.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (90%); ARMED FORCES (88%); DEATHS (87%); ARMIES
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TERRORISM (77%); TEXT
MESSAGING (76%); BOMBINGS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
COMMUNICATIONS (71%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (71%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(68%)

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (55%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (55%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             702 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Captain Hears Pleas for Afghan Detainee

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.; Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting from Kabul,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: GHAZNI, Afghanistan


Capt. Kirk Black, who trains the Afghan police in this impoverished province,
developed a practiced skepticism about claims of innocence during a decade as a
Baltimore police officer.

But last January, when relatives of an Afghan imprisoned at the Bagram military
detention center begged him to look into the case, he agreed to listen.
Eventually he became convinced that the detention was a case of mistaken
identity and put the family in touch with a lawyer.

Soon, Captain Black was facing a potential legal battle of his own. One of his
senior commanders ordered him not to discuss the case, and the military sent an
officer to investigate him. He retained military defense counsel.

The Bagram prison -- where about 600 people, mostly Afghans, are being held
indefinitely and without charges -- is a delicate issue for the Obama
administration at a time when it is struggling to come up with a plan for
detainees in the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which it intends to close.

The administration has argued that military detainees in Afghanistan may not
challenge their detentions in American courts. A federal judge ruled last month
that some Bagram detainees captured outside Afghanistan had the constitutional
right of habeas corpus, citing a Supreme Court ruling. But the new
administration has appealed.

Captain Black's involvement in the Bagram detainee's case began in January,
while the American officer was attending a meeting of village elders and
leaders. He was approached by relatives of an Afghan named Gul Khan, who they
said had been snatched by American troops in September and imprisoned at Bagram
Air Field, north of Kabul. The military apparently believed Mr. Khan was a
Taliban leader named Qari Idris. But local Afghan officials told Captain Black
it was a case of mistaken identity. Captain Black, believing that he was
fulfilling a policy of the American counterinsurgency by trying to hear out
locals with grievances, applied his police training to the evidence he heard.

''Upon speaking to multiple village elders, family members, the police chief and
the subgovernor, I am convinced that the individual in question is not the
person that the government claims,'' he wrote in January to Clive Stafford
Smith, a human rights lawyer he had met three years earlier during a posting to
Guantanamo. ''I am a police officer in the United States, and there is a mass of
evidence that this individual does not need to be held.''

Mr. Stafford Smith, who has agreed to represent Gul Khan pro bono through his
brother Kala Khan and is filing a writ of habeas corpus in federal court,
provided a copy of the correspondence.

It is impossible to be certain that Mr. Khan has no ties to the Taliban, who
have been known to threaten villagers to lobby for captured fighters' release.
In a case last year, such efforts led to the pardon of an insurgent leader from
northwest Afghanistan who immediately took up arms and killed a dozen members of
the Afghan forces; he was killed by an American airstrike in February.

But in Waghez, the Khan family's home district in Ghazni Province, officials and
elders have rallied to Mr. Khan's defense and say the Taliban have not pressed
anyone to help him. The district police chief, Mohammed Juma, says the Khans are
poor, nomadic shepherds. ''Qari Idris is a different person than Gul Khan,'' he
said. ''I have proven that Gul Khan is innocent.''

The subgovernor, Abdul Azim, said Qari Idris was probably in Pakistan, where
Taliban fighters have refuge. Mr. Khan ''is not working with the Taliban,'' Mr.
Azim said, adding that two dozen village elders had signed a petition seeking
his release.

Captain Black, 36, who grew up in the Detroit suburbs and attended college in
Michigan, joined the Baltimore police force in 1999. He eventually became a
member of its SWAT team.

In 2006 he was deployed to Guantanamo as an Army National Guard officer. ''When
I got there, I'll admit I basically believed everyone there was a terrorist and
we had every right to be holding them,'' he said. ''But as I learned more about
the system, I learned that quite a few of them were just swept up in the initial
invasion.'' He also said he and some fellow officers grew to fear that harmless
or innocent detainees were locked away alongside hard-core jihadists and were
vulnerable to conversion.

Late last year, Captain Black was sent to Ghazni Province. He and his fellow
officers said they soon ran into limits on how much they could accomplish. The
biggest frustration: provincial government and police officials so steeped in
corruption that they seemed to knock the Americans back every time they tried to
take a step forward.

Hearing out Mr. Khan's family, which had the support of police and other village
leaders, struck Captain Black as a way to build trust and show that the military
would look into complaints of wrongful incarceration.

Mr. Khan was detained in September, as he was riding a motorcycle near Ghazni
City, 80 miles southwest of Kabul. He was on his way to meet his brother and
help bring livestock to their village when he ran into Yar Mohammed, a friend
and relative, Mr. Mohammed recalled.

Suddenly, five helicopters swooped down. Men in one copter opened fire, Mr.
Mohammed said, and bullets struck the dirt a few feet away. Americans with
rifles and helmets leapt out, he said. A translator ordered the two Afghans to
take off their long, flowing shirts, hold their hands up and walk backward
toward the troops.

''They beat me very badly, covered my head with a bag and tied my hands,'' Mr.
Mohammed said.

Flown away, he said, he was eventually locked in a roughly six-feet-square cell
with a blanket, a mattress and a Koran, with the lights always on and a
ventilation fan rattling above.

Though his nose was broken during his capture, Mr. Mohammed said he later
received medical treatment and was not beaten or subjected to any ''bad
behavior'' during twice-daily interrogations.

''They asked, 'Have you seen Taliban?' and 'Are you cooperating with the
Taliban?' '' Mr. Mohammed said. He replied that neither he nor Mr. Khan was.
After three weeks, he said, he was taken to a military base in Sharana,
southeast of Ghazni, and released.

''Don't look back,'' he said his captors told him. He said he had not seen Mr.
Khan since the day the helicopters swooped down. American military officials in
Washington and Afghanistan either declined to comment or did not respond to
inquiries about Mr. Mohammed's detention.

Kala Khan said he was able to talk to his brother for 20 minutes in late
February, over an Internet video link provided for Bagram prisoners' relatives
by the Kabul office of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Gul Khan
said that interrogators kept showing him a picture of Qari Idris and demanding
that he admit it was a picture of him, his brother said.

''If you find somebody who says he is Qari Idris and that he was working for the
Taliban,'' Kala Khan said, ''then you can put all my relatives in jail and you
can hang all of us.''

In March, Captain Black said, he was ordered by a commander several rungs above
him to ''toe the party line'' and not discuss Mr. Khan's guilt or innocence. He
was also ordered not to allow two journalists who visited his base to accompany
him on routine trips to Waghez.

A few days later, as part of an official military investigation, a more senior
officer unexpectedly arrived at Captain Black's base to question him about
conversations with Mr. Khan's family and with this reporter. The investigating
officer also sought a sworn statement from this reporter, who declined.

A military spokesman in Kabul did not respond to questions about why the
decision was made to investigate the captain -- or whether he would be punished.
American military officials in Afghanistan and Washington also declined to
comment about evidence against Mr. Khan. One official would say only that all
Bagram prisoners were classified as ''an imminent danger to the lives of U.S.
service members.''

Citing his orders, Captain Black declined to comment about specifics of Mr.
Khan's case. But in an interview before those orders were issued, he said he was
mindful of the danger of incarcerating someone who might be innocent. ''Lock a
guy down for 22 hours a day,'' he said, ''and you are creating a criminal.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In civilian life, Capt. Kirk Black, shown in Qarabagh,
Afghanistan, is a Baltimore SWAT officer.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT NICKELSBERG/GETTY
IMAGES, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A1)
Relatives of Gul Khan, an Afghan detainee whose identity card is below, have
insisted that he has no connection to the Taliban. From left are Mr. Khan's
cousin Qahir
his brother Kala
Capt. Kirk Black of the Army
 and Gul Khan's uncle Kheyal.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT NICKELSBERG/GETTY IMAGES,
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); LAWYERS (89%); HABEAS CORPUS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); SUPREME COURTS (76%); PRO BONO LAW (76%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); LOBBYING (74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); JUDGES (71%); APPEALS (71%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); GHAZNI, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Rival Messages As Obama Lands In the Mideast

BYLINE: By JEFF ZELENY and HELENE COOPER; Jeff Zeleny reported from Riyadh, and
Helene Cooper from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


Aiming to repair the American relationship with the Muslim world, President
Obama was greeted on Wednesday with reminders of the vast gulfs his Cairo speech
must bridge, as voices as disparate as Al Qaeda's and the Israeli government's
competed to shape how Mr. Obama's message would be heard.

In a new audiotape, Osama bin Laden condemned Mr. Obama for planting what he
called new seeds of ''hatred and vengeance'' among Muslims, while in Jerusalem,
senior Israeli officials complained that Mr. Obama was rewriting old
understandings by taking a harder line against new Israeli settlements. [Pages
A6 and A14.]

The speech that Mr. Obama is to deliver  Thursday in Cairo is intended to make
good on a two-year-old promise to use a major Muslim capital as the scene for a
major address. Mr. Obama has pledged a new face and tone to relations between
the United States and the Muslim world. But whether his expected call for
America and Islam to come together can trump Mr. bin Laden's call to arms is a
question that could define Mr. Obama's presidency in the years to come.

Aware of the high expectations for the speech, Mr. Obama and his advisers have
spent months soliciting opinion and advice from a wide variety of experts, from
men of the cloth to Arab businessmen to Persian scholars. On his first stop in
the Middle East, Mr. Obama spent Wednesday afternoon with King Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia, home to Islam's two holiest sites, and declared on arrival, ''I thought
it was very important to come to the place where Islam began.''

In a bid to make sure that Mr. Obama's message will be heard, particularly among
young people, the White House has mounted an unusually aggressive campaign,
including a Web site created in Arabic, Persian, Urdu and English where people
outside the United States can sign up to receive the speech via text message.
The State Department is to translate the speech into at least 13 languages.

Mr. Obama's advisers nevertheless sought to lower expectations. ''There's been
an undeniable breach between the American and Islamic world,'' said David
Axelrod, a senior adviser to the president.

''That breach has been years in the making. It is not going to be reversed with
one speech. It's not going to be reversed, perhaps, in one administration.''

The speech will cover a wide swath of territory, advisers said, beginning by
challenging the misperceptions that Americans may hold about Muslims and that
Muslims may hold about Americans. Mr. Obama will touch upon violent extremism,
the threat of a nuclear Iran and the need for the expansion of human rights and
democracy.

But even on Wednesday night, as Mr. Obama headed to his quarters at Al
Janadriyah Farm, where he is a guest of the king, he told his advisers that he
had more thinking to do on the speech and that he would deliver a final version
by dawn.

As the son and grandson of Muslims, Mr. Obama has had years to reflect on
America's troubled ties with the Islamic world. But the path to the Cairo
address, as described by some advisers, also offers a case study in the
president's approach to a delicate issue, one in which he reached out to dozens
of people on how to shape his message.

Before his trip, he and his aides talked to American chief executives of major
companies who are Muslims. He read unsolicited essays that were sent to the
White House. And he sought out not only Muslims, but also Jews and people of
other faiths and experts across academia.

In recent weeks, as advisers presented him with drafts of the speech, Mr. Obama
would end sessions with a question. ''Are you making sure that we are hearing a
Muslim voice?'' he would say, according to participants.

Among the Muslim business leaders consulted during the preparations were: S. A.
Ibrahim of the Radian Group; Tariq Malhance, the president of UIB Capital;
Hultam Olayan of the Olayan America Corporation; and Noosheen Hashemi, a former
vice president at Oracle.

On the Friday afternoon before the Memorial Day weekend, White House officials
hosted a group of Muslim and other foreign policy scholars to discuss what
points Mr. Obama should touch on. The meeting was organized by Michael McFaul,
the White House senior adviser for Russia, who arranged it under his purview as
a senior democracy adviser. Other White House officials in the 90-minute meeting
included the National Security Council officials Mara Rudman, Dan Shapiro, Denis
McDonough and Ben Rhodes.

On the other side of the table were Karim Sadjadpour, an Iranian-American expert
from the Carnegie Endowment, Ghaith Al-Omari, a former Palestinian peace
negotiator, Vali Nasr, another Iran expert who is soon to join the Obama
administration, and Shibley Telhami, a senior fellow at the Saban Center for
Middle East Policy, who described for the assembled officials the results of
polling in the Middle East about attitudes toward the United States, according
to people in the meeting.

Even as Mr. Obama flew toward Saudi Arabia early Wednesday, he sat on Air Force
One, long after most of his advisers had fallen asleep, working with pen in hand
through page after page of the speech.

On the first of a five-day trip through four countries, Mr. Obama was treading
carefully, with every move being carefully watched in the Middle East. He
exchanged a light embrace and a double-kiss with King Abdullah, but the
president did not bow as he did at their first meeting in London this year in a
gesture that drew criticism.

''I also want to express my best wishes to the friendly American people who are
represented by a distinguished man who deserves to be in this position,'' King
Abdullah said, presenting the president with a large gold medallion known as the
King Abdul Aziz Collar.

''Shoukran,'' Mr. Obama replied, which in Arabic means ''thank you.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 11, 2009



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article last Thursday about the
expectations being set before President Obama's speech in Cairo, which was meant
to address American relations with the Muslim world, misstated the source of new
tensions between the Obama administration and Israel concerning Israeli
settlements. Senior Israeli officials have said that in their view Mr. Obama is
rewriting old understandings by taking a harder line against growth within
existing settlements, not against new settlements. (The rift was described
correctly in a related article the same day.)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Obama and his aides met with King Abdullah, seated
left of center, in Saudi Arabia on Wednesday. Next stop: Cairo.
(pg.A1)
 President Obama accepted a medallion known as the King Abdul Aziz Collar from
King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); RELIGION (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
TEXT MESSAGING (72%); WEB SITES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%); ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ (86%); OSAMA BIN LADEN
(72%); DAVID AXELROD (58%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (90%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); ISRAEL (94%); MIDDLE EAST
(93%); EGYPT (90%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             713 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Massachusetts: New Harvard Law Dean

BYLINE: By KATIE ZEZIMA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING NEW ENGLAND; Pg.
19

LENGTH: 97 words


Martha Minow, a human rights scholar, was named dean of Harvard Law School. A
faculty member at the law school since 1981, Professor Minow has written about
genocide, education and family law, among other topics, and was co-chairwoman of
a committee that overhauled Harvard Law School's first-year curriculum.
Harvard's president, Drew Gilpin Faust, said Professor Minow was a
well-respected teacher, mentor and colleague and ''scholar of remarkable
intelligence, imagination and scope.'' She starts July 1 and replaces Elena
Kagan, who was confirmed in March as solicitor general.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (92%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); LAW
SCHOOLS (90%); GENOCIDE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); CURRICULA (85%)

PERSON: DREW GILPIN FAUST (58%); ELENA KAGAN (58%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             714 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 14, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Allows Civil Lawsuit Over Claims Of Torture

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 629 words


The decision issued late Friday by a judge in San Francisco allowing a civil
lawsuit to go forward against a former Bush administration official, John C.
Yoo, might seem like little more than the removal of a procedural roadblock.

But lawyers for the man suing Mr. Yoo, Jose Padilla, say it provides substantive
interpretation of constitutional issues for all detainees and could have a broad
impact.

Mr. Padilla was held as an ''enemy combatant'' in solitary confinement for more
than three years in the Navy brig in Charleston, S.C. Mr. Padilla, who was
convicted of supporting terrorism and other crimes, demands that Mr. Yoo be held
accountable for actions that Mr. Padilla claims led to his being tortured.

During the time Mr. Padilla was held in the brig, according to his filings in
the case, he ''suffered gross physical and psychological abuse at the hands of
federal officials as part off a systematic program of abusive interrogation
intended to break down Mr. Padilla's humanity and his will to live.''

In the 42-page ruling, Judge Jeffrey S. White of Federal District Court in San
Francisco characterized the conflict as one that embodies the tension ''between
the requirements of war and the defense of the very freedoms that war seeks to
protect.''

Mr. Yoo, as part of a senior administrative group called the War Council, helped
to shape Bush administration policy in the war on terrorism, and as deputy
attorney general in the Office of Legal Counsel from 2001 to 2003, wrote many
memorandums authorizing harsh treatment. Mr. Yoo had argued that he should be
immune from the suit because it was not clearly established that the treatment
would be unconstitutional.

Judge White, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, rejected all but one
of Mr. Yoo's immunity claims and found that Mr. Padilla ''has alleged sufficient
facts to satisfy the requirement that Yoo set in motion a series of events that
resulted in the deprivation of Padilla's constitutional rights.''

Tahlia Townsend, one of Mr. Padilla's lawyers, called it ''a significant victory
for American values, government accountability and our system of checks and
balances.'' Mr. Padilla's legal team also included students from Yale Law
School's international human rights clinic.

Ms. Townsend said the decision ''announced that fundamental protections against
abuse apply to all individuals detained by the government'' and established what
federal officials should know about the limits of abuse. ''That holding goes a
long way to making sure that what happened to Mr. Padilla can never happen
again,'' she said.

Mr. Padilla and his mother, Estela Lebron, are seeking $1 in damages along with
a declaration by the court that his treatment was unconstitutional.

As a former government official, Mr. Yoo is being represented by the Justice
Department. Charles S. Miller, a department spokesman, said, ''We're reviewing
the decision.''

Mr. Yoo, now a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley, did not
respond to an e-mail message seeking comment, but in a column he wrote about the
suit last year in The Wall Street Journal, he said, ''The legal system should
not be used as a bludgeon against individuals targeted by political activists to
impose policy preferences they have failed to implement via the ballot box.''

Mr. Padilla, a Brooklyn-born convert to Islam, was arrested in June 2002 and
initially charged with taking part in a plot by Al Qaeda to detonate a
radioactive ''dirty bomb'' in the United States. After his time in the brig, the
government tried him in Miami, and in 2007, he and two co-defendants were found
guilty of conspiracy to murder, kidnap and maim people in a foreign country. Mr.
Padilla was sentenced to more than 17 years in prison.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); JUDGES (91%); LITIGATION (91%); CIVIL PROCEDURE
(90%); TORTURE (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); LAWYERS (89%); WAR ON TERROR
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); DAMAGES (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); TERRORISM (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL
(54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

CITY: CHARLESTON, SC, USA (72%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             717 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 17, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka: War-Abuses Panel Dissolved

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 119 words


A government commission investigating human rights abuses during the war with
the Tamil Tiger rebels has been disbanded with more than half of the cases
unresolved, an official said Tuesday. A presidential commission of inquiry was
established two years ago to investigate earlier claims of abuses in the war,
which ended last month. It was assigned 16 cases of abuses alleged by both
sides. Nissanka Kumara Udalagama, the commission chairman, said it had completed
work on seven of the cases by the time its mandate expired Sunday. The
government has also rejected demands for an international investigation into the
final battles of the war, in which the United Nations says more than 7,000
civilians were killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             721 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 19, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Sharp and Empathetic Eye Of a Westerner in the Middle East

BYLINE: By MOHAMAD BAZZI.

Mohamad Bazzi teaches journalism at New York University and is an adjunct senior
fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; BOOKS OF THE
TIMES; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 989 words


THE MEDIA RELATIONS DEPARTMENT OF HIZBOLLAH WISHES YOU A HAPPY BIRTHDAY

Unexpected Encounters in the Changing Middle East

By Neil MacFarquhar

385 pages. PublicAffairs. $26.95.

In the late 1990s, prodded by the United States, the Lebanese government vowed
to eliminate the persistent problem of hashish cultivation in the lawless Bekaa
Valley. The government bought 3,000 American dairy cows to help farmers survive
without relying on hashish.

But the farmers had no experience feeding and milking cows. And the cattle
needed imported, expensive feed that the farmers could not afford. When the cows
did not produce enough milk to keep the farmers afloat, they blamed the United
States. These complaints reached Iran, which stepped in with $50 million in farm
aid for Lebanon, including cheaper cows that were easier for the Shiite Muslim
farmers to feed and maintain. The United States had bungled a seemingly simple
case of foreign aid, and Iran reaped the benefits.

This ''cow vs. cow competition,'' as Neil MacFarquhar writes, demonstrates the
kind of unintended consequences that have accompanied decades of United States
policies in the Middle East. Mr. MacFarquhar's sly, vivid memoir, ''The Media
Relations Department of Hizbollah Wishes You a Happy Birthday,'' is full of such
anecdotes backed up by perceptive analysis. Whenever America tries to impose
change from outside, it leads either to disaster (Iraq) or preservation of the
status quo (Egypt, Saudi Arabia and much of the region).

Mr. MacFarquhar,  the United Nations bureau chief for The New York Times,  spent
more than 13 years as a correspondent in the Middle East, first for The
Associated Press and later for The Times. But his affection for the region is
rooted in his childhood: he grew up in a Libyan oil town, where his father
managed a refinery and a water desalinization plant. Mr. MacFarquhar writes
wistfully of family barbecues on a sandy Mediterranean coast in an enclave
inhabited by Westerners where he learned little about the world outside. The
stories of his childhood in Libya are quite compelling, but they do not permeate
the book as much as they should.

Unlike many correspondents Mr. MacFarquhar speaks Arabic and shows an
appreciation for the language, its poetry and political rhetoric. He uses
compelling characters effectively to illustrate larger themes and forces at play
in the region. He writes about a Kuwaiti advice columnist who is trying to break
down taboos over expressions of sexuality; a popular Lebanese television chef
pushing his fans to experiment with Western cooking; and a young, conservative
Egyptian cleric who cheerfully answers religious questions on his call-in radio
show.

Yet Mr. MacFarquhar writes most passionately about the activists and
intellectuals struggling to liberalize their societies and Islam as a whole.
These reformers  --  many of whom espouse an Islamic vision of democracy and
human rights  --  are caught between religious zealots and repressive regimes
that are often backed by the United States.

In June 2005 Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice told the world that the United
States would no longer tolerate oppressive rulers in the name of keeping
political stability. ''For 60 years my country, the United States, pursued
stability at the expense of democracy in this region here in the Middle East,
and we achieved neither,'' she said at the American University in Cairo. ''Now
we are taking a different course. We are supporting the democratic aspirations
of all people.''

For a brief period Ms. Rice's message resonated in the Arab world. It was  five
months after Iraqis had shown extraordinary bravery by turning out in droves to
vote in the parliamentary elections of January 2005. In Lebanon a popular revolt
had succeeded in dislodging years of Syrian domination. At that moment the
United States could have encouraged some genuine change in a region ruled by
kings and despots.

But things fell apart when Washington confronted its first test: in late 2005, a
small group of Egyptian judges challenged the undemocratic regime of President
Hosni Mubarak. The United States stood by silently while Mr. Mubarak crushed
public protests, and the Arab world understood, correctly, that Washington had
given up on democracy or had never meant it in the first place.

Mr. MacFarquhar chronicles the dashed hopes of reformers at that point and the
cumulative effect of decades of broken promises and halfhearted rhetoric from
the United States. ''So 2005 was perhaps a high point of American support for
reform and change, and it has been downhill ever since,'' he writes.

Throughout the book Mr. MacFarquhar displays an impressive grasp of history,
particularly in his chapters on fatwas (religious rulings) and the concept of
jihad. He describes how the competing schools of law and the lack of a central
religious authority in Islam create ''fatwa chaos'':  any cleric of dubious
stature can issue a religious ruling, and Muslims find it easy to shop around
for a fatwa that fits their needs.

Mr. MacFarquhar presents a nuanced discussion of ''jihad,'' the Arabic word that
means ''to struggle,''  and also denotes ''holy war'' -- but not always,  as
some Westerners incorrectly assume. ''But those who argue that the word contains
no implication of violence,'' he adds, ''are glossing over the fact that for
some zealots, jihad means only one thing: an armed fight against the enemies of
Islam.''  That goes to the heart of a debate between moderate and militant
Muslims over the interpretation of Islam's two primary sources: the Koran and
the Sunnah, the sayings and actions of the prophet Muhammad.

Few in the West pay attention to these arguments within Islam  --  or to the
daily tribulations of homegrown reformers  --  and that is the ultimate strength
of this book. Mr. MacFarquhar has provided a sobering and heartbreaking record
of these quiet struggles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: The Media Relations Department of Hizbollah Wishes You a Happy Birthday
(Book); The Media Relations Department of Hizbollah Wishes You a Happy Birthday
(Book)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAQUI ASSAD)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (90%); DAIRY FARMING (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION
(89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); CANNABIS (77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); ADVICE COLUMNS
(73%); WRITERS (72%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (72%); AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES (71%);
COASTAL AREAS (70%); POETRY (67%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(60%)

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (53%); AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC
(51%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (84%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (51%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (53%); NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (51%); SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (51%)

STATE: MEDITERRANEAN SEA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); MIDDLE EAST (95%); LEBANON (94%); LIBYA (92%);
EGYPT (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); IRAQ (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
MEDITERRANEAN (79%); KUWAIT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             724 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 21, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Legal Strategy Fails to Hide Pride a Khmer Torturer Took in His Job

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


He is deceptively unassuming, a small man in a neat white shirt, sometimes
wearing reading glasses as he studies the stack of legal documents he brings
with him every day from his cell to the courtroom.

He gives the judges a humble greeting, both palms pressed together, an
obsequiousness that has begun to be annoying to some who once suffered at his
hands and now sit across the courtroom from him.

But in nearly three months of trial proceedings, a harder man has emerged --
alert, vigorous, with a self-confidence that has begun to shade into
condescension as he corrects a lawyer or a witness about details of his life as
the chief torturer of the Khmer Rouge.

This is Kaing Guek Eav, 66, known as Duch (pronounced DOIK), the first person to
go on trial in the deaths of 1.7 million people from 1975 to 1979 when the Khmer
Rouge ruled Cambodia.

Slow progress and other problems surrounding the United Nations-backed tribunal
have opened the possibility that Duch may be the only person ever to be tried in
one of the worst episodes of mass killing in the past century. If convicted, he
would face a possible life sentence for crimes against humanity and war crimes
as well as homicide and torture.

He is a man who chose his revolutionary name, Duch, to emulate an obedient
schoolboy in a children's book, and he reached the peak of his career overseeing
a prison staff that tortured more than 14,000 people and sent almost all of them
to their deaths.

''I wanted to be a well-disciplined boy,'' Duch told the court, ''who respected
the teachers and did good deeds.''

Four higher-ranking leaders await their turns in prison cells, but they are ill
and growing older. Both money and political will are in question for a long
process that has become shadowed by allegations of corruption and of political
interference by the Cambodian government. In the courtroom, Duch has clearly
taken pride in the efficiency with which he ran the prison, called Tuol Sleng,
or S-21, and he seems to relish his role as the public face of the Khmer Rouge,
whose leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998.

Talking to journalists before his arrest 10 years ago, Duch said he had decided
to confess in order to prove that Tuol Sleng really did exist, rebutting a claim
by Pol Pot that it had been only a propaganda fiction created by enemies of the
Khmer Rouge.

''I could not bear what Pol Pot said so I had to show my face,'' he said in
court. ''For S-21, I was the chairman of that office. The crimes committed at
S-21 were under my responsibility!''

Under the guidance of an experienced and nimble French lawyer, Francois Roux,
Duch has constructed a complicated bait-and-switch defense since the trial
opened in March.

It began on his first day on the stand, when, reading a statement in what seemed
a rote manner, he took responsibility for the torture and killings, saying, ''I
would like to express my regret and heartfelt sorrow.''

But the culpability he admits to has become more and more nuanced as he
distances himself from the worst brutality of the regime and places himself
within a chain of command where disobedience often meant death.

''The horrendous images of the babies being smashed against the trees, I didn't
recognize it at first,'' he testified recently. ''But after seeing the
photographs I recalled that it had happened. It was done by my subordinates. I
do not blame them because this was under my responsibility.''

Court analysts say Duch and his legal team will not be able to avoid a
conviction and are working to soften his image to produce something less than
the maximum penalty of life in prison.

''He is winning the case, even though he'll be convicted,'' said Youk Chhang,
director of the Documentation Center of Cambodia, which has compiled much of the
evidence against him.

''He has managed not to let his brutality show,'' Mr. Youk Chhang said. ''I feel
so frustrated. It's all collective responsibility. 'Forgive me. I'm sorry.' It's
well prepared and the public buys it.''

A former high school math teacher, Duch seems to have approached the trial with
a well-prepared lesson plan and with little patience for those who disagree with
him or fail to grasp his version of the material.

At one point a judge reminded him that laughter was not an appropriate response
to a question.

He seems to find satisfaction in evading questions with long, pedantic answers,
correcting witnesses and sometimes taunting those who seek to pin him down.

''Please do not interrupt me,'' he said to one lawyer as he embarked on a new
digression. ''Since you are asking a question which has already been asked, I am
not required to answer.''

At a pretrial conference with investigators, Duch seemed almost cocky, according
to a former prison guard named Him Huy, who is expected to testify against him.
As he left the room, Mr. Him Huy said, Duch looked back and raised one fist, as
if to say, ''I'm O.K. I will prevail.''

This is the complicated, defiant man who is revealing himself in the courtroom
-- the only one of the defendants to acknowledge guilt, and yet seemingly all
the prouder of it.

''It raises questions for all of us about how human beings become a part of a
project of mass murder,'' said Alex Hinton, director of the Center for the Study
of Genocide and Human Rights at Rutgers University.

According to a psychological profile that formed part of the indictment, the
defendant is ''meticulous, conscientious, control-oriented, attentive to detail
and seeks recognition from his superiors.''

Like the good schoolboy who is his namesake, Duch said, ''In my entire life, if
I do something, I'll do it properly.''

He taught himself how to torture, he said, picking up some beating techniques
from Cambodian and French police manuals and improvising the rest through trial
and error. He said he frequently had to instruct the young farm boys he
recruited as torturers not to get carried away and kill the prisoner.

Once the confession was extracted, death was all but inevitable.

''Whoever was sent to S-21 was considered to be already dead,'' Duch said.

But then, to the surprise of the courtroom, Duch said he did not believe most of
the confessions his torturers worked so hard to obtain. Some ran to as many as
200 pages, which Duch meticulously annotated like a schoolteacher and sent to
his superiors.

''I never believed that the confessions I received told the truth,'' he said.
''At most, they were about 40 percent true.''

As for the long lists of supposed accomplices the prisoners were forced to name,
Duch said he believed that only 20 percent were genuine.

These lists -- whether he believed them or not -- fed the prison's killing
machine with more arrests, followed by the extraction of more names, followed by
more arrests, in a widening purge that spread to top members of the party.

''The work expanded, people were arrested illegally, right or wrong,'' Duch
said. ''I considered it evil eating evil eating evil.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A photographer captured an image of a television screen showing
Kaing Guek Eva, known as Duch, who is on trial in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Duch ran
a prison called Tuol Sleng, or S-21. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TANG CHHIN SOTHY/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); PRISONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); SENTENCING (77%); TESTIMONY
(77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (74%); HOMICIDE (73%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
ARRESTS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); CORRUPTION (66%); CORRECTIONS
WORKERS (64%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE (64%); WRITERS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             727 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spain: Vote On Changes To Inquiry Law

BYLINE: By VICTORIA BURNETT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 134 words


Spanish lawmakers voted Thursday to reduce the scope of a law that allows judges
to investigate crimes against humanity anywhere in the world. The amendment,
approved by the lower house of Parliament, would restrict jurisdiction to crimes
that take place in Spain or affect Spanish citizens. It now goes to the Senate.
Spain's principle of universal jurisdiction has been used to prosecute human
rights violators like Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator.
Baltasar Garzon, above, Spain's most prominent investigating judge, invoked the
principle in May when he sought to open an inquiry into six former White House
officials who he said gave legal cover for torture at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. That
and other cases created tensions with foreign governments and prompted calls to
amend the law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); APPROVALS
(88%); TORTURE (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (84%); JUDGES (73%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (95%); CHILE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             728 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 26, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwe: State Abducted Activist

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 68 words


A prosecutor admitted during a Supreme Court hearing on Thursday that state
security agents illegally abducted and detained Jestina Mukoko, a human rights
advocate, in December. Ms. Mukoko, who led a civic group that documented the
murder and torture of opposition activists, is seeking to halt the state's
attempt to prosecute her on charges of aiding an effort to topple President
Robert Mugabe from power.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); SUPREME COURTS (86%);
TORTURE (85%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Marines Land in Caldron of Afghan Resentment

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: LASHKAR GAH, Afghanistan


The mood of the Afghan people has tipped into a popular revolt in some parts of
southern Afghanistan, presenting incoming American forces with an even harder
job than expected in reversing military losses to the Taliban and winning over
the population.

Villagers in some districts have taken up arms against foreign troops to protect
their homes or in anger after losing relatives in airstrikes, several community
representatives interviewed said. Others have been moved to join the insurgents
out of poverty or simply because the Taliban's influence is so pervasive here.

On Thursday morning, 4,000 American Marines began a major offensive to try to
take back the region from the strongest Taliban insurgency in the country. The
Marines are part of a larger deployment of additional troops being ordered by
the new American commander in Afghanistan, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, to
concentrate not just on killing Taliban fighters but on protecting the
population.

Yet Taliban control of the countryside is so extensive in provinces like
Kandahar and Helmand that winning districts back will involve tough fighting and
may ignite further tensions, residents and local officials warn. The government
has no presence in 5 of Helmand's 13 districts, and in several others, like
Nawa, it holds only the district town, where troops and officials live virtually
under siege.

The Taliban's influence is so strong in rural areas that much of the local
population has accepted their rule and is watching the United States troop
buildup with trepidation. Villagers interviewed in late June said that they
preferred to be left alone under Taliban rule and complained about artillery
fire and airstrikes by foreign forces.

''We Muslims don't like them -- they are the source of danger,'' said a local
villager, Hajji Taj Muhammad, of the foreign forces. His house in Marja, a town
west of this provincial capital that has been a major opium trading post and
Taliban base, was bombed two months ago, he said.

The southern provinces have suffered the worst civilian casualties since NATO's
deployment to the region in 2006. Thousands of people have already been
displaced by fighting and taken refuge in the towns.

''Now there are more people siding with the Taliban than with the government,''
said Abdul  Qadir Noorzai, head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission in southern Afghanistan.

In many places, people have never seen or felt the presence of the Afghan
government, or foreign forces, except through violence, but the Taliban are a
known quantity, community leaders said.

''People are hostages of the Taliban, but they look at the coalition also as the
enemy, because they have not seen anything good from them in seven or eight
years,'' said Hajji Abdul Ahad Helmandwal, a district council leader from Nadali
in Helmand Province.

Foreign troops continue to make mistakes that enrage whole sections of this
deeply tribal society, like the killing of a tribal elder's son and his wife as
they were driving to their home in Helmand two months ago. Only their baby
daughter survived. The tribal elder, Reis-e-Baghran, a former member of the
Taliban who reconciled with the government, is one of the most influential
figures in Helmand.

The infusion of more American troops into southern Afghanistan is aimed at
ending a stalemate between NATO and Taliban forces. The governor of Helmand,
Gulab Mangal, said extra forces were needed since the Taliban were now so
entrenched in the region that they had permanent bases.

Last year an American Marine Expeditionary Unit of 2,400 men secured a small but
critical area in the district of Garmser in southern Helmand, choking off
Taliban supply routes from the Pakistani border while reopening the town for
commerce. The operation had a crippling effect on Taliban forces operating
farther north in neighboring Oruzgan Province, according to Jelani Popal, who
oversees local affairs for President Hamid Karzai's government.

This year military officials hope to replicate that operation in more places,
according to Lt. Gen. James Dutton, the British deputy commander of NATO forces
in Afghanistan.

The extra forces will be critical to create confidence among the locals and
persuade insurgents to give up the fight, said Mr. Mangal, the Helmand governor.
Yet he and others warn that there will be more bloodshed and that the large
influx of foreign forces could prompt a backlash.

In parts of Helmand and Kandahar, resentment and frustration are rampant. People
who traveled to Lashkar Gah from the districts complained of continued civilian
suffering and questioned American intentions. ''They come here just to fight,
not to bring peace,'' said Allah Nazad, a farmer.

People from Marja said that foreign troops carrying out counternarcotics
operations conducted nighttime raids on houses, sometimes killed people inside
their homes, and used dogs that bit the occupants.

''The people are very scared of the night raids,'' said Spin Gul, a local
farmer. ''When they have night raids, the people join the Taliban and fight.''

''Who are the Taliban? They are local people,'' interjected another man, who did
not give his name. One man, Hamza, said he would fight if foreigners raided his
house. ''I will not allow them,'' he said. ''I will fight them to the last drop
of blood.''

Many do not side with the Taliban out of choice, however, and could be won over,
community leaders said.

Fazel Muhammad, a member of the district council of Panjwai, an area west of
Kandahar, said he knew people who were laying mines for the Taliban in order to
feed their families. He estimated that 80 percent of insurgents were local
people driven to fight out of poverty and despair. Offered another way out, only
2 percent would support the Taliban, he said.

Yet mistrust of the government remains so strong that even if the Taliban were
defeated militarily, the government and the American-led coalition would find
the population reluctant to cooperate, said Hajji Abdullah Jan, the leader of
the provincial council of Helmand. ''These people will still not trust the
government,'' he said. ''Even if security is 100 percent, it will take time
because the government did not keep its promises in the past.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Marine took up a combat position on Thursday in southern
Afghanistan during Operation Khanjar, an American-led offensive.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES)(pg. A1)
 A village elder greeted American troops on Thursday in Helmand Province, where
the Taliban's influence is pervasive.(PHOTOGRAPH BY BARIS ATAYMAN/REUTERS)(pg.
A8)  MAP (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); ARMED FORCES (91%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (74%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); DISPLACED PERSONS (69%); HOSTAGE TAKING (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (60%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (56%); RELIGION (50%)

PERSON: STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (58%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%); LASHKAR GAH, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             737 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudi Arabia: Sentences For Attacks

BYLINE: By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 94 words


The Justice Ministry said Wednesday that Saudi security courts sentenced one
person to death and others to prison in cases related to a string of attacks
starting in 2003 for which the government has blamed militants linked to Al
Qaeda. The charges had included conspiring with Al Qaeda, plotting to disrupt
national security and financing terrorism, the ministry said in a statement
carried by SPA, a state news agency. Human rights activists have said suspects
were denied  legal help. But the Justice Ministry  said they had the right to
lawyers, according to SPA.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); CONSPIRACY
(87%); AL-QAEDA (87%); LAWYERS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (83%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             738 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Bias Against Israel

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 235 words


To the Editor:

Amnesty International's report on the conflict in Gaza is fundamentally biased
against Israel (''Report Accuses Israel and Hamas of War Crimes in Gaza,'' news
article, July 3). Nothing illustrates this more starkly than when the report
deals with the issue of Gaza civilians caught up in the conflict.

When assessing Israeli efforts to warn civilians of an impending attack, whether
by telephone or by leaflet, the report says that all such warnings did was
create panic because the civilians had nowhere to flee.

On the other hand, when the report looked at Hamas's placing military
infrastructure in the heart of civilian areas, it minimized the effect by
arguing that Hamas did not force people to stay in their homes so civilians
could flee attacks.

In other words, Amnesty adjusted its version of the facts to suit its a priori
assumptions that Israel was the main party responsible for civilian deaths.

In fact, in a complicated situation, Israel did all it could to avoid civilian
casualties. The main violator of human rights was Hamas; its eight-year
rocketing of Israeli civilians and its deliberate placing of its military in
civilian buildings, homes, schools, hospitals and mosques were major violations
of international law. One would barely know this from the Amnesty
''investigation.''

Kenneth Jacobson Deputy National Director Anti-Defamation League New York, July
5, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HAMAS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); RELIGION (51%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE
(54%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             740 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Trial To Hear From Ex-Liberia President

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


For months, Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, has watched in
silence as witnesses have passed through the courtroom, telling stories of
mind-boggling violence, even cannibalism. His face remained blank,  eyes hidden
behind tinted glasses, as women spoke of rape and villagers told how their hands
or their arms were severed with axes.

Only when longtime allies appeared has Mr. Taylor seemed agitated, passing
messages to his defense team, demanding to challenge the accounts.

This week, Mr. Taylor, the first African leader to be tried for war crimes, will
break his silence as he takes the stand to defend himself. His lawyers say that
his testimony may go on for weeks, given the wide range of the charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

The prosecution, which has rested its case, has charged that he armed and
commanded rebel groups to bolster his influence in West Africa and to seize a
large swath of neighboring Sierra Leone, in particular its diamond-mining areas.

His indictment holds him accountable for the rebels' barbaric methods, as they
pillaged, killed, raped, used drug-crazed children as soldiers and hacked off
limbs, ears or noses to subdue civilians.

Up to 200,000 people died in the decade of fighting, and Mr. Taylor's war
strategies are said to have affected many more in Liberia, his home country, but
only crimes in Sierra Leone between 1996 and 2002 are within the mandate of the
court.

For Mr. Taylor's trial, the international judges of the United Nations-backed
Special Court for Sierra Leone are sitting in The Hague to avoid potential
unrest in Freetown, Sierra Leone's capital, where the court is based. The
prosecution has brought 91 witnesses, many making a 7,000-mile round trip to The
Netherlands.

''We didn't have documents and orders signed by Taylor, so we needed much
circumstantial evidence,'' said Stephen J. Rapp, the court's chief prosecutor.
''But key players  close to Taylor have testified and painted the complex
picture. Taylor was in another country, it was not his army, he was not at the
scene of the crimes and you cannot apply the doctrine of command
responsibility.''

Mr. Rapp said that about a dozen ''insiders'' -- witnesses once close to Mr.
Taylor, whose testimony had been crucial -- had been moved to other countries
and given new identities. Several key witnesses had declined to testify because
they had been threatened, he said.

The horrors of the Sierra Leone war have frequently perturbed the solemn setting
of The Hague courtroom, with its officers in black robes with neatly starched
bevvies and its crimson-robed judges high on the dais. At times, witnesses on
the stand gesticulated with amputated limbs, swaddled in bandages. Or take the
small but awkward incident on the day when Mustapha Mansary, a villager, came to
testify. Rebel gangs had hacked off both of his hands.

The defense lawyer began: ''Mr. Witness, can I ask you, can you read and write
English?'' Mr. Mansary listened to the translation, and then he held up his two
stumps. ''I have no hands to write anything,'' he said.

''I appreciate that; my apologies,'' the lawyer said.

At other times, witnesses described scenes of incomprehensible cruelty.

A rape victim who testified under the name 064 described the day a gang of
rebels mutilated and killed many adults and children in the village of Foendor,
among them members of her family, including her two children. After all the
children and many adults had been decapitated, Tamba Joe, the gang leader,
ordered her to look for her people. Their severed heads were put in a sack.

''They gave me the heads to carry,'' the woman said. ''But at first I
couldn't.''

A man was told to help her carry the sack, dripping with blood. When they got to
Tombudu, the next village, the rebels ordered all the heads thrown into a pond.
The heads of her two children were among them, she said.

No one knows exactly how many people were killed or maimed in the civil war of
the 1990s. Human rights groups have said that close to 4,000 amputees have not
survived. Up to 3,500 amputees are believed to be still alive.  Numerous former
child soldiers are still in rehabilitation homes.

During the trial, the magnitude of the atrocities has not been in dispute. But
the prosecution and the defense have described the case as legally complicated.
The lead defense lawyer, Courtenay Griffiths, said that the prosecution must
prove Mr. Taylor's effective control over the rebel groups and that
demonstrating influence or assistance was insufficient. ''The case is all about
linking the crimes to Mr. Taylor, but the evidence has been riddled with
inconsistencies,'' Mr. Griffiths said. Mr. Rapp, the chief prosecutor, insists
that Mr. Taylor's criminal responsibility has been more than demonstrated with
the insider witnesses. These included radio operators, describing orders given
from the secret communications center in Mr. Taylor's mansion, and members of
the president's security force,  who said they witnessed the movement of arms
and ammunition to the rebels and attended high-level strategy sessions.

One of the most dramatic accounts came from Joseph ''Zigzag'' Marzah, a longtime
associate of Mr. Taylor's. He described himself as Mr. Taylor's onetime chief of
operations and head of a death squad, now an affluent businessman. He said that
African peacekeepers were killed and eaten by Mr. Taylor's militiamen and that
weapons were easily smuggled. Four other witnesses also referred to the
ritualistic eating of enemy flesh by Liberian combatants.

Mr. Marzah spoke of the ease with which weapons were moved from Liberia to
Sierra Leone during the Taylor government, despite an arms embargo. He said that
Nigerian peacekeepers at the Monrovia airport were bribed and the weapons were
transported in the peacekeepers' vehicles.

He became angry as the defense lawyer repeatedly insisted that he had no close
contact with Mr. Taylor.  Stung, Mr. Marzah blurted out that he and Mr. Taylor
belonged to the same secret  society and had together eaten human hearts. With
that he nervously crossed himself.

When the lawyer asked if he crossed himself because he had just lied under oath,
Mr. Marzah said he had just broken the secrecy laws of his  society.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Charles Taylor, the former Liberian president, is on trial for
war crimes in The Hague. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GEORGE OSODI/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WITNESSES (90%);
TESTIMONY (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ARMIES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); INDICTMENTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); CHILD SOLDIERS (70%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); ARMED FORCES (66%); MINES & MINING (53%); DIAMOND
MINING (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (57%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (95%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); NETHERLANDS (91%); AFRICA (79%);
WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             741 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 13, 2009 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Amnesty's Mideast Report

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 201 words


To the Editor:

Re ''A Bias Against Israel'' (letter, July 9):

In assessing the human rights violations during the Israel-Hamas conflict this
past winter, Amnesty International quickly dispatched a team of researchers to
both southern Israel and Gaza. Amnesty International does not measure violations
against each other, and the organization condemned the attacks in southern
Israel and in Gaza with the same vigor.

In his letter Kenneth Jacobson of the Anti-Defamation League alleges that
Amnesty International's report was biased. But that same report examines the
alleged use of human shields by both Hamas and Israel, the attacks on densely
populated areas (again by Israel and Hamas), and also the extent to which all
parties tried (and failed) to warn civilians about impending attacks.

The reality remains, however, that the bulk of the casualties and infrastructure
damage was committed in Gaza by Israel, and our report tries to comprehensively
document those abuses as well as those by Hamas, and to hold all sides -- Hamas
and Israel -- accountable by the same standards and laws.

Zahir Janmohamed Advocacy Director Middle East and North Africa Amnesty
International USA Washington, July 9, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LIBEL & SLANDER (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE
(57%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (88%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             742 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 14, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Charles Taylor to Speak at War Crimes Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


For months, Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, has watched in
silence as witnesses have passed through the courtroom, telling stories of
mind-boggling violence, even cannibalism. His face remained blank, eyes hidden
behind tinted glasses, as women spoke of rape and villagers told how their hands
or their arms had been severed with axes.

Only when longtime allies appeared has Mr. Taylor seemed agitated, passing
messages to his defense team, demanding to challenge the accounts.

On Tuesday, Mr. Taylor, the first African leader to be tried for war crimes,
will break his silence as he takes the stand to defend himself. His lawyers say
that his testimony may go on for weeks, given the wide range of the charges of
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The prosecution, which has rested its case, has charged that he armed and
commanded rebel groups to bolster his influence in West Africa and to seize a
swath of neighboring Sierra Leone, in particular its diamond-mining areas.

His indictment holds him accountable for the rebels' barbaric methods as they
pillaged, killed, raped, used drug-crazed children as soldiers and hacked off
limbs, ears or noses to subdue civilians.

Opening the defense case on Monday, Courtenay Griffiths, the lead lawyer, said
that Mr. Taylor was not ''an African Napoleon'' bent on taking over a region,
but a broker of peace who would exonerate himself when he gave his account.

As many as 200,000 people died in the decade of fighting, and Mr. Taylor's war
strategies are said to have affected many more in Liberia, his home country, but
only crimes in Sierra Leone between 1996 and 2002 are within the mandate of the
court.

For Mr. Taylor's trial, the international judges of the United Nations-backed
Special Court for Sierra Leone are sitting in The Hague to avoid potential
unrest in Freetown, Sierra Leone's capital, where the court is based. The
prosecution has brought 91 witnesses, many of whom made a 7,000-mile round trip
to The Netherlands.

''We didn't have documents and orders signed by Taylor, so we needed much
circumstantial evidence,'' said Stephen J. Rapp, the court's chief prosecutor.
''But key players close to Taylor have testified and painted the complex
picture. Taylor was in another country, it was not his country's army, he was
not at the scene of the crimes. But we have direct evidence of his orders and
communications.''

Mr. Rapp said that about a dozen ''insiders'' -- witnesses once close to Mr.
Taylor, whose testimony had been crucial -- had been moved to other countries
and given new identities. Several important witnesses had declined to testify
because they had been threatened, he said.

The horrors of the Sierra Leone war have frequently perturbed the solemn setting
of The Hague courtroom, with its officers in black robes with neatly starched
white bibs and its crimson-robed judges high on the dais. At times, witnesses on
the stand gesticulated with amputated limbs, swaddled in bandages. Or take the
small but awkward incident on the day when Mustapha Mansary, a villager, came to
testify. Rebel gangs had hacked off both of his hands.

The defense lawyer began: ''Mr. Witness, can I ask you, can you read and write
English?'' Mr. Mansary listened to the translation, and then he held up his two
stumps. ''I have no hands to write anything,'' he said.

''I appreciate that; my apologies,'' the lawyer said.

At other times, witnesses described scenes of incomprehensible cruelty.

A rape victim who testified under the name ''064'' described the day a gang of
rebels mutilated and killed many adults and children in the village of Foendor,
among them members of her family, including her two children. After nine
children and the adults had been decapitated, Tamba Joe, the gang leader,
ordered her to look for her people. Their severed heads were put in a sack.

''They gave me the heads to carry,'' the woman said. ''But at first I
couldn't.''

A man was told to help her carry the sack, dripping with blood. When they got to
Tombudu, the next village, the rebels ordered all the heads thrown into a pond.
The heads of her two children were among them, she said.

No one knows exactly how many people were killed or maimed in the civil war of
the 1990s. Human rights groups have said that close to 4,000 amputees have not
survived. Up to 3,500 amputees are believed to be still alive. Numerous former
child soldiers are still in rehabilitation homes.

During the trial, the magnitude of the atrocities has not been in dispute. But
the prosecution and the defense have described the case as legally complicated.
The defense lawyer, Mr. Griffiths, said that the prosecution must prove Mr.
Taylor's effective control over the rebel groups and that demonstrating
influence or assistance was insufficient. ''The case is all about linking the
crimes to Mr. Taylor, but the evidence has been riddled with inconsistencies,''
Mr. Griffiths said.

Mr. Rapp, the chief prosecutor, insists that Mr. Taylor's criminal
responsibility has been more than demonstrated with the insider witnesses. These
included radio operators, describing orders given from the secret communications
center in Mr. Taylor's mansion, and members of the president's security force
who said they witnessed the movement of arms and ammunition to the rebels and
attended high-level strategy sessions.

One of the most dramatic accounts came from Joseph Marzah, a longtime associate
of Mr. Taylor's. He described himself as Mr. Taylor's onetime chief of
operations and head of a death squad, now an affluent businessman. He said that
African peacekeepers were killed and eaten by Mr. Taylor's militiamen and that
weapons were easily smuggled. Four other witnesses also referred to the
ritualistic eating of enemy flesh by Liberian combatants.

Mr. Marzah, known as Zigzag, spoke of the ease with which weapons were moved to
Sierra Leone from Liberia during the Taylor government, despite an arms embargo.
He said that Nigerian peacekeepers at the airport in Monrovia, the Liberian
capital, were bribed and the weapons were transported in the peacekeepers'
vehicles.

He became angry as the defense lawyer repeatedly insisted that he had no close
contact with Mr. Taylor. Stung, Mr. Marzah blurted out that he and Mr. Taylor
belonged to the same secret society and had together eaten human hearts. With
that he nervously crossed himself.

When the lawyer asked if he crossed himself because he had just lied under oath,
Mr. Marzah said he had just broken the secrecy laws of his society.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WITNESSES (90%);
EVIDENCE (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAWYERS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
ARMIES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); INDICTMENTS (75%); CHILD SOLDIERS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); ARMED FORCES (66%); MINES & MINING (53%);
DIAMOND MINING (53%); PEACE PROCESS (53%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (57%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); LIBERIA (93%); NETHERLANDS (90%); AFRICA (79%);
WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             743 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 15, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Torture and Death in Cambodian Prison Are Recounted at Trial

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


''Where were you tortured and when?''

For the past two weeks, judges and lawyers in the trial of a Khmer Rouge prison
chief have probed for details about the suffering of victims of a regime that
caused the deaths of an estimated 1.7 million people between 1975 and 1979.

As personal stories of terror and brutality fill the courtroom for the first
time, even the defendant, Kaing Guek Eav, or Duch, has at times dropped his hard
mask and broken down in tears.

''I send my respects to the soul of your wife,'' he told one witness, Bou Meng,
whose wife died in the prison and whom Duch (pronounced DOIK) had come to know
when he pulled him from a row of shackled prisoners and put him to work as a
painter.

Bou Meng put his face in his hands. Duch, his lips quivering, turned his back on
the courtroom, and both men wept.

Duch, 66, is the first of five central figures from the Khmer Rouge regime to be
tried here in a United Nations-backed tribunal. He faces charges of crimes
against humanity and war crimes as commandant of Tuol Sleng prison, where at
least 14,000 people were tortured and sent to their deaths.

Duch   has taken responsibility for the torture and killings at the camp, and he
expressed ''heartfelt sorrow'' when he took the stand. But he has also placed
himself within a chain of command where disobedience often meant death.

In vivid testimony, the court has heard a  description of the ripping out of
toenails -- and viewed the scarred toes of the victim -- and has listened to the
sobs of a man who said he drank his own urine to survive.

It has heard from a man who said he crawled out alive from a pit in a killing
field, and from a woman who said she saw a child thrown into the air and speared
on a bayonet.

Most of this testimony is uncorroborated, and some has faced vigorous challenges
from the defense and skepticism from the judges. In particular, the judges have
called into question the testimony of witnesses who also are designated as
''civil parties'' -- an innovation in international tribunals that allows
alleged victims to join the case and to seek reparations from any defendants who
are convicted.

The testimony of these witnesses has not been vetted by prosecutors, and most
have arrived poorly prepared by overburdened lawyers. Their testimony has often
deviated from their sworn depositions, leaving the judges to decide which
version, if any, to credit.

Duch's trial opened at the end of March; testimony has been heard not just from
the defendant himself, but also from expert witnesses. It has been slowed by
procedural delays and challenged by accusations of corruption and of political
manipulation by the Cambodian government. The tribunal, an experimental hybrid
of local and international legal systems, has been criticized by human rights
groups and some legal scholars who say it compromises on international standards
of justice.

Duch's most intense display of emotion to date came in a video that was shown
publicly for the first time of his escorted visit in February 2008 to Tuol Sleng
prison, which is now a museum in Phnom Penh.

With survivors standing nearby, Duch, surrounded in the video by his lawyers and
security officers, began to read a statement of apology to the victims. Suddenly
he stopped, wiped his forearm across his eyes and let out a cry that sounded
like the bark of a seal, before turning away in tears.

But apart from such moments of emotion, Duch has maintained a confident,
didactic tone in the courtroom, prefacing his answers with phrases like ''based
on my analysis and assumption'' and ''according to the surviving documents.''

The five-person panel of Cambodian and international judges has often addressed
him more as a disinterested authority than as a defendant. He seemed to have the
final word in the courtroom on the authenticity of prison documents and on the
long, painstaking lists that he compiled of prisoners sent to die in a killing
field.

In challenging the story of one witness who said he had been a prisoner at Tuol
Sleng, Duch presented the curious defense that this could not be the person in
question because, according to Duch's records, he had already had him killed.

Using a similar argument, he questioned the account of a man who said he had
survived the camp, where he was imprisoned as an 8-year-old child; Duch asserted
confidently that he had made sure all children who entered the prison with their
parents were killed.

That witness, Norng Chan Phal, now 39, whose authenticity was later confirmed by
prison documents, presented a horrifying picture of loss that could resonate
with millions of those who survived the rule of the Khmer Rouge.

He testified that he and four other children were left alone in the empty prison
when Duch and his staff fled the Vietnamese invasion that ended Khmer Rouge rule
in February 1979. Mr. Norng Chan Phal said he ran through empty corridors among
corpses and flies, searching for his mother, who had been imprisoned with him.

''There was blood, and I was scared,'' he said. ''I kept running and crying for
my mother, searching for my mother.'' Like almost everyone else who was
imprisoned there, she had been killed.

Duch has claimed that he had not visited the prison's cells and torture
chambers, asserting that he was a coward, and that he did not participate in, or
even know in detail about, the abuse of the prisoners.

''I shut my eyes and ears,'' he said. ''I did not want to see the reality that
did not reconcile with my feelings. I did not allow myself to see or hear.''

This testimony, which seemed at odds with his hands-on administrative style, was
challenged Monday by a witness who said she had worked for him as a medic and
had lost several family members in Tuol Sleng.

The witness, Nam Man, 48, said she had seen Duch, standing under a coconut tree,
beat two of her uncles to death with a metal rod.

''Are you going to deny the facts and the truth that I have just told the
chamber?'' she said, addressing him directly.

Duch said that he had found no records of her family in his files and that no
women had worked as medics there. He denied everything.

Asked later about this response, Ms. Nam Man said, ''Now I have to find the
records to prove I am telling the truth.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Outside the courtroom, journalists and spectators watched as
Kaing Guek Eav, a former prison commandant, stood trial on charges of war
crimes.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN VINK/MAGNUM)
 The remains of a Khmer Rouge killing field, outside of Phnom Penh. At one
prison, at least 14,000 people were tortured and sent to their
deaths.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DENIS GRAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); JUDGES (89%);
DEPOSITIONS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(73%); CORRUPTION (72%); EXPERT WITNESSES (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (91%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             748 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 22, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Radical Islamists Slipping Easily Into Kenya

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: HULUGHO, Kenya


A thin, dusty line is about the only thing separating Kenya, one of the Western
world's closest allies in Africa, from the Shabab, a radical Islamist militia
that has taken over much of southern Somalia, beheading detractors, stoning
adulterers and threatening to kill any Americans or Europeans who get in their
way.

In most places this line, the official international border, is not even marked,
let alone protected. In the village of Hulugho, there is simply a tattered
Kenyan flag and a cinderblock schoolhouse with chicken-wire windows. Then a
meadow of thorn trees and donkey dung. Then Shabab country.

Kenya is widely seen as a frontline state against the Islamist extremism
smoldering across the Horn of Africa. Few expect the Shabab to make good on its
threats to march en masse across the border. But the creeping fear, the one that
keeps the security staffs at Western embassies awake at night, is that the
Shabab or its foreign jihadist allies will infiltrate Kenya and attack some of
the tens of thousands of Westerners living in the country, possibly in a major
strike like Al Qaeda did in 1998.

Last month, Western counterterrorism experts in Kenya sent out text messages
warning expatriates to stay away from malls in Nairobi, Kenya's usually
laid-back capital, because of possible suicide attacks by the Shabab. A few
weeks later, the group threatened to destroy Nairobi's ''tall, glass
buildings.''

The Shabab has already penetrated refugee camps inside Kenya, according to camp
elders, luring away dozens of young men with promises of paradise -- and $300
each. It has carried out cross-border attacks, kidnapping an outspoken cleric in
May from a refugee camp 50 miles inside Kenya. Last Wednesday, in one of its
boldest cross-border moves yet, a squad of uniformed, heavily armed Shabab
fighters stormed into a Kenyan school in a remote town, rounding up all the
children and telling them to quit their classes and join the jihad.

''If these guys can come in with their guns and uniforms in broad daylight,''
said one of the teachers at the school, ''they must be among us.''

Then on Saturday it happened again: Somali gunmen, widely believed to be with
the Shabab, stormed the offices of an aid organization and kidnapped three aid
workers from a Kenyan border town before melting back into Somalia.

American and British advisers are working closely with Kenyan counterterrorism
teams, but the area along the Somali border is known to be a gaping hole.

''The Kenyans don't have the skills to close the border, even if they wanted
to,'' said one Western diplomat, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing
diplomatic protocol. ''People are very concerned. But on some level, we can't
defend Kenya's border for them.''

When asked to assess the level of security at the Somali border, the diplomat
flatly stated, ''There is no security.''

The raging war in the country next door, between Somalia's weak transitional
government and the Shabab, is rapidly becoming a proxy war -- with Western arms
and money keeping the transitional government alive, while Arab and Pakistani
jihadists with links to Al Qaeda fight for the Shabab.

Late last month, American officials acknowledged that they had shipped 40 tons
of weapons to Somalia's transitional government, a disclosure that has only
sharpened the Shabab's anti-American sentiments.

Kenyan security forces are now flooding into their borderlands, marching along
the shimmering roads and across the unforgiving landscape, their assault rifles
slung over their shoulders.

But the 400-mile border is inevitably porous, and Somali-speaking nomads from
both countries flow seamlessly back and forth in diaphanous shawls and worn-out
wooden carts. And the biggest proverbial holes may be in the police officers'
pockets.

Just this month, Transparency International listed Kenya as the most corrupt
nation in East Africa. The region's most corrupt public institution? The Kenyan
police.

Even though the border is officially closed, Hassan Mohamed, a refugee who used
to build houses in Somalia but got driven out by war, explained how thousands of
Somali refugees find their way into Kenya each month.

''It's easy,'' he said, rubbing his thumb and index finger together in the
universal sign of a bribe. ''If you pay, you can come in.''

The cracked wooden shelves in the border-town markets are heaped with the
telltale signs of a flourishing smuggling business: sacks of Pakistani sugar,
foreign brands of sodas and soaps, cigarettes with Somali labels -- all illegal
imports from Somalia that somehow made it past the dozen police checkpoints on
the Kenyan side.

Abdi Dimbil Alan, an elder who lives in Alin Jugul, a town near the Somali
border, says that nearly every night he witnesses the same Somali businessmen
paying off the Kenyan police to allow consumer goods and even assault rifles to
slip through the border.

''These guys are so corrupt,'' Mr. Abdi said, referring to the border police,
''that if 100 Shabab pulled up with a truckload of weapons and said they were
coming to Kenya to kill the president, the police would let them through -- for
the right price.''

Erick Kipkorir, a district officer in Alin Jugul, said Kenyan forces were
hard-working and honest.

''We can't say that nothing is coming in because, as you see, the border is very
expansive,'' he said. ''But as for bribes, that has never happened.''

Ever since Al Qaeda blew up the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in
1998, killing more than 200 people and wounding thousands, American
counterterrorism officials have been watching East Africa warily. But in the
areas along the Kenya-Somalia border, it seems that anti-Americanism is still
spreading, despite the millions of dollars the American government has spent on
a hearts-and-minds campaign.

Take an American-built well in the village of Raya. No one is using it, though
Raya is desperately poor and dry.

''The Americans wanted to finish us,'' said one villager, Ibrahim Alin,
convinced that the American water engineers who built the well had poisoned it
to sterilize him.

The Somali-speaking areas of Kenya have always been an uneasy fit, and Kenya has
often responded brutally.

This area tried to secede in the 1960s and join Somalia, leading to a guerrilla
war. In 1984, Kenyan security forces imprisoned and then killed thousands of
ethnic Somali men at a remote airstrip, according to Kenyan human rights groups.

In recent weeks, Human Rights Watchaccused Kenyan security services of raping
women and smashing the testicles of men during a crackdown in northeastern Kenya
in October.

''We're trying to find a way that when they do deploy,'' the Western diplomat
said, ''they do more helping than hurting.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Students walked home after school in Kenya near the Somali
border. Across the border is the Shabab, a radical Islamist militia. (pg. A1)
A young Somali boy ran away from a sandstorm at a refugee camp in Kenya near the
porous, 400-mile border with Somalia.
 A Kenyan police officer stood along the Somali border. Some fear the Shabab
might infiltrate Kenya and attack Westerners.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOMINIC NAHR FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A11) MAP: Beyond the village of Hulugho lies Shabab
country. (pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (86%); REFUGEES (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); RURAL SCHOOLS (76%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(67%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (67%); TEXT MESSAGING (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (90%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (99%); SOMALIA (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (91%); EASTERN
AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             754 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 29, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain: Allegations Over Detainee

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 111 words


Human rights lawyers took legal action against the British government on
Tuesday, accusing it of involvement in the illegal transfer of a terrorism
suspect from Indonesia to Egypt where they say he was tortured. Reprieve, a
London-based rights group, says Britain knowingly allowed the suspect, Mohammed
Saad Iqbal Madni, above, to be sent  from Jakarta to Egypt via an American air
base on Diego Garcia, a British-ruled island in the Indian Ocean, in 2002. Mr.
Madni says he was tortured with cattle prods for three months in Egypt, then
sent to   Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he was held for six years before being
released last August without having been charged.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TERRORISM
(85%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (71%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); EGYPT (92%); INDONESIA (91%); UNITED KINGDOM
(90%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             757 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 31, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel: Report On Gaza War

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 129 words


An Israeli government report released Thursday insisted that ''incessant'' Hamas
rocket attacks forced Israel to attack Gaza in late 2008 and early 2009,
countering charges of war crimes but acknowledging that more than a dozen
criminal inquiries are under way. The 160-page report was the first
comprehensive Israeli government study of the offensive in December and January.
It was an attempt to answer charges from Palestinians, the United Nations, and
human rights groups that Israeli forces committed war crimes and violated
international law during the three-week operation. The Israeli government said
the report was not meant to be an ''assertion of infallibility,'' but rejected
the charges one by one, attributing extensive damage and casualties to wartime
mistakes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); HAMAS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             762 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain: Torture Inquiry Sought

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 133 words


A parliamentary committee called Tuesday for an independent inquiry into
allegations that Britain's security services were complicit in the torture of
terrorist suspects detained after the Sept. 11 attacks. The Joint Committee on
Human Rights, composed of lawmakers of all major parties, said in a report that
there were ''a disturbing number of credible allegations'' of official
complicity in the torture of detainees. Seven former Guantanamo Bay detainees
are suing the British government, accusing the security services of ''aiding and
abetting'' their abuse, including by providing intelligence used by those who
interrogated them under torture. A junior foreign minister, Ivan Lewis, rejected
the allegation in a BBC interview. ''We neither engage in, collude with or
condone torture,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); INTERVIEWS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); LITIGATION (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (53%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             784 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 3, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Dick Cheney's Version

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 808 words


After the C.I.A. inspector general's report on prisoner interrogation was
released last week, former Vice President Dick Cheney settled into his usual
seat on Fox News to express his outrage -- not at the illegal and immoral
behavior laid out in the report, of course, but at the idea that anyone would
object to torturing prisoners. He was especially vexed that the Obama
administration was  beginning an investigation.

In Mr. Cheney's view, it is not just those who followed orders and stuck to the
interrogation rules set down by President George Bush's Justice Department who
should be sheltered from accountability. He said he also had no problem with
those who disobeyed their orders and exceeded the guidelines.

It's easy to understand Mr. Cheney's aversion to the investigation that Attorney
General Eric Holder ordered last week. On Fox, Mr. Cheney said it was hard to
imagine it stopping with the interrogators. He's right.

The government owes Americans a full investigation into the orders to approve
torture, abuse and illegal, secret detention, as well as the twisted legal
briefs that justified those policies. Congress and the White House also need to
look into illegal wiretapping and the practice of sending prisoners to other
countries to be tortured.

Mr. Cheney was at the center of each of these insults to this country's
Constitution, its judicial system and its bedrock democratic values. To defend
himself, he offers a twisted version of history:

He says Mr. Bush's Justice Department determined that the ''enhanced
interrogation techniques'' ordered by the president were legal under American
law and international treaties like the Geneva Conventions.

In reality, those opinions were based on a corrupt and widely discredited legal
analysis cooked up after the White House had already decided to use long-banned
practices like waterboarding. Mr. Cheney was an architect of the decision to
''get tough'' with prisoners, as the bureaucrats often say to soften the outrage
of this policy.

He insists the inspector general's findings were ''completely reviewed'' by the
Justice Department and that any follow-up investigation would be improper and
unnecessary.

In reality, Mr. Bush's attorney general, Alberto Gonzales, did not appoint an
independent investigator after receiving the inspector general's report, which
was completed in 2004. The Justice Department decided there was only one narrow
case worth pursuing, involving a civilian contractor -- hardly a surprise from a
thoroughly politicized department whose top officials set the very rules they
were supposed to be judging. Mr. Gonzales's team did not look into allegations
that some interrogators broke those rules. Mr. Cheney may not care about that,
but Mr. Holder rightly does.

Mr. Cheney claims that waterboarding and other practices widely considered to be
torture or abuse ''were absolutely essential'' in stopping another terrorist
attack on the United States after Sept. 11, 2001.

Mr. Cheney is right when he says detainees who were subject to torture and abuse
gave up valuable information. But the men who did the questioning flatly dispute
that it was duress that moved them to do so.

Deuce Martinez, the C.I.A. officer who interrogated Khalid Shaikh Mohammed,
engineer of the 9/11 mass murders, said he used traditional interrogation
methods, and not the infliction of pain and panic. And, in an article on the
Times Op-Ed page, Ali Soufan, a former F.B.I. agent who oversaw the
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, another high-ranking terrorist, denounced ''the
false claims'' about harsh interrogations. Mr. Soufan said Mr. Zubaydah talked
before he was subjected to waterboarding and other abuse. He also said that
''using these alternative methods on other terrorists backfired on more than a
few occasions.''

Every week, it seems, new disclosures about this sordid history dribble out.
This week, Physicians for Human Rights analyzed what the inspector general's
report said about the involvement of C.I.A. physicians and psychiatrists in the
abuse of prisoners. It said they not only monitored torture, like waterboarding,
but also kept data on the prisoners' reaction in ways that ''may amount to human
experimentation.''

Getting at the truth is not going to be easy. The C.I.A. destroyed evidence --
videotapes of interrogations -- and is now refusing to release its records of
the questioning of its prisoners. It also is asking the courts to keep secret
the orders Mr. Bush gave authorizing the interrogations, and the original
Justice Department memos concluding that they were legal.

Americans need much more than glimpses of the truth. They should not have to
decide whether to believe former interrogators, whom they do not know, or Mr.
Cheney, who did not hesitate while in office to mislead them when it suited his
political aims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: September 4, 2009



CORRECTION: In our editorial on Thursday about interrogations: The group
Physicians for Human Rights said psychologists, not psychiatrists, were involved
in the torture and abuse of detainees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); CORRUPTION (77%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(76%); WIRETAPPING (71%); APPROVALS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (63%)

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (92%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (92%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (92%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%); ERIC HOLDER (58%); BARACK OBAMA
(58%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             795 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice in Gaza

BYLINE: By RICHARD GOLDSTONE.

Richard Goldstone, the former chief prosecutor for war-crime tribunals on Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, is the head of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 669 words


I ACCEPTED with hesitation my United Nations mandate to investigate alleged
violations of the laws of war and international human rights during Israel's
three-week war in Gaza last winter. The issue is deeply charged and politically
loaded. I accepted because the mandate of the mission was to look at all
parties: Israel; Hamas, which controls Gaza; and other armed Palestinian groups.
I accepted because my fellow commissioners are professionals committed to an
objective, fact-based investigation.

But above all, I accepted because I believe deeply in the rule of law and the
laws of war, and the principle that in armed conflict civilians should to the
greatest extent possible be protected from harm.

In the fighting in Gaza, all sides flouted that fundamental principle. Many
civilians unnecessarily died and even more were seriously hurt. In Israel, three
civilians were killed and hundreds wounded by rockets from Gaza fired by Hamas
and other groups. Two Palestinian girls also lost their lives when these rockets
misfired.

In Gaza, hundreds of civilians died. They died from disproportionate attacks on
legitimate military targets and from attacks on hospitals and other civilian
structures. They died from precision weapons like missiles from aerial drones as
well as from heavy artillery. Repeatedly, the Israel Defense Forces failed to
adequately distinguish between combatants and civilians, as the laws of war
strictly require.

Israel is correct that identifying combatants in a heavily populated area is
difficult, and that Hamas fighters at times mixed and mingled with civilians.
But that reality did not lift Israel's obligation to take all feasible measures
to minimize harm to civilians.

Our fact-finding team found that in many cases Israel could have done much more
to spare civilians without sacrificing its stated and legitimate military aims.
It should have refrained from attacking clearly civilian buildings, and from
actions that might have resulted in a military advantage but at the cost of too
many civilian lives. In these cases, Israel must investigate, and Hamas is
obliged to do the same. They must examine what happened and appropriately punish
any soldier or commander found to have violated the law.

Unfortunately, both Israel and Hamas have dismal records of investigating their
own forces. I am unaware of any case where a Hamas fighter was punished for
deliberately shooting a rocket into a civilian area in Israel -- on the
contrary, Hamas leaders repeatedly praise such acts. While Israel has begun
investigations into alleged violations by its forces in the Gaza conflict, they
are unlikely to be serious and objective.

Absent credible local investigations, the international community has a role to
play. If justice for civilian victims cannot be obtained through local
authorities, then foreign governments must act. There are various mechanisms
through which to pursue international justice. The International Criminal Court
and the exercise of universal jurisdiction by other countries against violators
of the Geneva Conventions are among them. But they all share one overarching
aim: to hold accountable those who violate the laws of war. They are built on
the premise that abusive fighters and their commanders can face justice, even if
their government or ruling authority is not willing to take that step.

Pursuing justice in this case is essential because no state or armed group
should be above the law. Western governments in particular face a challenge
because they have pushed for accountability in places like Darfur, but now must
do the same with Israel, an ally and a democratic state.

Failing to pursue justice for serious violations during the fighting will have a
deeply corrosive effect on international justice, and reveal an unacceptable
hypocrisy. As a service to the hundreds of civilians who needlessly died and for
the equal application of international justice, the perpetrators of serious
violations must be held to account.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); HAMAS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); RULE OF LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             796 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel and Gaza: Which Standards Apply?

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 440 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Justice in Gaza'' (Op-Ed, Sept. 17):

Richard Goldstone displays the same disregard for Israel and naivete regarding
Hamas that permeates the report he wrote for the United Nations Human Rights
Council.

Since its inception in 2006, the council has consistently demonized Israel while
giving a free pass to some of the world's worst tyrants, from Sudan to Iran. Mr.
Goldstone largely neglects what prompted Israel to act militarily against Hamas.

Let's be clear for historical accuracy. Israel's military operation came after
eight years of relentless rocket attacks from Gaza on Israeli towns and
villages. Indeed, thousands of rockets were launched after Israel transferred
the entire Gaza Strip to the Palestinians four years ago.

While the United Nations made no effort to stop the Palestinian rockets, Israel
showed remarkable restraint over the years until it could not hold back anymore.

More disturbing, the Goldstone report has set a new standard for equating the
behavior of democratic nations and terrorists.

He makes no moral distinction between Israel, a United Nations member state, and
Hamas, a terrorist organization that violently seized control of Gaza two years
ago from the Palestinian Authority.

The implications of this moral equivalency go beyond the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In fact, they undermine the United States and other democracies facing
asymmetrical warfare from adversaries who care little for international norms of
war and international humanitarian law.

In sum, Mr. Goldstone's conclusions are a disservice to the credibility of the
United Nations itself.

Richard Sideman President American Jewish Committee New York, Sept. 17, 2009

To the Editor:

Richard Goldstone expresses deep concern regarding the ''corrosive effect on
international justice'' and the ''unacceptable hypocrisy'' of not holding Israel
accountable for what he has determined are possible war crimes in Gaza.

He is absolutely right that such corrosion and hypocrisy exist -- but through
the select application of international law against one democratic nation,
Israel. According to the standards of Mr. Goldstone, United States troops would
similarly be unable to defend themselves in Iraq and Afghanistan without being
smeared as war criminals.

Recognizing this absurdity, Americans should stand with Israel against the
discriminatory whims of the larger international community.

Matan Shamir New York, Sept. 17, 2009

The writer is a Legacy Heritage Fellow. The program cultivates young leaders in
North America, Europe and Israel committed to public service and peace in the
Middle East.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); WRITERS (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); BOMBINGS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(75%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); ARMED FORCES (70%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%); UNITED NATIONS (91%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES
(94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             802 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel and the Gaza War

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 144 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Gaza Report's Wasted Opportunity,'' by David Landau (Op-Ed, Sept. 20):

The only missed opportunity regarding the report by Richard Goldstone was
Israel's illogical refusal to meet with the United Nations commission headed by
a respected South African jurist who also happens to be Jewish and a Zionist.

Irrespective of the intention and the Israeli motive, the report concludes that
Israel committed ''war crimes, and possibly crimes against humanity.''

International humanitarian law is the only law binding the world community to
some type of law about war. Palestinians will welcome any change to that law so
long as it takes into consideration protection of a population that has lived
under more than 40 years of a foreign military occupation.

Daoud Kuttab Ramallah, West Bank, Sept. 20, 2009

The writer is a Palestinian journalist.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); WRITERS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); WAR CRIMES (86%); LAW OF WAR
(86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             816 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 13, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Netanyahu Calls War Crimes Report 'Distorted'

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 144 words


JERUSALEM  In a speech opening the winter session of parliament on Monday, the
prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, described a United Nations report
that found evidence of possible war crimes by both Israel and Hamas in last
winter's Gaza war as ''distorted,'' and said that Israel acted in self-defense.

His remarks came after the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, in a sharp
reversal, said in a speech on Sunday that he had instructed his ambassador in
Geneva to try to muster an extraordinary session of the United Nations Human
Rights Council for a vote endorsing the report.

Mr. Abbas had come under harsh criticism at home and in the Arab world for an
earlier decision, under American and Israeli pressure, to defer the vote by six
months. The Security Council is expected to debate the contentious report on
Tuesday, with Palestinian support.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); HAMAS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (88%); PRIME MINISTERS (88%); SELF DEFENSE (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); HAMAS (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL
(56%)

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (90%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (72%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             818 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 16, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 807 words


International

IN FACE OF SANCTIONS PUSH, CHINA WARMS TO IRAN

The Obama administration's effort to marshal global support for new sanctions
against Iran hit another snag, when China said it was seeking to bolster
cooperation and high-level exchanges with Iran. PAGE A12

ITALY DENIES PAYING TALIBAN

Italy's prime minister denied claims -- made in a British newspaper article --
that the Italian secret service bribed the Taliban in 2008 to maintain calm in
the Afghan district under Italian control. PAGE A4

A DAM TESTS JAPAN LEADERS

Japan's new government wants to scrap a $5.2 billion dam being built in
Naganohara. It is the first major test of their vow to replace Japan's
''construction state.'' PAGE A4

DISPUTE BETWEEN KOREAS

The North Korean military accused South Korean warships of entering the North's
waters near its west coast. PAGE A10

U.N. OFFICIAL BACKS REPORT

A United Nations report on war crimes committed in the Gaza war last winter
received a statement of support from the top United Nations human rights
official. PAGE A10

Obituaries

WILLIAM WAYNE JUSTICE, 89

A federal judge in Texas, he ruled on groundbreaking lawsuits that compelled the
state to integrate schools, reform prisons and revamp many other policies. PAGE
B11

DIETRICH VON BOTHMER, 90

Regarded as the top expert on ancient Greek vases, he was a curator at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art for more than 60 years. PAGE B10

National

VOTE FOR DETAINEE TRANSFER FROM GUANTaNAMO TO U.S.

The House voted to allow detainees being held at the Guantanamo Bay naval base
in Cuba to be transferred to the United States, but only to stand trial. PAGE
A17

POSSIBLE DELAYS FOR REACTORS

Regulators said a new nuclear reactor design might not withstand events like
earthquakes and tornadoes. PAGE A13

JOB PROTESTS IN PUERTO RICO

Thousands of union members brought a bustling San Juan to a holidaylike calm as
they protested government plans to lay off more than 20,000 workers.  PAGE A14

OBAMA VISITS NEW ORLEANS

President Obama made his first visit to New Orleans as president and found
impatience and frustration in a city struggling four years after Hurricane
Katrina. PAGE A16

53 REPUBLICANS SEEK OUSTER

House Republicans have signed a letter asking President Obama to fire an
official charged with promoting school safety because of his career as an
advocate of teaching tolerance of homosexuality. PAGE A19

New York

REPORT SIGNALS SCHOOL POLICY ON PROMOTIONS IS WORKING

A long-awaited study analyzing the Bloomberg administration's student-promotion
policy says that fifth graders who were held back did better in subsequent
years. PAGE A22

ALBANY SOUNDS FISCAL ALARM

Gov. David A. Paterson proposed billions of dollars in spending cuts and raised
alarms about New York's financial health. PAGE A23

Business

BANK OF AMERICA CHIEF WILL GO UNPAID FOR 2009

Bowing to increasing scrutiny of his compensation, Kenneth D. Lewis, Bank of
America's embattled chief executive who will step down at the end of the year,
agreed not to take a salary or bonus for 2009. PAGE B1

BILL SHIELDS MOST BANKS

After approving regulations over derivatives, a House committee exempted
community banks, which represent more than 8,000 of the nation's roughly 8,200
banks, from the oversight of a new consumer protection agency. PAGE B1

POSITIVE SIGNS IN TECH SECTOR

Several technology giants delivered better-than-expected quarterly financial
results this week, suggesting, economists say, that the United States is truly
emerging from the Great Recession. PAGE B1

WEAK DOLLAR? NOT SO MUCH

There is renewed talk about a weak dollar. But don't believe it. Where it really
counts, China, the dollar is not moving at all. High & Low Finance by Floyd
Norris. PAGE B1

VOW TO ENFORCE WATER ACT

The Environmental Protection Agency said it would remake enforcement of the
Clean Water Act, as lawmakers sharply criticized the agency's decade-long lapses
in punishing polluters. PAGE B1

Sports

A DIFFERENT WORLD AWAITS THE AMERICAN SOCCER TEAM

American soccer fans had better enjoy the team's two stirring rallies in recent
days, because in the World Cup in South Africa next year, play will get harder,
faster and tougher. PAGE B12

Weekend

A BRITISH DRAMA EXAMINES THE IRAQ WAR

''Occupation,'' a British look at the Iraq war on BBC America, is one of the
best television depictions yet of that conflict, and it isn't even a
straightforward war story. A review by Alessandra Stanley.  PAGE C1

JOURNEY OF FAITH AND LOVE

Leon Botstein opened the American Symphony Orchestra season at Avery Fisher Hall
by resuscitating another French opera: Vincent d'Indy's ''Fervaal.'' A review by
Anthony Tommasini. PAGE C1

Flu Season Hits 'Bye Bye Birdie' C1

Drummers Map Imaginary City C3

Op-ed

PAUL KRUGMAN PAGE A25

DAVID BROOKS PAGE A25

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (84%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (78%); DAMS & RESERVOIRS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
POLITICAL PROTESTS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (75%); DAM &
HYDROELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION (75%); NAVIES (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); LITIGATION (72%); WAR CRIMES (72%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (71%); PRISONS (70%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (69%); NAVAL VESSELS (68%);
MILITARY VESSELS (68%); NUCLEAR PLANT SAFETY (68%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); JUDGES (66%); EDUCATION REFORM (65%); CLASSICS (65%);
NUCLEAR ENERGY (63%); LABOR UNIONS (62%); LAYOFFS (62%); HURRICANE KATRINA (60%)

COMPANY: BANK OF AMERICA CORP (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART (54%)

TICKER: BAC (NYSE) (50%); BAC (LSE) (50%); 8648 (TSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (50%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (50%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); DAVID PATERSON (79%)

CITY: NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (92%); ALBANY, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); LOUISIANA, USA (92%); WEST USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); JAPAN (93%); ITALY (93%); UNITED
STATES (92%); CUBA (92%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); PUERTO RICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             821 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Believer in Heroism, To Jews' Lasting Gratitude

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; RYE JOURNAL; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: RYE, N.Y.


The walls of Dr. Tina Strobos's light-filled apartment here are dappled not only
with paintings but also with the many plaques she has received from Jewish
organizations, even though she is not Jewish.

Dr. Strobos, a sturdy 89, is honored every so often for the quietly valiant
things she did almost 70 years ago as a medical student during the German
occupation of the Netherlands: working with her mother, she hid more than 100
Jews who passed through their three-story rooming house in Amsterdam.

That sanctuary, which included an attic lair that was never discovered, was just
a 10-minute stroll from a more famous hideout: Anne Frank's at 263
Prinsengracht. Indeed, the question of why the Franks did not have an escape
hatch for when the Gestapo barged in gets her fairly worked up.

At her home, the Jews were stowed away on the upper floors with quick access to
the attic, which had a secret compartment for two or three people to cram into.
''A carpenter came with a toolbox and said: 'I'm a carpenter from the
underground. Show me the house, and I'll build a hiding place,' '' she recalled.

There was an alarm bell on the second floor so she or her mother, Marie Schotte,
could alert those above. They drilled their fugitives in how to scramble out a
window to a roof and make their way to an adjoining school, which was not likely
to be raided.

Dr. Strobos, who will be honored on Monday by the Holocaust and Human Rights
Education Center, based in Westchester, retired in May as a psychiatrist and
retains a nobility of manner that suggests a life she feels has been largely
well lived. Her memory is keen enough to retrieve the tasty details that bring
her escapades to life.

She recalled carrying news and ration stamps by bicycle -- at great risk, and
often cold and hungry -- to Jews hidden on farms outside the city. She also
ferried radios and stashed boxes of pilfered guns for the Dutch resistance. She
was seized or questioned nine times by the Gestapo and was once hurled against a
wall and knocked unconscious.

Why would she take such gambles for people she sometimes barely knew?

''It's the right thing to do,'' she said with nonchalance. ''Your conscience
tells you to do it. I believe in heroism, and when you're young, you want to do
dangerous things.''

But such an outlook has an origin, what Donna Cohen, the Holocaust Center's
executive director, calls ''learned behavior.'' Dr. Strobos comes from a family
of socialist atheists who took in Belgian refugees during World War I and hid
German and Austrian refugees before World War II. Dr. Strobos had close Jewish
friends and, for a time, a Jewish fiance, Abraham Pais, who went on to become a
particle physicist, though not her husband.

The Nazis required Dutch Jews to wear stars and carry identity cards stamped
with a J. So Dr. Strobos patched together false papers by swiping documents from
gentile guests and inserting new photographs and fingerprints. As roundups
increased, her six-bedroom row house, at 282 Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal, became a
way station; most Jews stayed briefly, until the underground network could find
them more durable refuges.

''We never hid more than four or five at a time,'' she said. ''We didn't have
enough food.''

Among the people who lodged with her was her close friend Tirtsah Van Amerongen,
a blonde who passed for a gentile, and her sister and brother-in-law. She hid an
Orthodox couple with five children, who brought their own kosher food. She
helped Jews in other hideouts, including a prominent impressionist, Martin
Monnickendam, who painted her portrait, which now hangs in her apartment, at a
residence for older people.

''You can see he's a turmoiled type,'' she said slyly as she showed off the
portrait.

The Gestapo banged on her door many times, she said, sometimes accusing her of
concealing Jews and searching the rooms for two or three hours. A Dutch spy in
the Gestapo headquarters would sometimes alert her to an impending raid.

'' 'You're going to have a visitor tomorrow,' he would say,'' she remembered.
''I never knew who he was, but he was always right.''

Erudite and fluent in German, with a talent for striking a sweetly innocent
pose, she learned to charm the Germans.

When she suspected that the Gestapo knew that a prominent factory owner had
lived in her home for a year, she surrendered his name but insisted that she
believed he had been a gentile.

''Some Jews are like violets in the woods,'' the Gestapo agent advised her.
''They hide by having blue eyes and blond hair.''

Another time the Gestapo told her that it always identified Jews by the look of
the inside corners of their eyes.

''My mother and I were not laughing, but my God, they were really nuts,'' she
said.

During the five years working for the underground, she took interludes to study
medical books at a hospital.

''You have to be a little bit selfish and look after yourself; otherwise you
just die inside, you burn out,'' she once told an interviewer. ''There's just so
much you can do for other people.''

After the war, she and her first husband, Robert Strobos, a medical student,
traveled to New York on a Fulbright scholarship, and she studied child
psychiatry. They divorced in 1964. In 1967 she married Walter Chudson, an
economist, and they lived on a saltwater inlet in Larchmont, N.Y. She has two
sons and a daughter by her first husband and two stepchildren.

In the decades since her wartime experience, she has spoken out on issues like
the torture of terrorists, which she argues is not only cruel but also
ineffective.

''Even when they scared me to death and hurt me, it confirmed me that I should
not say anything to them,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Dr. Tina Strobos in her Westchester apartment, and at far left
in 1941 with Abraham Pais and her mother, Marie Schotte, with whom she housed
scores of Jews. Their home in Amsterdam is at right in the photo at left.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHESTER HIGGINS JR./THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (92%); HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ROOMING & BOARDING HOUSES (73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS
(73%); REFUGEES (70%); WORLD WAR II (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); WORLD WAR I (60%)

CITY: AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (91%); UNITED STATES (73%); AUSTRIA (50%)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             833 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 30, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Reassessing Security After Deadly Kabul Assault

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN and CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Most United Nations workers here were confined to their living quarters on
Thursday in the aftermath of a deadly assault on a United Nations guesthouse,
and some were moved to more secure housing as foreigners working in Kabul
reassessed their security.

On Wednesday, gunmen associated with the Taliban  entered the compound of the
guesthouse and killed eight people, including six foreign staff members. The
authorities said the gunmen would have killed far more people had they not been
held off by United Nations guards, who engaged the assailants in a fierce gun
battle, killing three of them.

The assault unnerved many international organizations working here, underscoring
the vulnerability of their workers. ''Before yesterday, the risk was there, but
it was a virtual risk,'' said Laurent Saillard, the director of the Agency
Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief, which represents nonprofit aid
organizations here.

''Now, it's become a reality. Any group that is well organized and determined
can do it,'' Mr. Saillard said. ''We are not secure like a military camp or an
embassy. It's easy. They crossed a line.''

Attacks on international aid workers are not new, but Mr. Saillard said he
believed that this was the first time a compound had been attacked in this way.
Attacks on aid groups, he said, are ''higher now than in the last six years.''

The mayhem on Wednesday brought to 23 the number of aid workers killed here this
year. The vast majority of attacks are on Afghan nonprofit groups, not
international organizations or international workers, Mr. Saillard said.

The United Nations mission here halted operations while it reviewed security.
United Nations flights between Afghanistan and neighboring Pakistan were
suspended until at least Saturday.

A Taliban spokesman on Wednesday said the attack was intended to warn people not
to take part in the Nov. 7 runoff presidential election, in which the United
Nations mission is helping with preparations. The mission was also involved in
monitoring the August election. President Hamid Karzai appeared to have won that
vote, but he eventually bowed to international pressure to hold a runoff after
widespread fraud in his favor was discovered.

In its work here, officials of the United Nations mission have made a point of
emphasizing the organization's impartiality. As a result, they found Wednesday's
attack particularly shocking. They have tried to impress on Afghans that the
mission does not favor any side in conflict with insurgents and is unlike the
foreign military forces here. They have pointed to their investigations of
civilian casualties and other human rights abuses that have angered the Afghan
population, and have tried to improve government services.

Although the United Nations is not immune from the violence here -- three of its
foreign election workers were kidnapped in 2004 -- its workers have gone largely
untouched. In the last two years it has expanded the number of its provincial
offices, a reflection of good relations with the general population and the
reputation for impartiality.

In the runoff, Mr. Karzai will face Abdullah Abdullah, who was the next largest
vote-getter in the election in August, and there are fears that fraud may occur
again.

If United Nations workers are constrained from working at full strength because
of security fears, they will most likely be less able to safeguard the integrity
of the runoff.

Complicating matters is an announcement by Afghanistan's Independent Electoral
Commission that in the runoff it plans to open more polling centers than in the
first election.

The move by the commission, which has been accused of favoring Mr. Karzai, ran
counter to the advice of the United Nations and election observers who had
called for fewer polling centers, to reduce the possibility of fraud.

Much of the fraud in the August vote occurred in what monitoring officials have
called ''ghost'' polling centers, mostly in remote areas, which existed only on
paper. More than one million fraudulent ballots, most for Mr. Karzai, were
counted from those centers.

The chairman of the commission, Azizullah Ludin, defended the decision to
increase the number of polling centers, saying that security forces had
confirmed that the commission would be able to safely open 6,322 polling
centers. He said a number of senior election officials who had been suspended
over allegations of fraud would not be employed for the second round and
approximately 150 midlevel district coordinators would also be excluded from
working on the election.

Also on Thursday, the NATO-led forces here announced that two members of the
international force had died in separate roadside bomb attacks on Wednesday in
southern Afghanistan.

In Kandahar, Ahmed Wali Karzai, the president's brother, held a news conference
to rebut statements in an article in  The New York Times on Wednesday that said
he had been paid by the C.I.A. for much of the past eight years, rented a
compound to the agency and helped it run the Kandahar Strike Force, a
paramilitary group. Mr. Karzai categorically denied having any relationship with
the C.I.A. and also said that he was not involved in the lucrative narcotics
business in southern Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: United Nations workers on Thursday retrieved the belongings of
colleagues killed in an attack.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TALIBAN (89%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (85%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS
(85%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (67%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (67%); INVESTIGATIONS (65%); WAR & CONFLICT (61%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (53%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             841 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Orders Airlift of Vehicles and Equipment to Darfur for Peacekeeping Force

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; Elisabeth Bumiller contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


With just 15 days left in office, President Bush announced Monday that he had
ordered an immediate airlift to deliver vehicles and equipment to the war-torn
Darfur region of Sudan to bolster a struggling international peacekeeping effort
there.

Mr. Bush waived a requirement that he notify Congress 15 days before undertaking
such a mission,  because waiting would ''pose a substantial risk to human health
and welfare,'' the White House national security adviser, Stephen J. Hadley,
said in a statement.

The White House said the airlift had been in the planning stages for months. But
some human rights activists expressed puzzlement at the timing of the move, a
little more than two weeks before the inauguration of Barack Obama. Mr. Obama
has vowed more aggressive action in Darfur, including imposition of a no-flight
zone, a move Mr. Bush has declined to make.

''It is certainly more than passing strange to have the national security
adviser come out and say that this step is being taken and Congressional
notification is being waived because of the urgency of the situation in the last
two weeks of the administration, when Darfur has been on fire for five years,''
said John Norris, executive director of the Enough Project, a group here that
campaigns against genocide.

Mr. Bush has long classified the violence in Darfur as genocide; since 2004,
hundreds of thousands of people have died and more than a million have been
displaced as a result of ethnic and sectarian strife in the region.

Yet the president has wrestled openly with whether or how to use American
military power there, and has favored relying on an international force,
prompting critics to accuse him of hand-wringing without action.

''There is this question, 'Why haven't they done this before?' '' said Jerry
Fowler, executive director of Save Darfur, an advocacy group, adding that the
airlift ''might be a little bit of last-minute legacy shopping by the
administration.''

Asked about the timing of the decision, Dana M. Perino, the White House
spokeswoman, replied: ''We're doing what we can as soon as we possibly can.
We've been working on trying to get the assets in place so that we would be able
to actually do it.''

The airlift is intended to support the year-old joint peacekeeping mission of
the United Nations and the African Union in Darfur. It will not involve direct
American military action or the donation of American supplies.

A spokesman for the United States Africa Command, Vince Crawley, said a small
number of American troops would provide protection aboard the two C-17 cargo
planes the Pentagon is sending and would remain in Darfur only long enough to
unload the aircraft.

Mr. Crawley said the planes would fly from the United States to Rwanda to pick
up 75 tons of large vehicles and heavy equipment, belonging to Rwanda, to take
to Darfur in the next two to three weeks. Separately, the State Department is to
hire a contractor to transport 240 containers of other supplies, currently stuck
at Port Sudan.

The United States conducted similar airlifts when the African Union ran the
peacekeeping mission, before last January.

A senior White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said  one of
Mr. Bush's ''real focuses was, the more peacekeepers and equipment we can get on
the ground before he leaves office, the better.''

In his statement on Monday, Mr. Hadley, the national security adviser, said the
airlift was ''further evidence'' that harsh criticism of the Bush
administration's approach in Darfur by Nicholas D. Kristof, an opinion columnist
for The New York Times, was inaccurate.

On Dec. 28, Mr. Kristof wrote that the White House had ignored a ''menu of
options for tough steps to squeeze Sudan,'' including destroying its air force,
put forth by the administration's own special envoy to the region, Richard
Williamson. Mr. Kristof also accused Mr. Hadley and Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice of ''acquiescence in genocide.''

Mr. Bush has repeatedly expressed frustration with his inability to do more to
curb the killing in Darfur. During a visit to Rwanda last year, he spoke in
unusually personal terms, after being reminded that his predecessor, Bill
Clinton, regretted not intervening in the 1994 Rwandan genocide.

Referring to his own decision not to send troops to Darfur, Mr. Bush said, ''I
still believe it was the right decision.'' But he acknowledged that by relying
on an international force, he had put himself ''at the mercy of the decisions of
others,'' in this case a United Nations effort that ''seems very bureaucratic to
me, particularly with people suffering.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); GENOCIDE
(89%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (78%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); ARMED FORCES (64%); PASSENGER & CARGO AIRCRAFT (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFRICA (92%); RWANDA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             843 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 6, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Incursion Into Gaza

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 528 words


With its ground incursion into Gaza, Israel has gambled that it can finally
silence the Hamas rockets that have terrorized its people for years. We
sympathize with that goal. But we are concerned that short-term success on the
battlefield might encourage the Israelis to keep pressing further and longer in
an attempt to decimate Hamas and wrest Gaza from its grip.

That is also a goal we can sympathize with -- there is no justification for
Hamas's attacks or its virulent rejectionism. But it is highly unlikely, and
there is a point of diminishing returns that could be easy to miscalculate.

The longer the Israeli incursion, the more casualties mount (550 Palestinians
and 5 Israelis have died so far); the more Hamas's popularity grows among its
supporters; the more moderate Arab states, which have correctly blamed Hamas for
ending a six-month cease-fire, are alienated; and the more regional instability
is fueled.

It will also make it harder for President-elect Barack Obama to pick up the
pieces of peacemaking when he takes office on Jan. 20.

Israel, aided by the United States, Europe and moderate Arab states, must try to
end this conflict as soon as possible and in a way that increases the chances
for negotiating a broad regional peace.

That means ensuring at a minimum that Hamas -- a proxy of Iran -- is not seen as
gaining from the war, that the rocket fire is halted permanently and that the
terrorist group can no longer restock its arsenal with more deadly weapons via
hundreds of tunnels dug under the Egypt-Gaza border.

Israel has made it clear that it is in no rush for a diplomatic solution, but
there will have to be one. That will require compromises from Israel, including
acceptance of international monitoring of a cease-fire and an increased flow of
goods and people between Israel and Gaza. Accepting those conditions would help
persuade skeptics that Israel's goals are as narrowly defined as it says they
are.

Israel must immediately allow foreign journalists access to Gaza, as the Israeli
high court ruled on Dec. 31. As in every war zone, reporting by journalists --
and human rights monitors as well -- can discourage abuse and is essential to
full public understanding of the conflict.

We applaud European and Arab officials for intensifying efforts to try to
achieve a meaningful cease-fire. While Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has
been in Washington telephoning foreign leaders (wasn't Middle East peace
supposed to be her legacy?), it is Europeans like President Nicolas Sarkozy of
France who have traveled to the region for face-to-face talks.

We understand Mr. Obama's decision to leave the current crisis to President
Bush. But we hope he and his team are prepared for whatever faces them in this
immediate crisis, and that they are working on a broader strategy for the
region.

There is little chance of restraining Hamas without dealing with its patrons in
Syria and Iran. Mr. Obama will also have to move quickly to revive
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza need to
see that there is another way out of their misery and that Hamas and its rockets
are not the answer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (87%); TERRORISM
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (70%);
JOURNALISM (65%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (62%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (62%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (71%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (51%); NICOLAS
SARKOZY (51%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(92%); EUROPE (92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             844 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Making a Treaty: The Senate's Role

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 793 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Restore the Senate's Treaty Power'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 5):

Now that the Democrats are about to gain control of the presidency and Congress,
John R. Bolton and John Yoo claim that only the Senate can approve a broad range
of international agreements. While Article II of the Constitution gives the
Senate this power, Article I grants both houses authority to approve them as
well. Congress has repeatedly exercised its Article I power to approve
fundamental international charters, including Nafta and the World Trade
Organization.

Mr. Bolton and Mr. Yoo are also on weak ground in suggesting that Congress has
used its Article I authority only in the field of international trade. Both
houses have acted under Article I to approve key national security accords, like
the SALT agreement with the Russians or the recent United States-India nuclear
agreement.

Mr. Bolton and Mr. Yoo, however, don't even mention Article I. While their claim
would enable a minority of Senate Republicans to veto international agreements,
it does not have a basis in either the constitutional text or precedent.

Bruce Ackerman

Oona Hathaway

New Haven, Jan. 5, 2009

The writers are professors of law at Yale and the University of California,
Berkeley, respectively.

To the Editor:

John R. Bolton and John Yoo would have the treaty power of the Senate restored
whereby new treaties would once again be enacted only by a two-thirds majority
of the Senate rather than by circuitous means that bypass the necessity of an
enormously difficult consensus. Fine.

But if they really want to restore the treaty power of the Senate, let us begin
by reaffirming the treaties we have already signed, which according to Article
VI of the Constitution makes them the ''supreme law of the land.'' I am thinking
of a long list of treaties beginning with the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which holds that ''no one shall be subjected to torture or to
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.'' We could start there and
work our way forward.

John Yoo seemed to have missed a few of those Senate-approved treaties a few
years ago when he wrote what are now being referred to as ''the torture memos.''
Judith McDaniel

Tucson, Jan. 5, 2009

To the Editor:

John R. Bolton and John Yoo's defense of treaties is intriguing, but also
ironic.

Federal courts have consistently upheld the constitutionality and
appropriateness of Congressional-executive agreements. Far from being rare and
reviled, these agreements are more common than treaties, and the Senate approves
hundreds each year.

The writers defend the use of Congressional-executive agreements for trade and
finance, but would not for climate change. This makes no sense. Climate pacts
are, among other things, complex economic agreements. Like trade deals, they are
lengthy to negotiate, hard to undo and also have successive ''rounds.''

Because they require extensive coordination, often in advance of international
negotiations, these agreements would do a better job than treaties of forging a
bipartisan climate policy.

It is ironic that these defenders of executive power are suddenly concerned
about the Senate's treaty prerogatives when Barack Obama becomes president.
Nigel Purvis

William Antholis

Washington, Jan. 5, 2009

The writers are, respectively, a scholar at Resources for the Future and
president of Climate Advisers; and managing director of the Brookings
Institution.

To the Editor:

It is certainly satisfying to see that John R. Bolton and John Yoo have
rediscovered that ''a bulwark against presidential inclinations'' can even
exist.

These two men -- who contemptuously dismissed any restraints on executive power
when they were in power, and forcefully advocated the absurd fantasy of a
unitary executive -- now worry that Congress might not assert its constitutional
powers against the executive branch.

If they had shown the slightest inclination to uphold international treaties
when they were in power -- the United Nations Convention Against Torture, for
instance, comes to mind -- their plaintive cry would be considerably more
persuasive today.

Francois Furstenberg

Montreal, Jan. 6, 2009

To the Editor:

During the years George W. Bush has occupied the White House, John Yoo has been
the chief legal architect of an imperial presidency, subordinating the role of
Congress and bypassing constitutional provisions for the balance of power.

Now that Barack Obama is soon to take office, Mr. Yoo and John R. Bolton, the
pertinacious former ambassador to the United Nations, are rushing to turn the
tables and agitating to eviscerate presidential authority.

Their motives are transparent and appalling. Martha D. Trowbridge

New York, Jan. 5, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY OTTO STEININGER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); APPROVALS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
WRITERS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); TORTURE (85%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (76%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); LAW
SCHOOLS (71%); BANKING & FINANCE (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (66%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(55%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (57%); WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION (57%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BERKELEY (55%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (69%); NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (55%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (55%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             845 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Talks Falter, Israel Warns Gazans of Stepped-Up Attacks

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza,
and Steven Erlanger from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel warned Gaza residents on Saturday that it was preparing the next phase of
its war against Hamas -- a deeper ground force operation -- as diplomatic
efforts to end the 15-day assault and Hamas rocket fire into Israel faltered.

Tank and artillery fire pounded Gaza all night and day, with plumes of black
smoke visible especially in the eastern part of Gaza City. A tank shell landed
outside the home of a family in Jabaliya, northeast of the city, killing eight
members of the same family who were sitting outside, hospital officials said,
bringing the death toll to more than 820. Nearly half of the dead were reported
to be civilians.

United Nations relief operations resumed after a daylong suspension prompted by
fears for the safety of the drivers. On Thursday, a United Nations driver was
killed and two others were wounded from what the agency said was Israeli fire.
Israel issued a statement on Saturday saying it was certain that the shooting
had not come from its forces, adding that the drivers were treated in an Israeli
hospital. It also redoubled its assurances to the United Nations on holding its
fire around aid convoys.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, whose Fatah Party opposes Hamas, was
in Cairo pressing a call for a cease-fire, and he discussed with President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt the idea of international troops along the Gaza-Egypt border.
Hamas representatives were also there, but the plan, also urged by the French,
seemed to be losing steam. Egypt is unenthusiastic about the presence of foreign
troops on its soil, while Hamas is unwilling to have the troops inside Gaza.

More focus was being placed on technical assistance to the Egyptians to help
them block and destroy the smuggler tunnels that help Hamas stay lethal.

Both Israel and Hamas rejected a United Nations Security Council resolution on
Friday calling for a cease-fire. And the actions of both on Saturday made their
resolve to keep fighting manifest.

More long-range rockets hit Israel, including two in open areas in Ashdod, a
city of 200,000 on the way to Tel Aviv.

Israel said its aircraft attacked more than 40 targets throughout Gaza, striking
10 rocket-launching sites and weapons-storage facilities. It also rounded up
people in the north of Gaza, questioning them and telling them to deliver
warnings to Hamas activists. It said it killed the man in charge of Hamas's
rocket launchers and another 15 militants.

In Gaza City as well, residents reported getting phone calls that said: ''We are
going to intensify the military strike against Hamas. Our intention is not to
harm civilians. If you live near Hamas, evacuate.''

Leaflets were dropped addressed to ''the residents of Gaza,'' saying that the
Israeli military had in recent days warned residents of the southern city of
Rafah of ''an imminent operation,'' and asking them to evacuate their homes for
their safety.

''The fact that the residents of Rafah abided by the orders,'' the leaflets
continued, ''has protected those who had nothing to do with the fight. The
Israel Defense Forces will intensify shortly its directed operation against
tunnels, weapon storehouses and members of terrorist groups all over Gaza. For
your safety and that of your family you are asked to stay away from terrorist
elements and from places where terrorist operations occur. Please continue
abiding by our orders.''

Red Cross workers said their telephones were flooded with calls from residents
of the Beach refugee camp who had received large numbers of the calls and
leaflets. The callers wanted to know if they should evacuate their homes, and if
so, to where.

A Beach camp car mechanic named Hamdi Eki, 47, was asked why he did not leave
after receiving such a call. ''I have nine children,'' he said. ''Where can I
go? I prefer to die at my own house.''

Some Beach camp residents did leave but ended up in other neighborhoods or camps
that had received similar warnings.

Israel has come under increasing international criticism for the growing number
of civilian casualties of this war and for complicating efforts by aid and
rights groups to help those caught in the cross-fire. Israel says Hamas fighters
hide consciously among civilians, in mosques and schools and under clinics.

Khaled Meshal, the leader of Hamas who lives in exile in Syria, said Saturday
that the ferocity of the Israeli campaign had crossed the line and called it a
''holocaust.''

''You have destroyed the last chance for negotiations,'' Mr. Meshal said,
according to Reuters.

Fred Abrahams, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch, who has studied both
the Kosovo and Lebanon conflicts, said he was concerned that Israel was not
paying enough attention to international legal requirements for ''distinction
and proportionality -- first, to distinguish between combatants and civilians,
and second, whether an attack will have a disproportionate effect on the
civilians in the area.''

Even if a target is legitimate, he said, ''you can't drop a 500-pound bomb in an
area crowded with civilians.''

This was also the first conflict he could remember when civilians could not flee
the war zone. Gaza's borders are shut both to Israel and to Egypt, and
civilians, he said, ''are fish in a barrel.''

''Our conclusions are preliminary, but evidence is suggesting serious violations
of the laws of war, which require investigation,'' Mr. Abrahams said.

That is also true of Hamas, he said. ''We need to know more about what Hamas is
doing on the ground,'' he said. ''For example, we know Hamas has stored weapons
in mosques, so when Israel targets a mosque, we don't scream war crime.''

Regarding force protection, he said it ''must be balanced by distinction and
proportion.''

''A violation by Hamas shooting from a mosque or school doesn't give the Israeli
Army carte blanche to return fire in the name of force protection with
everything and anything it has,'' he added.

Human rights groups are also concerned about the Israeli use of white
phosphorous, which creates smoke on a battlefield, at low altitudes or crowded
areas, because it can burn like a kind of napalm.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Palestinians pressed forward before receiving emergency food
aid on Saturday at a United Nations distribution center at the Shati refugee
camp in Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM MOUSSA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 An Israeli woman being evacuated from her home in Ashkelon on Saturday, after
it was hit by a missile fired from Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); HAMAS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (88%); ARMED FORCES (86%); AL FATAH (79%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (75%);
HOSPITALS (70%); SMUGGLING (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (59%); HOSNI MUBARAK (50%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (95%); EGYPT (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             846 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Signals His Reluctance To Investigate Bush Programs

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1619 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President-elect Barack Obama signaled in an interview broadcast Sunday that he
was unlikely to authorize a broad inquiry into Bush administration programs like
domestic eavesdropping or the treatment of terrorism suspects.

But Mr. Obama also said prosecutions would proceed if the Justice Department
found evidence that laws had been broken.

As a candidate, Mr. Obama broadly condemned some counterterrorism tactics of the
Bush administration and its claim that the measures were justified under
executive powers. But his administration will face competing demands: pressure
from liberals who want wide-ranging criminal investigations, and the need to
establish trust among the country's intelligence agencies. At the Central
Intelligence Agency, in particular, many officers flatly oppose any further
review and may protest the prospect of a broad inquiry into their past conduct.

In the clearest indication so far of his thinking on the issue, Mr. Obama said
on the ABC News program ''This Week With George Stephanopoulos'' that there
should be prosecutions if ''somebody has blatantly broken the law'' but that his
legal team was still evaluating interrogation and detention issues and would
examine ''past practices.''

Mr. Obama added that he also had ''a belief that we need to look forward as
opposed to looking backwards.''

''And part of my job,'' he continued, ''is to make sure that, for example, at
the C.I.A., you've got extraordinarily talented people who are working very hard
to keep Americans safe. I don't want them to suddenly feel like they've got
spend their all their time looking over their shoulders.''

The Bush administration has authorized interrogation tactics like waterboarding
that critics say skirted federal laws and international treaties, and domestic
wiretapping without warrants. But the details of those programs have never been
made public, and administration officials have said their actions were legal
under a president's wartime powers.

There was no immediate reaction from Capitol Hill, where there has been a
growing sense that Mr. Obama was not inclined to pursue these matters. In
resisting pressure for a wider inquiry, he risks the ire of influential
Democratic lawmakers on Congressional judiciary and intelligence committees and
core constituencies who hoped his election would cast a spotlight on President
Bush's antiterror efforts.

The issue will also be an important early test of his relationship with
conservatives in Congress and the country's intelligence agencies; both groups
oppose any further review.

On other terrorism issues, Mr. Obama suggested in the interview that his
approach might be more measured. He said the closing of the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which once seemed to be an early top objective, was not
likely to happen during the first 100 days of his administration.

''It is more difficult than I think a lot of people realize,'' Mr. Obama said,
''and we are going to get it done. But part of the challenge that you have is
that you have a bunch of folks that have been detained, many of whom who may be
very dangerous, who have not been put on trial or have not gone through some
adjudication.''

Mr. Obama has in the past condemned waterboarding, and he was explicit in the
interview that he regarded the use of the technique, in which a subject is made
to believe that he is drowning, as torture, prohibited by statute. And the
president-elect said he disagreed with Vice President Dick Cheney, who has
defended the practice.

''Vice President Cheney, I think, continues to defend what he calls
extraordinary measures or procedures when it comes to interrogations,'' Mr.
Obama said, ''and from my view, waterboarding is torture.''

Mr. Obama's choice for attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., is widely expected
to be asked about his views on these issues at his confirmation hearing this
week. Associates say Mr. Holder is open to prosecutions based on specific
accusations but is less eager to use the criminal law to commence wide-ranging
inquiries. Before being chosen for the Obama cabinet, he said there should be
''a reckoning'' over Bush administration policies.

Lawyers who represented Bush administration officials over the years expressed
little surprise that Mr. Obama's legal and national security team had lost
whatever appetite it might have had for delving into alleged misdeeds of the
Bush years.

''A new president doesn't want to look vengeful,'' said a former Bush White
House lawyer, Bradford A. Berenson, who was a Harvard law classmate of Mr. Obama
and has represented administration figures as a private lawyer, ''and the last
thing a new administration wants to do is spend its time and energy rehashing
the perceived sins of the old one.

''No matter how much the Obama administration's most extreme supporters may be
screaming for blood, the president himself doesn't seem to share that
bloodlust.''

Moreover, any effort to conduct a wider re-examination would almost certainly
provoke a backlash at the country's intelligence agencies.

Mark Lowenthal, who was the assistant director for analysis and production at
the C.I.A. from 2002 to 2005, said if agents were criminally investigated for
doing something that top Bush administration officials asked them to do and that
they were assured was legal, intelligence officers would be less willing to take
risks to protect the country.

''There are just huge costs to the day-to-day operation of intelligence,'' Mr.
Lowenthal, now the president of the Intelligence and Security Academy, said of a
potential investigation. He added that he saw no benefit to such an effort
because, he said, the public was not clamoring for it.

But it may be difficult for Mr. Obama to resist the pressure for a fuller public
accounting, and lawmakers appear ready to proceed even without his support.

The House Judiciary Committee chairman, Representative John Conyers Jr.,
Democrat of Michigan, has already introduced a measure to create a commission to
investigate Mr. Bush's detention, interrogation and rendition policies. Mr.
Conyers's bill would establish a bipartisan nine-member commission with subpoena
power and a mandate ''to investigate the broad range of policies'' undertaken
with claims that Mr. Bush's wartime powers as commander in chief trumped laws
and treaties.

The measure by Mr. Conyers is not the only sign that Congress may force the
issue. Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the second-ranking Democrat on the
intelligence committee, said such a commission might not be necessary because
the panel itself would press the administration to declassify as much
information about C.I.A. prisons as possible.

''With regard to the C.I.A. interrogation program,'' Mr. Wyden said in an
interview, ''if you want to make a break with the flawed policies of the past,
as the president-elect has said he wishes to do, you have got to come clean
about what happened over the past eight years, and that is why I'm going to push
very hard to declassify these documents.''

Mr. Obama's legal team could also be forced to react to litigation pending
before federal courts. For example, the Bush administration has invoked the
state-secrets privilege to avoid disclosing information about its surveillance
program being sought in a civil lawsuit. The Obama legal team will have to
decide how to handle that case.

In a related area, Mr. Conyers has indicated that he intends to keep pressing a
House Judiciary Committee investigation into the Bush administration's firings
of nine United States attorneysand other accusations of political favoritism in
hiring at the Justice Department.

The Bush administration has blocked subpoenas from Congress for documents and
testimony by White House officials in that case, citing executive privilege.
Last week, Mr. Conyers reissued the subpoenas to Mr. Bush's chief of staff,
Joshua B. Bolten, and his former White House counsel, Harriet E. Miers, in the
name of the new Congress, ensuring that a lawsuit over the dispute will stay
alive into the Obama presidency.

Mr. Obama is facing even more intense pressure from liberal, human-rights and
civil-liberties groups to allow some kind of investigation into the Bush
administration's terrorism policies.

Chris Anders, senior legislative counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union,
said it would be a simple matter to start such an inquiry because the Justice
Department's special prosecutor, John H. Durham, is already investigating
whether the C.I.A. acted illegally when it destroyed videotapes of its harsh
interrogations. Mr. Anders said Mr. Durham's mandate could be expanded to look
into whether the interrogations depicted on the tapes were illegal.

Some groups are focused on prosecution. Michael Ratner, president of the Center
for Constitutional Rights, said prosecution efforts were justified, even if they
did not lead to convictions, as a way to deter future officials from undertaking
a similar ''assault on the law itself.''

Other groups want fuller public disclosure. They favor a commission that would
answer lingering questions about exactly what happened -- like disclosing how
many Americans were wiretapped without warrants and making a detailed accounting
of what interrogators did to each detainee and the real value of the information
they obtained through the enhanced tactics.

''One of the things that is going to have to happen is an examination and, to
the extent possible, a public airing of the validity of the claims that these
policies enhanced our security,'' said Elisa Massimino, the executive director
of Human Rights First. ''Because there is a lot of reason to think that calculus
hasn't been accurate.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); INTERVIEWS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(79%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (79%); WIRETAPPING (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(77%); CONSERVATISM (75%); LIBERALISM (75%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (75%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (65%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             848 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mistakes, I've Made a Few, Bush Tells Reporters

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1077 words


WASHINGTON -- President Bush held what he called ''the ultimate exit interview''
on Monday, using the final news conference of his presidency to dispute the idea
that the nation's ''moral standing has been damaged'' by his actions and to warn
President-elect Barack Obama that, despite the turbulence in the economy, his
most urgent priority must be fighting ''an enemy that would like to attack
America and Americans again.''

Looking back over the long arc of his turbulent presidency, Mr. Bush was by
turns impassioned and defiant, reflective and light-hearted, even as he conceded
that some things ''didn't go according to plan.'' He confessed a litany of
mistakes, refused to talk about pardons, cautioned the Republican Party to be
inclusive and wondered aloud what it would feel like to make coffee for his
wife, Laura, at their ranch in Crawford, Tex., on the morning after Mr. Obama
takes his place.

He showed flashes of the humor that helped elect him, as when he said -- without
offering specifics -- that he intended to get busy quickly after leaving office.

''I just can't envision myself, you know, with a big straw hat and Hawaiian
shirt, sitting on some beach,'' the president said, adding, ''particularly since
I quit drinking.''

But the most striking moment of the 47-minute question-and-answer session, by
far, was Mr. Bush's rousing defense of his record on fighting terrorism. With
human rights advocates accusing his White House of condoning torture and
demanding an inquiry into its counterterrorism tactics, the departing president
used his platform to admonish reporters, and by extension, his successor and the
nation, not to forget the lessons of Sept. 11, 2001, and the climate of fear in
which his policies were forged.

''All these debates will matter not if there is another attack on the
homeland,'' he said, his voice rising as he leaned over the lectern for effect.

''You remember what it was like right after September the 11th around here?'' he
demanded, adding: ''People were saying, 'How come they didn't see it? How come
they didn't connect the dots?' Do you remember what the environment was like in
Washington? I do.''

Mr. Bush would not address the possibility, widely debated in legal and
political circles, that he might issue so-called pre-emptive pardons to
counterterrorism agents or administration officials who could face criminal
prosecution for a range of activities, including harsh interrogation techniques
like waterboarding or the firing of United States attorneys.

''I won't be discussing pardons here,'' he said, cutting off the question. It
was the only question he refused to answer.

The last time Mr. Bush took questions from reporters was in Baghdad, where an
Iraqi journalist made international headlines by throwing a shoe at him.

The news conference on Monday featured only questions, no shoes, and it will not
be the final word from the president. The White House said Mr. Bush would
deliver a farewell address on Thursday night on the ''greatest challenges facing
the country and what it will take to meet them'' -- a parting shot, in a sense,
from a leader who is well aware that historians will debate his policies for
decades.

Mr. Bush said he was not certain why he had become so divisive. ''I don't know
why they get angry,'' he replied to a question about those who disagreed with
his policies so vehemently that it became personal. ''I don't know why they get
hostile.'' He added that he had learned not to pay attention.

''I don't see how I can get back home in Texas and look in the mirror and be
proud of what I see, if I allowed the loud voices, the loud critics to prevent
me from doing what I thought was necessary to protect this country,'' Mr. Bush
said.

It has been nearly eight years since Mr. Bush arrived in Washington vowing to be
''a uniter, not a divider,'' with the idea that his presidency would focus on
domestic issues like education, Social Security and immigration reform.

He leaves behind two unfinished wars and an economy in turmoil, and the wear and
tear of the office shows. At 62, he is grayer and a bit more wrinkled now. Yet
Mr. Bush said that he had ''never felt isolated'' during his time in office, and
dismissed the idea of the presidency as a burden.

''Even in the darkest moments of Iraq,'' the president said, he and his staff
found that there were times ''when we could be light-hearted and support each
other.''

Mr. Bush began Monday's news conference by thanking the reporters who covered
him, although the relationship has often been tense. He fielded a variety of
questions, including whether he would ask Congress to release $350 billion in
bailout money -- he later did so, at the request of Mr. Obama -- and why his
efforts to bring about a peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians had
failed.

''I know we have advanced the process,'' he said.

Mr. Bush has repeatedly said that he believes history will be the judge of his
presidency, and while he said so again on Monday, he did deliver his own
assessment. Four years ago, he was asked if he had made any mistakes during his
presidency, and struggled to come up with an answer, a moment that came to
define him as unwilling to engage in critical self-analysis.

''Clearly, putting a 'Mission Accomplished' on an aircraft carrier was a
mistake,'' Mr. Bush began, referring to the banner displayed during his
shipboard speech in May 2003 declaring that major combat operations in Iraq had
ended. ''It sent the wrong message,'' he said, adding, ''Obviously, some of my
rhetoric has been a mistake.'' Mr. Bush said he had ''thought long and hard''
about Hurricane Katrina, which had become an iconic low point of his years in
office. But he did not say what might have been done differently.

He also said, for the first time, that he believed he should have pressed
immigration reform -- he had come to office calling it his first priority --
instead of calling for an overhaul of Social Security after the 2004 election.

He predicted Republicans would make a comeback but said he was ''concerned that
in the wake of the defeat that the temptation will be to look inward.''

Looking ahead, Mr. Bush has said he intends to write a book and to work on his
library and public policy institute at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.

One thing he does not intend to do, he said Monday, is make news.

''When I get out of here, I'm getting off the stage,'' Mr. Bush said, adding,
''I've had my time in the klieg lights.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In 47 minutes, passion, defiance, reflection,
light-heartedness, and finally, a thought on coffee.(TOP FOUR PHOTOGRAPHS BY
DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES
SAUL LOEB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)(A1)
 President Bush leaving his final news conference on Monday. He is grayer and a
bit more wrinkled after eight years in office.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUL LOEB/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)(A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); PARDONS (88%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(86%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); PRESS CONFERENCES (78%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES
(73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); INVESTIGATIONS (63%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); BARACK OBAMA (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             849 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Warns of Refugee Crisis in Gaza Strip

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and SABRINA TAVERNISE; Taghreed El-Khodary
reported from Gaza City, and Sabrina Tavernise from Jerusalem. Steven Erlanger
contributed reporting from Jerusalem, and William J. Broad from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: GAZA CITY


Growing numbers of Palestinians are fleeing their homes for makeshift shelters
in schools, office buildings and a park as the Israeli Army continues to press
its military campaign deeper into Gaza City.

According to the United Nations, about 30,000 people are living in schools it
sponsors and an estimated 60,000 have fled to the houses of relatives. The
figures still represent a small part of Gaza's 1.5 million population but have
doubled in the past four days, United Nations officials said, raising concerns
about the humanitarian impact of a broader war.

''What began as very small, isolated numbers is now turning into a torrent,''
said Aidan O'Leary, deputy director for the United Nations agency that deals
with Palestinian refugees.

Maj. Jacob Dallal, an Israeli military spokesman, said units used leaflets to
warn families to leave areas where they planned to operate. Aid officials say
that with Gaza's borders closed, choices for shelters in the 140-square-mile
strip are slim and the shelters are not completely safe. Last week, as many as
43 people were killed near a United Nations school by an Israeli mortar strike
that the military said was in response to a Hamas attack. The Israeli military
disputes the death toll.

Egypt continued to press for a cease-fire on Monday, the 17th day of Israel's
military campaign in Gaza. MENA, Egypt's  state-owned news agency, quoted an
unidentified Egyptian official as saying that talks between the nation's
intelligence chief, Omar Suleiman, and Hamas envoys were ''positive.''

Tony Blair, a special international envoy for  the Middle East, speaking from
Cairo, said the ''elements of an agreement for an immediate cease-fire are
there,'' The Associated Press reported, though a senior Israeli military
official, Amos Gilad, postponed his trip to Egypt to discuss a possible truce.
An Israeli official, speaking on condition of anonymity because the negotiations
were not yet public, said the delay was a matter of timing and not a breakdown
in talks.

In a televised speech on Monday night, a senior Hamas official, Ismail Haniya,
expressed an openness to a diplomatic solution but reiterated previous demands
that any deal include the opening of Gaza's border crossings, which Israel and
Egypt have kept mostly closed since Hamas violently pushed out its rival Fatah
in 2007.

''We are not closed to this path,'' he said of diplomacy, speaking from hiding
in Gaza.

He praised Hamas fighters as heroes who would be victorious.

Aid groups, meantime, spotlighted what they said was a growing number of
refugees. When Israeli soldiers moved deeper into the Zeitoun neighborhood of
Gaza on Sunday night, Olfat Jaawanah decided she had had enough. Shrapnel flew
through a window, injuring her son, Ali, she said, and on Monday morning, she
gathered a few blankets and moved her nine children out of their large house.

The nearby United Nations school was full -- its bare classrooms packed with
families and its toilets smelling foul  -- so she took  her family instead to
her husband's office, in a building belonging to an international organization
in the center of Gaza City.

According to Mr. O'Leary, about a third of the agency's 91 schools are now full.

Movement is complicated by the confusion over when it is safe to leave. When the
Abu Hajaj family received a leaflet last weekend, they took it as a sign of safe
passage. But Majad Abdel Karim Abu Hajaj, a teacher at a United Nations school,
said his mother and sister were killed as they walked holding a white flag.
Their bodies remain where they fell, he said, because ambulances cannot get to
the area.

Sarit Michaeli of B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, said she had had six
reports of families stuck in areas now occupied by Israeli troops.

At times, the city took on a cinematic quality. A woman came with a pan and
dough to Al Nasir hospital, asking for the use of its  electricity so she could
bake. A corpse was wheeled in a donkey cart where an ambulance was afraid to go.

Humanitarian shipments were moving on Monday, and Egypt, under pressure to do
more for Palestinian victims of the conflict, agreed to allow in 38 Arab doctors
and a group of European legislators.

Palestinians interviewed in Gaza on Monday cited another reason for their
flight: Israel soldiers, they said, are firing rounds of a noxious substance
that burns skin and makes it hard to breathe.

A resident of southwest Gaza City on Monday showed a reporter a piece of metal
casing with the identifying number M825A1, which Marc Garlasco, a military
analyst with Human Rights Watch, identified as white phosphorus, typically used
for signaling, smoke screens and destroying enemy equipment.

In recent years, experts and rights advocates have argued over whether its use
to intentionally harm people   violates international conventions.

Major Dallal would not say whether Israel was using white phosphorus, but said,
''The munitions we use are consistent with international law.''

Still, white phosphorus can cause injury, and a growing number of Gazans report
being hurt by it, including in Beit Lahiya, Khan Yunis, and in eastern and
southwestern Gaza City. When exposed to air, it ignites, experts say, and if
packed into an artillery shell, it can rain down flaming chemicals that cling to
anything they touch.

Luay Suboh, 10, from Beit Lahiya, lost his eyesight and some skin on his face
Saturday when, his mother said, a fiery substance clung to him as he darted home
from a shelter where his family was staying to pick up clothes.

The substance smelled like burned trash, said Ms. Jaawanah, the mother who fled
her home in Zeitoun, who had experienced it too. She had no affection for Hamas,
but her sufferings were changing that. ''Do you think I'm against them firing
rockets now?'' she asked, referring to Hamas. ''No. I was against it before. Not
anymore.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A woman dug through rubble on Monday in Rafah after an Israeli
airstrike. An Israeli military spokesman said leaflets were used to warn
Palestinian families to leave areas targeted for attacks.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALED
OMAR/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Luay Suboh, 10, lost his eyesight and some skin on his face Saturday when a
fiery substance clung to him as he ran in a street.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ISMAIL
ZAYDAH/REUTERS)
 An Israeli reservist praying on Monday on the Israeli side of the border after
returning from a mission in the Gaza Strip.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES SAMAN FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
HAMAS (89%); PEACE PROCESS (88%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (75%); ARMED FORCES (73%); BORDER CONTROL (72%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (50%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (73%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); EGYPT (94%);
MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             851 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times, January 16, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1988 words


International

EARLY RELEASE OF RUSSIAN RAISES TENSIONS IN CHECHNYA

A former Russian tank commander who was imprisoned for killing a Chechen woman
was released early for good behavior. As he walked free, exasperation and
animosity flared in Chechnya. Human rights advocates and Chechen officials, two
sides that rarely inhabit the same side of an issue, spoke out against the early
release with a unified voice. Page A6

ACTIVISTS SPEAK OF TORTURE

As activists came forward to provide harrowing tales of torture they say they
were subjected to by agents of President Robert Mugabe's government, opposition
leader Morgan Tsvangirai demanded that all those imprisoned on trumped up
charges be released. Mr. Tsvangirai said it must happen before he would consider
joining with Mr. Mugabe in a power-sharing deal for which another round of talks
is scheduled next week. Page A6

CONCERN ABOUT IRAQI JOURNALIST

It's been more than a month since an Iraqi television journalist expressed his
disapproval with President Bush by throwing his shoes at him. The journalist was
promptly detained and has been allowed only two visitors since. Few people know
where he is, he is not allowed telephone calls, and he has claimed he has been
tortured. Page A6

Mortality in Post-Soviet Era A8

Netherlands Journal

A Deep Freeze Warms the Soul

For the first time in 12 years, the canals of the Netherlands have frozen,
bringing a euphoric pandemonium to the Dutch. Hundreds of thousands of
red-cheeked people tore outside, ice skates in hand. Page A10

WOULD-BE PROTESTER SENTENCED

A legal advocate who signed up for a permit from the Chinese government to
protest during the Beijing Olympics, and was subsequently arrested, has been
sentenced to three years in prison, his lawyer said. The advocate was swept up
along with others when the government designated three public parks for
sanctioned protests, and then arrested those who applied for the necessary
permits. Page A11

WHAT COST HEATHROW EFFICIENCY?

A third runway at Heathrow airport in Britain would allow 125,000 more flights
to take off and land each year. It would allow the airport, currently reviled
for its myriad hassles for travelers, to better compete internationally with
other airports. But the runway would require the razing of an entire village,
with residents at a loss about where they would go. Page A11

National

COURT AFFIRMS WIRETAPPING

Without Warrants

In a rare public ruling, a secret federal appeals court has said
telecommunications companies must cooperate with the government to intercept
international calls and e-mail messages of American citizens suspected of being
terrorists. The ruling did not address whether President Bush was within his
powers in ordering domestic warrantless wiretapping without Congressional
approval. Page A13

ILL PELICANS FLOOD ANIMAL HOSPITALS

More than 400 brown pelicans have been found dead or dying in California since
late December. With a list of sinister possibilities, it turns out that the most
likely explanation is a snowstorm on the Washington-Oregon border. Above, a
volunteer puts a sick pelican into a warm water pool at the International Bird
Rescue Research Center in Fairfield, Calif. Page A13

METHANE CONFIRMED ON MARS

What explanation can there be when methane gas erupts from the surface of Mars?
Since some kind of interplanetary juvenile prank is out of the question,
bacteria is a likely explanation. The eruption occurred in 2003 and researchers
have learned that it made for 19,000 metric tons of methane. It was the first
definitive proof of methane on Mars. Page A14

STUDENTS FOOTING A GROWING BILL

It is called the Delta Project, and it is researching what it calls the black
box of higher education -- why does it cost so much and where does the money go?
It is not going to the students. The study has found they are paying more and
getting less. While financing for actual education has dropped, the money being
funneled into administrative costs has gone up. Page A17

F.D.A. FAULTED ON DEVICE REVIEWS

A report by Congressional investigators concluded, and consumer advocates and
industry groups agreed, that the Food and Drug Administration's system for
evaluating medical devices was deeply flawed. Most medical devices have never
been shown to be safe or effective. It is not the first time the agency has been
upbraided and in previous cases the agency agreed and promised to do better.
Page A17

Obituaries

TRAMMELL CROW, 94

He began his career as a teller behind the window at the Mercantile National
Bank in Dallas. His legendary career as a real estate developer and landlord
gained momentum from there. In 1971 and 1986, Forbes and The Wall Street Journal
respectively, called Mr. Crow the largest landlord in the United States. Page
B15

Business

QUESTIONS ABOUT APPLE'S FUTURE WITH ITS VISIONARY ON THE SIDELINES

Steven P. Jobs helped redefined the way consumers look at and value design in
personal computers, reinvented retail and turned the mobile phone world on its
head, leaving everybody else to play catch-up. But Mr. Jobs has announced a
six-month leave of absence because of health concerns. What does the future look
like for Apple without its visionary? Page B1

INVESTIGATION INTO FINANCIER

New York's attorney general has issued subpoenas to determine whether the
financier J. Ezra Merkin defrauded universities and charities when he invested
money in Bernard L. Madoff's Ponzi scheme, money that they gave him to manage.
Many of those institutions are now suing Mr. Merkin, claiming that his
investment lost them millions of dollars. Page B1

Breaking Views

Bank of America and HSBC

Shareholders of Bank of America may be hoping that the federal government will
be very tough on the chief executive, Ken Lewis, if it hands over a second round
of aid. HSBC could certainly use an infusion of capital, but needs to avoid
looking desperate. Page B2

EUROPEAN BANK CUTS KEY RATE

The European Central Bank cut its benchmark interest rate to 2 percent while
hinting that it was possible that it would drop even further. Page B2

INTEL UNRESTRAINED BY CRISIS

Intel, the world's largest microchip company, is weathering a precipitous drop
in hardware sales by spending more money. Intel has vowed to continue making
strides in manufacturing capability and challenging companies in new markets.
Page B3

LUXURY RETAILERS HIT HARD

Two luxury retail titans are stooped and gasping in the wake of one of the worst
holiday shopping seasons in decades. Saks Inc. has said it planned to cut about
9 percent of its workforce, eliminating merit raises and matching 401(k)
contributions, and Neiman Marcus said it was eliminating 2.3 percent of it's
employees. Page B4

AS FUEL DROPS, SO DOES WHOLESALE

As the prices of wholesale goods dropped in December, along with the drop in
demand, economists worried that deflation was dangerously close. The drop was
attributed to the declining cost of fuel, which cut the prices for various items
like fertilizers, rubber and steel. Page B8

New York

BLOOMBERG REASSURES NEW YORKERS

And Rolls Out a Plan for the Future

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg gave his annual State of the City Address and
entreated New Yorkers to bear up under the pressure of the financial crisis,
citing earlier crises like Sept. 11. As a tangible part of that bearing up, he
rolled out a plan to preserve and create 400,000 jobs without additional
spending, and several other measures that would make life easier and government
smoother. Page A22

METROPOLITAN OPERA FACES CUTS

The Metropolitan Opera is facing a disaster scenario as its $300 million
endowment has dropped by a third, the Met's general manager said. The future
looks decidedly grim unless the opera can find major cost cuts along with
concessions from its unions. Page A22

Sports

LONG MEMORIES AND HISTORY

Preserve and Maintain a Rivalry

The memory of the Steelers last loss of an A.F.C. championship game in Jan. 23,
2005, still stings, even though they went on to win the Super Bowl thenext
season. That was bad. You know what was worse? Losing last Sunday's game against
the Ravens. It's an enmity that has long roots, extending all the way back to
when the Ravens were the Cleveland Browns. Page B9

Mom, Apple Pie and Baseball Cards B9

OF THE PEOPLE FOR THE PEOPLE

He was a basketball star and a folk hero three years ago in Martinsburg, W.Va.
After that he was an all-American senior expecting to make the N.B.A. draft. Now
at 24 he's a middle school teacher in the town where he was born and raised, and
his most immediate concern is to graduate special education students into
regular classes. Page B9

SURPRISES NO LONGER FOR MARIST

The star guard of the Marist college basketball team hears it from friends and
hears it from locals. They want the Final Four. They've saddled themselves with
that expectation by delivering some major accomplishments and landing themselves
a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament in four of the last five seasons. Page B13

Weekend

THE BIOPIC OF BIGGIE SMALLS:

The Man, the Myth, the Notorious

''Notorious'' is a lively melodrama wholeheartedly devoted to burnishing the
myth of Biggie Smalls, the Brooklyn-born rapper. But hip-hop artfully blurs the
line between raw testimony and fantastical exaggeration, so disentangling fact
from myth is not always easy, A. O. Scott writes. PAGE C1

ALL ALONE IN A CROWDED HOME

Sam Mendes's seriously comic production of Chekhov's last play, ''The Cherry
Orchard,'' about a motley mix of aristocrats in a country home, is now showing
at the Harvey Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music. But the cast, which
includes Sinead Cusack and Ethan Hawke, lacks the feeling of characters trapped
in the solitary confinement of their own thoughts yet itching to connect, Ben
Brantley writes. PAGE C1

THE LIVES OF A DISPARATE HOUSEWIFE

In Showtime's ''United States of Tara,'' Toni Collette plays a woman with
dissociative identity disorder, mainstreaming that unthinkable way of life into
PTA meetings and suburban cul-de-sacs. The show's comic conceit is that Tara's
loved ones humor her personalities, from a sex-crazed teenage girl to a
gun-loving redneck, as old friends, Alessandra Stanley writes. PAGE C1

HOW WE GOT TO SESAME STREET

The evolution of ''Sesame Street'' should make for a good read. But Michael
Davis's new book ''Street Gang: The Complete History of Sesame Street'' turns
out not to be so complete, providing little analysis of the show's social and
cultural impact, Michiko Kakutani writes. PAGE C1

Movie Review: 'Hotel for Dogs' C9

TV Review: 'Big Love' C17

Escapes

HANGING 10 DEGREES:

Surfing an Icy Lake Superior

Surfing in a snowstorm may sound like a direct route toward certain death. But
on Lake Superior, where surfers ride all months of the year, thick wet suits,
gloves, hoods, booties and petroleum jelly smudged on exposed skin all form a
protective shell against the crushing cold encountered by wave catchers in what
is one of the world's most unlikely surfing scenes. PAGE D1

Editorial

A WAY OUT OF GAZA?

We agree that Israel had to defend itself against Hamas's rocket attacks. But we
fear the assault on Gaza has passed the point of diminishing returns. It is time
for a cease-fire with Hamas and a return to the peace negotiations that are the
only real hope for guaranteeing Israel's long-term security. page A28

A CITY SHAKEN, 'NOT BROKEN'

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who steered New York through the post-9/11 economic
crisis, now has the daunting task of holding the city steady during a national
recession. Much will depend on help from Washington and, especially, the
governor and State Legislature in Albany. page A28

Op-Ed

PAUL KRUGMAN

President-elect Barack Obama should reconsider his apparent decision to let the
previous administration get away with crime. Consequences aside, that's not a
decision he has the right to make. page A29

DAVID BROOKS

A thousand mental shortcomings contributed to the financial meltdown. What does
that tell us about what is happening today with public policy? page A29

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
 A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); SENTENCING (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); AIRPORTS (85%); AIRPORT RUNWAYS (85%);
PRISONS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS
(74%); TERRORISM (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); APPROVALS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(72%); WIRETAPPING (71%); LITIGATION (69%); OLYMPICS (68%); LAWYERS (67%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (66%); LICENSES & PERMITS (64%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (64%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); APPEALS COURTS (60%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (50%);
VETERINARY SERVICES (50%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (69%); GEORGE W BUSH (55%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (78%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (68%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); CHINA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             853 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Improving Labor Standards

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 199 words


To the Editor:

It was fascinating to read Nicholas D. Kristof's column attempting to use
Cambodia as an example of how the proliferation of sweatshops, without basic
labor standards, might help workers (''Where Sweatshops Are a Dream,'' Jan. 15).

He does not mention that the United States textile agreement with Cambodia,
which included the very kinds of labor protections that Mr. Kristof seems to
lament, expired several years ago. During the life of the agreement, the
Cambodian garment industry grew while working conditions dramatically improved.

Mr. Kristof presents poor workers with a false choice between having a job and
having human rights. Workers can have both if the president and Congress commit
to improving trade policies so that violations of labor rights are subject to
the same enforcement mechanisms as commercial complaints brought by
multinational corporations.

As a start, we should modernize both Nafta and Cafta to upgrade the weak labor
and environmental provisions included in both flawed agreements.

George Miller  Washington, Jan.

16, 2009

The writer, a Democratic congressman from California, is chairman of the House
Committee on Education and Labor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GARMENT WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); FREE TRADE TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); EMPLOYMENT (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); WRITERS (73%);
PUBLIC POLICY (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); TRADE
DEVELOPMENT (67%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (56%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             854 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: January 21, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2172 words


Moscow Journal

A City Shivers as a Ritual Returns

Monday was Russian Orthodox Epiphany, and roughly 30,000 Muscovites lined up to
dunk themselves in icy rivers and ponds, city officials said. The annual ritual
baptism, which is believed to wash away sins, is enjoying a boisterous revival
(with high production values) after being banished to villages during the Soviet
era. PAGE A10

BOMBS KILL 5 IN BAGHDAD

Violence rose in Baghdad ahead of provincial elections on Jan. 31, with five
people killed in two separate bombings. PAGE A14

Australia Reports Rescue at Sea A16

Suit Filed in Chinese Milk Scandal A19

CHECHNYA PROTESTS LAWYER'S DEATH

Thousands of people attended a rally in Chechnya's capital, Grozny, to protest
the killing of a prominent human rights lawyer who had represented the family of
a Chechen girl killed by a former Russian officer.  PAGE A19

CHINA SEES THREATS, NEAR AND AFAR

An assessment from China's cabinet sees threats from independence movements and
American arms sales to Taiwan. According to goals implied in the paper, China is
seeking to counterbalance the American military presence in Asia. PAGE A19

New Supply Routes to Afghanistan A20

Conflict in Gaza

Israel Slows Gaza Withdrawal

As the Cease-Fire Is Violated

Israel slowed its withdrawal of forces from Gaza as the cease-fire with Hamas
suffered its first violations. Eight mortars were shot at Israel, all falling
short, and Israeli troops twice came under fire. Israel responded with
airstrikes on launching sites. PAGE A8

A VILLAGE REDUCED TO DEBRIS

In Juhr el Dik, a farming village on Gaza's eastern border, a swath of
destruction spreads like a sea across an area where about 40 houses once stood.
While the destruction was indisputable, who is at fault is not, as Israel blames
Hamas, and the villagers blame Israel.  PAGE A8

LITTLE CELEBRATION IN ISRAEL

Israel's offensive against Hamas in Gaza ended on Sunday. Yet there was little
sense of triumph in Israel in the days after, more a nagging feeling of
something missed or incomplete.  PAGE A8

Tension in France Over Gaza A20

The Inauguration P1-30

National

STUDY SAYS IMMIGRANT WOMEN

Mistreated in Detention Centers

A study by the University of Arizona found that some 300 women held at
immigration detention centers in Arizona face dangerous delays in health care
and widespread mistreatment. Federal immigration officials said the study, which
examined the conditions for women in the process of deportation proceedings at
three federal immigration centers in Arizona, was narrow and unsubstantiated.
PAGE A23

STATES JOIN STUDY OF OHIO RIVER

Six states bordering the Ohio River are joining the Environmental Protection
Agency in a large study intended to identify and reduce dangerous levels of
bacteria that plague the waterway. Unsafe levels of fecal coliform, or E. coli,
which can sicken those in contact with the water, have been identified in about
500 miles of the 981-mile river.  PAGE A23

TRIAL TESTS RELIGIOUS FREEDOM

The parents of Kara Neumann, above, an 11-year-old girl in Weston, Wis., who
died from undiagnosed and untreated juvenile diabetes, were ordered to stand
trial for reckless endangerment in failing to get her medical attention. The
child's parents -- who believe that God alone has the ability to heal the sick
-- said the charges violated their constitutional right to religious freedom.
They face up 25 years in prison if convicted.  PAGE A23

TRANSFER OF INMATES SOUGHT

A court-appointed receiver said that California should be ordered to transfer up
to 7,000 ailing inmates to facilities with access to better medical care. The
receiver, Clark Kelso, is in charge of improving medical care for inmates, but
has become frustrated as Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger and state lawmakers have
balked at providing the $8 billion he is seeking to build medical facilities.
PAGE A24

Obituaries

EDMUND DE ROTHSCHILD, 93

A merchant banker from the renowned banking family's British branch, he led the
development of a major hydroelectric project in Labrador while helping his firm
expand globally.  PAGE B15

RAY YOSHIDA, 78

During his four decades of teaching at the Art Institute of Chicago, he was
known for his mysteriously comical paintings and collages, and was one of the
most admired contributors to a tradition known as Chicago Imagism, which favored
surrealism, fantasy and oddball humor. PAGE B15

New York

GOVERNOR TO ANNOUNCE DECISION

On Senate Appointment

Gov. David A. Paterson said he had decided whom he would appoint to fill the
United States Senate seat that is being vacated by Hillary Rodham Clinton, and
would announce his decision no later than Saturday. ''I have a good idea now
which direction I want to go,'' Mr. Paterson said, but said he wanted to mull it
over for several more days.  PAGE A26

HARLEM TAKES IN A HISTORIC DAY

Residents of Harlem crowded into public spaces to view the swearing in of the
first black president. Some had taken the day off to see it. Others darted out
during their lunch breaks to watch on large screens. ''I do feel this means we
are one United States, one people,'' said one. Jim Dwyer, About New York.  PAGE
A29

Business

OPTIMISM IN THE CAPITAL,

But Not on Wall Street

The financial markets appear not to share the widespread optimism inspired by
the incoming Obama administration. The Dow industrials plunged 4 percent, and
dropped under 8,000. Above, traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange
take a break to watch President Obama take the oath of office. Page B1

The Economic Crisis Gauging the Health Of the Economy, and Gulping

Just how bad is the economy? With help from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
David Leonhardt discovered some good news: The current economic climate isn't
close to being as dire as that of the early 1980s, when more people were
unemployed. The bad news? By the end of 2009, the nadir of 1982 won't be too far
off.  PAGE B1

UNEMPLOYMENT, IT'S BIG BUSINESS

As businesses slim down to avoid being torn down by an economy in a nose dive,
layoffs are skyrocketing. And as layoffs multiply, firms that specialize in
career transitions are scrambling to keep up with the volume, as many former
employees of corporate America are set adrift.  Page B1

LAYOFFS AT WARNER BROTHERS

Warner Brothers said it would eliminate 800 jobs, citing declining DVD sales and
a lag in scripted television programming. Page B2

CUTBACKS AT CLEAR CHANNEL

The parent company of Clear Channel Communications, which owns billboards and
radio stations under that name, announced that it would be laying off 1,850
employees effective immediately.  Page B2

Arts

THE JOYS AND PAINS

Of Being an Animal

Temple Grandin designed the slaughter systems used to process about half the
cattle in the United States and Canada, and yet her latest book, ''Animals Make
Us Human,'' argues for improving the quality of life of animals. Dwight Garner
writes that the book is provocative and frequently funny.  PAGE C1

FOX'S HUMAN POLYGRAPH MACHINE

Fox's new crime show, ''Lie to Me,'' stars one of those familiar television
law-enforcement types: cocky, divorced, encumbered by his skills and always
right. A review by Ginia Bellafante.  PAGE C1

Arts, Briefly C2

SIGN NO. 1: THEIR PANTS ARE ON FIRE

The science in the aforementioned ''Lie to Me'' is heavily influenced by the
work of the psychologist Paul Ekman, who has trained the authorities in how to
determine when someone is lying.  PAGE C4

AN 18TH-CENTURY STAR SHINES AGAIN

Hester Santlow was one of the premier dancers of the early 18th century, though
she has been largely forgotten. Her dances, however, were copiously notated, and
a number of dance specialists have tried to bring them to life in recent
decades.  PAGE C3

MULLING WARHOL AND IDENTITY

The comedian Josh Kornbluth's  latest show, ''Andy Warhol: Good for the Jews?,''
details how he came to reconsider the artist, and his own identity.  PAGE C5

Film Reviews:

'Dealing and Wheeling in Small Arms' C8

'The Photograph' C8

Sports

A MENTOR TO TENNIS GREATS

Heads to the Hall of Fame

Dr. Robert Walter Johnson, a Virginia physician, used to feed and clothe young
black tennis players and train them on a single clay court in his backyard. Two
of his proteges, Althea Gibson and Arthur Ashe, went on to break the champion
color barrier at the United States Open. His election to the International
Tennis Hall of Fame has come at a particularly fitting moment. Harvey Araton,
Sports of The Times.  PAGE B9

O'NEAL BECOMES FORCE FOR PHOENIX

The idea of a Phoenix Suns meet-and-greet on the South Lawn of the White House
as N.B.A. champions sounds like a stretch in some quarters of the league, but
Shaquille O'Neal is forcing some midseason reassessments. The Suns are showing
signs of renewal and making a push to rejoin the West's elite. Page B9

FIGHTING OPPONENTS AND OBSCURITY

Fedor Emelianenko is the No. 1 mixed martial arts fighter in the world. He has
never been knocked out. And while he has thousands of fans across Europe, North
America and Japan, almost no one in his native Russia knows who he is. PAGE B10

Dining

Wines of The Times

For Cabernet Sauvignon

A New Source Appears

Napa Valley, please take a step to your left, the spotlight is getting crowded
-- and besides, it's South Africa's turn. Eric Asimov writes that for cabernet
sauvignon lovers, South Africa is producing some of the very best, and at prices
that demand attention, if their flavor doesn't first.  Page D1

Restaurants

A New Sparkle for an Old Gem

Daniel has undergone something of a change. It was fancy before, but it has
traded the frilly for a strong beauty of sharp lines, deep chocolate browns and
silver grays. Frank Bruni writes that it has also maintained its position as the
least marginalizing of the four-star breed, and a dining experience to match the
dollars spent. Page D1

HOW MUCH CAN ONE OBJECT DO?

Taking its place next to cooking items as important as pots, pans, knives and
cookbooks is the cellphone. Many people now depend on it for a variety of
cooking related tasks.  Page D1

Food Stuff

What Happens Without the Cream  D2

Put a Little Burn in This Winter  D2

Religion Is Just That Sweet  D2

The Minimalist

Not Mom's, but Amazing Anyway

With minimal oil needed and taste that raises the bar on an old favorite, this
fried herbed chicken is right on the money for weeknight menus. Mark Bittman
explains this recipe for both bone-in and boneless chicken.  Page D3

A Good Appetite

It's All in the Beets

Beets need not be labor intensive to add that special sweetness. For a beet and
radicchio salad with goat cheese and pistachios the raw beets can be cubed in
smaller pieces and roasted, reducing the prep time and adding a caramelized
sweetness. Page D3

STRAIGHT FROM THE BAYOU

Cochon Butcher is a meat market and a cafe. The supply closet doesn't have room
for pens, it's hung with mouthwatering loops of sausage. You can sate your
cravings for Cajun fare either at the cafe, or at home with fare cooked in your
own pots.  Page D4

Salvaged New Orleans Recipes  D4

Conflict in the White House Kitchen  D5

DINING BLOGS

Excerpts from Dining Blogs by Frank Bruni, Emily Weinstein and Eric Asimov.
Page D6

$25 and Under

The Unsung South America

For a more reasonable rate than a plane ticket, you can give your taste buds a
trip to no fewer than three South American countries. Visit the tastes of
Colombia at Cafecito Bogota, above; Peru at Urubamba; and Suriname at Warung
Kario.  Page D8

Editorial

PRESIDENT OBAMA

There was no shortage of powerful imagery at President Obama's inauguration. But
as he has done so many times in his career, he both embraced the symbolism and
rose above it.  PAGE A30

THE (NOW SILENT) GUNS OF JANUARY

While we are relieved that the guns and rockets are finally silent in Gaza, this
is not a negotiated cease-fire. For both sides, it is grudging and unilateral.
The immediate challenge is to find ways to make it more stable.  PAGE A30

Op-Ed

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

This is a moment for radical departures from business as usual in so many areas.
So my most fervent hope about President Obama is that he will be as radical as
this moment -- and put everything on the table.  PAGE A31

QUESTIONS FOR MR. GEITHNER

After some delay, Timothy Geithner, the Treasury secretary nominee, will appear
before the Senate Finance Committee on Wednesday. With the economy in crisis,
the Op-Ed editors asked seven experts in finance and economics to pose the
crucial questions that they would like to see him answer.  PAGE A31

FREE THE BLUE ROOM

Harking back to the Kennedys' Camelot, President Obama and the first lady,
Michelle Obama, have said that they plan to open up the White House and remind
people that it is the people's house. In an Op-Ed article, Deborah Needleman
suggests that the Obamas are likely to find it hard to follow the example set by
Jacqueline Kennedy because of the layers of bureaucracy.  PAGE A31

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
BOMBINGS (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); COLIFORM BACTERIA (89%); HAMAS (89%);
IMMIGRATION (88%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (84%); CITIES (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (76%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(76%); SCANDALS (75%); E COLI (75%); LITIGATION (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
ELECTIONS (73%); WOMEN (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (72%); LAWYERS (71%);
RESCUE OPERATIONS (71%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(69%); ARMED FORCES (66%); DEPORTATION (65%); CANALS & WATERWAYS (62%); BACTERIA
(61%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (54%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); CHINA (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES
(93%); IRAQ (90%); TAIWAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); ASIA (79%); FRANCE (72%)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Music for Many Firsts, Including the First Couple's First Dance

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1275 words


President Obama danced his way through 10 official inaugural balls on Tuesday
night to the song ''At Last,'' which was a hit for Glenn Miller in 1941 and,
more influentially, in 1961 for Etta James. Her version made the song, written
by Mack Gordon and Harry Warren, an R&B standard and a wedding perennial. It has
been revived and recorded steadily ever since by performers including, most
recently, Beyonce, who sang it for Mr. Obama's first public dance as president
at the Neighborhood Ball, broadcast on ABC.

A good campaigner wields symbols deftly, and Mr. Obama chose brilliantly with
''At Last.'' It's an adoring, slow-dance love song with a title that can evoke
far more. Politicos can take it to mean the end of the Bush administration and
the Democrats taking control. And Americans of all ethnicities can take it as a
clear reference to Mr. Obama becoming the first African-American president: a
decisive turning point in a history of slavery and racial discrimination. The
song treats the moment not with self-righteousness or resentment, but as a
long-awaited embrace: ''Here we are in heaven/for you are mine at last.''

Music had long anticipated this moment. African-Americans repaid the historical
injustice of slavery with generous and profound cultural gifts, making American
music a free-for-all where fertile, powerful ideas -- like swing,
call-and-response, the modes and phrasing of the blues, the drive and dynamics
of gospel and the immediacy of hip-hop -- could triumph in the marketplace and
on the dance floor.

For performers of every background, American popular music (and much of the
world's popular music) is, unmistakably, African-American music. Americans have
long accepted black musicians as stars; sooner or later, politics had to follow.
And Mr. Obama's inaugural events, which strove to involve everyone, were
suffused with African-American soul like the rest of American pop culture.
Aretha Franklin, wearing an outsized, glamorized church-lady hat, sang ''My
Country, 'Tis of Thee'' at the swearing-in ceremony with the flamboyance of a
gospel hymn: ''Let freedom ring, let it ring!''

The evening before, at a concert to mark Martin Luther King's Birthday, Ms.
Franklin treated her free concert at the John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts like a gospel service, including only one secular song (''Chain
of Fools'') and hurling her voice skyward while promising to praise Jesus
everywhere. ''I'll stand up and tell it in the White House!'' she declared.

The language of gospel, blended with secular American optimism, emerged in Mr.
Obama's campaign slogans, like ''Change you can believe in.'' Now, savoring the
outcome of that campaign while considering the state of the nation, the
inaugural music drew on another cornerstone of African-American tradition: the
determination to face troubles and hard times with hope. The inauguration's
official face was bookended with those two aspects of the music, moving in two
days from a somber introduction to a joyful finale.

The earnest opening ceremony televised on Sunday from the Lincoln Memorial,
which HBO telecast free for cable and satellite viewers, was more than aware of
the symbolism of Lincoln as emancipator and of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr.'s 1963 March on Washington.

The chords and choirs of gospel music were used by Bruce Springsteen (with ''The
Rising'') and even the country singer Garth Brooks to sing about striving for
better times. Stevie Wonder (with Usher and Shakira) sang his socially conscious
''Higher Ground'' at the Lincoln Memorial, then returned at the determinedly
upbeat Neighborhood Ball, with an all-star singalong on his ''Signed, Sealed,
Delivered I'm Yours.''

Song titles told the story at the Neighborhood Ball: Sting (with Mr. Wonder on
harmonica) with ''Brand New Day,'' Shakira singing Van Morrison's ''Bright Side
of the Road,'' Mariah Carey with ''Hero.''

Bill Clinton's 1993 pre-inaugural concert showed his baby-boomer taste, for good
and bad. Bob Dylan performed ''Chimes of Freedom'' on the Lincoln Memorial
steps, followed two days later by an Inauguration Eve concert filled with
presumably reassuring 1970s soft rock from Fleetwood Mac and Barry Manilow.
Political differences offered George W. Bush less of a talent pool; Wayne
Newton, the country duo Brooks & Dunn and the Latin pop singer Ricky Martin (who
would later turn against Mr. Bush over the Iraq war) performed at his
pre-inaugural event.

Stars who had shunned the politics of the Bush administration happily flocked to
Washington for Mr. Obama's inauguration. ''Today is the beginning of no more
separation, no more segregation!'' Mary J. Blige exulted at the Neighborhood
Ball before singing her own ''Just Fine,'' a song about hard-won self-esteem.
(Two days earlier, at the Lincoln Memorial, she had poured emotion into Bill
Withers's comforting song ''Lean On Me.'')

While it was a gospel and soul inauguration, it was also a hip-hop inauguration.
Rappers who are charismatic, articulate, self-made successes may well see Mr.
Obama as one of their own; he also gives them someone to boast about besides
themselves.

Jay-Z, who performed his ''History'' at the Neighborhood Ball, also headlined a
premium-priced concert on Monday night at the Warner Theater, a few blocks from
the White House. Among his guests was Young Jeezy, who has a song called ''My
President Is Black''; Jay-Z added verses of his own: ''My president is black/In
fact he's half white/So even in the racist mind/he's half right.''

It continued, ''My president is black/but his house is all white.''

The Youth Ball, an official inaugural event telecast on MTV, featured Kanye West
-- a Chicagoan, like Mr. Obama -- who rewrote his song ''Heartless'' to pay
tribute to the new president: ''From miles around they came to see him speak/The
story that he told/to save a country that's so blue/that they thought had lost
its soul/the American dream come true tonight.''

Other constituencies presented unofficial events, celebrating their new sense of
inclusion and, perhaps, reminding the incoming administration of their clout and
attention. There were musical celebrations from Chicago independent rockers,
from the voter-registration group Rock the Vote and from the gay, lesbian and
transgender voters of the Human Rights Campaign. At a Latino Inaugural Gala on
Sunday night, more than a dozen legislators and two cabinet nominees turned out
along with salsa, pop, mariachi and Latin rock bands to celebrate a Hispanic
turnout that voted 2 to 1 for Mr. Obama, which provided the margin of victory in
Nevada, Colorado and New Mexico.

In pop as in politics, self-promotion is never off the agenda. Michelle, Sasha
and Malia Obama were dancing in the front row at the Kids' Inaugural on Monday,
telecast on the Disney Channel, where Disney-nurtured stars of tween-pop
including the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato sang their peppy hits about
''burning up'' and breaking up. With sublime shamelessness, Miley Cyrus looked
at Mr. Obama's daughters and said, ''Girls, I know you guys must be awful proud
of your dad, and so am I,'' then brought her father, Billy Ray Cyrus, onstage to
sing.

While the new president's politics and identity were the overwhelming draws for
so many musical celebrants -- bringing out countless performances electrified by
the moment -- he also has a musical ace in the hole: his name.

The percussive ''Barack'' followed by the three open-voweled syllables of
''Obama'' give him the most singable name in presidential history, and from the
National Mall to the inaugural balls, amateurs and stars alike kept finding new
ways to chant, sing and shout it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Obama and the first lady, Michelle Obama, at the
Western Ball on Tuesday
Mary J. Blige at the Neighborhood Ball
and Stevie Wonder, left, and Sting at the Neighborhood Ball.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
LEFT, CHIP SOMODEVILLA/POOL VIA BLOOMBERG NEWS
CENTER, DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES
RIGHT, MAX WHITTAKER/GETTY IMAGES)
 Beyonce sang as President Obama and the first lady, Michelle Obama, have their
first dance at the Neighborhood Ball on Tuesday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON WINTER/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. C4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); MUSIC (90%); OBAMA'S
FIRST 100 DAYS (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%); POP & ROCK (89%); JAZZ & BLUES
(89%); RACE & RACISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS
(78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (76%); HIP HOP
CULTURE (73%); RAP MUSIC (73%); SONG WRITING (73%); HISTORY (72%); SLAVERY
(72%); PERFORMING ARTS CENTERS (70%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (68%); DISCRIMINATION
(67%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (94%); MICHELLE OBAMA (92%); BEYONCE KNOWLES (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             856 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Holocaust, Viewed Not From Then but From the Here and Now

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; ABROAD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: BERGEN-BELSEN, Germany


Habbo Knoch, who runs the new Bergen-Belsen Memorial at the former concentration
camp, invited various scholars and museum directors to a four-day conference
here last week called ''Witnessing: Sites of Destruction and the Representation
of the Holocaust.'' He asked a question one evening during a break: ''Will
people in 20 years look back and say we built a museum that focuses on Nazi
genocide while Darfur was happening? Will they ask whether anyone raised this
issue?''

Consider it raised.

The new memorial is an immense concrete and glass museum emerging from a copse
of trees beside the cemetery of mass graves (there are more than 70,000 bodies
buried there), which had been the camp site. The permanent exhibition is a model
of its kind, focused on the meticulous and sober reconstruction of the past.
From time to time the present literally intrudes with a bang, though, when
practice rounds of tank fire from the British military base next door boom over
the treetops.

Otherwise you might be struck by how ordinary the whole area seems. During the
war, prisoners -- at first Soviet soldiers, later Jews -- used to be marched
several miles from a railway terminal beyond the base, which was then for the
Wehrmacht, and past fields, farms and houses. Some survivors have said they were
struck by the pretty scenery.

At the camp, corpses lay in piles and thousands were dying of starvation and
disease, from genocide by neglect. The farmers and villagers who had watched the
prisoners go by afterward mostly claimed they knew nothing about it.

Times change. Some of the children of those farmers and villagers recall on
videotaped interviews the endless lines of walking dead. It was impossible not
to see what was plainly in front of them. Along these lines, the constant
television broadcasts during the conference of grieving parents and wounded
children in Gaza reminded a few conferees of the emotions stirred up by video
testimonies of Holocaust survivors (there are dozens of these in the museum),
and the comparison made several scholars uneasy.

Videos are only one form of evidence, a French researcher ventured, inadequate
by themselves as history.

True.

That said, the Holocaust has become what one expert here called the ''master
narrative'' for suffering, shaping discussions about every present conflict over
genocide and human rights even as comparisons distort history and can serve the
purposes of propaganda as often as the truth. ''Every generation gets the
stories it wants to hear,'' is how Heidimarie Uhl, an Austrian scholar, put it,
which is to say that the master narrative of the Shoah itself has evolved to
suit different eras. She pointed out that the memorial at the former Mauthausen
concentration camp in northern Austria was for several years after the war
controlled by the Soviets, who put up a monument to Communist resistance but
none to the Jews.

Today the message at Mauthausen has come to reflect Austria's ''negative
memory,'' Ms. Uhl said, referring to the collective sentiment of Austrians (many
of them, she might have added, but alas, still not enough) who admit their
country willingly committed genocide. As at Bergen-Belsen, the permanent
exhibition there now speaks to a kind of post-ideological, post-cold-war world
that prizes victimhood and individual resilience, just as the Communist memorial
spoke to Soviet priorities.

History keeps moving, in other words. Here at Bergen-Belsen, after liberation in
April 1945, the military training barracks became a camp for displaced persons.
Jews awaited transport to America, Australia and to the new Israel, a flashpoint
with British authorities who also controlled Palestine. Some Jewish survivors
inaugurated a theater company called Kazet (the name played on the German KZ,
for concentration camp). Life started over in other ways, too. Henri
Lustiger-Thaler, who helped organize the conference, recalled that his mother, a
former prisoner, returned from Paris to give birth at the camp hospital because
her friends were here.

Then Bergen-Belsen fell into neglect. Ronald Reagan was responsible
(inadvertently) for its revival. The announcement that he would visit Nazi
graves at Bitburg in 1985 resulted in an uproar that forced his staff to
scramble, and Bergen-Belsen was suddenly added to his itinerary. Embarrassed
Germans, who preferred to forget the site, threw together a small documentation
center. It soon became inadequate to the accumulating archives, to the general
liberalizing process of German identity building after the wall fell, and to the
growing public appetite abroad for Holocaust museums, along with the tourist
economy they generated.

Nothing about the present museum dramatizes information for visitors the way,
say, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington apparently feels
it needs to. Divorced as it is from the sites of persecution, it turns relics of
genocide like a Zyklon B canister and a cattle car that transported Jews to
Auschwitz into props.

Bergen-Belsen has the camp as evidence, or what's left of it. After liberation,
the British burned down the prisoners' barracks to stem the spread of typhus,
and hired an architect to turn bulldozed graves into a pastoral cemetery. The
architect turned out to be a favorite of the Nazis, adding insult to injury, but
by the time that scandal broke it was already too late, and the graves today
look like Teutonic mounds, covered in lavender.

In the absence of original buildings, the aura of Bergen-Belsen now, as at all
haunted places, can be linked to the superstition people tend to bring to it --
the vague hope that our presence might somehow help renew the ground. Meanwhile
the sheer emptiness of the landscape, never mind the graves, speaks clearly to
loss.

Of course, there are still the photographs and films made by arriving British
troops to show what once was here. Various camps liberated before Bergen-Belsen
had been evacuated or destroyed, but the Germans turned this place over as it
had been. Circulated worldwide in newspapers, magazines and movie theaters, the
pictures made unconditional surrender obligatory and the site forever synonymous
with the worst Nazi atrocities.

In a sense, the images have become too familiar, too loaded. The museum stresses
the survivor testimonies instead. These run silently on monitors throughout the
galleries, accompanied by subtitles in German and English. As Geoffrey Hartman,
the literary scholar who helped start the Fortunoff Video Archive for Holocaust
Testimonies at Yale, remarked after walking through the museum, the quiet
promotes a space in which ''to think that thinking is important.''

But you can also wear headphones to hear the voices. Mr. Hartman borrowed Paul
Celan's famous phrase about bottles in the ocean tossed at ''the shoreline of a
heart'' to describe the effect.

One survivor is Robert Rijxman. ''I was sitting on a rock,'' he recalls on
screen. ''It was sunny, in winter. I just prayed to die, but it didn't work.''

Without sound, he's the picture of defiance, elfin and smiling, clutching a pipe
like an old Swiss mountaineer after a walk in the Alps. But listening to him,
you hear that he needs a moment to collect himself and it suddenly becomes clear
that Mr. Rijxman wishes to convey a thought darker and more complicated than
simple defiance.

Praying for death ''didn't work,'' is what he said.

''Not to this day,'' he added.

Another reminder of history's relentlessness.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A memorial near the site of the Bergen-Belsen concentration
camp in Germany, which is now the location of a museum.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIAN
CHARISIUS/REUTERS)
Above and right, views of the Bergen-Belsen Memorial museum, located on the site
of the German concentration camp.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KLEMENS ORTMEYER)
 (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTIAN CHARISIUS/REUTERS)(pg. C6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); STARVATION (73%); POWS & MIAS (72%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (72%); ARMED FORCES (67%); TESTIMONY (66%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY
(62%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (89%); AUSTRIA (65%); CENTRAL EUROPE (50%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             860 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 11, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2151 words


International

Role of U.N. Peacekeeper

Raises Concerns Among Experts

More than a decade after United Nations peacekeepers failed to prevent massacres
in Rwanda and Srebrenica, Bosnia, diplomats and experts say that the
organization's flagship mission appears to be slouching toward crisis once again
because of a significant rise in the number of peacekeeping commitments
worldwide. PAGE A6

REPORT LINKS ATTACKS TO PAKISTANIS

According to a report by the Pakistani government leaked to local television
networks, at least 5 of the 10 gunmen who attacked targets in Mumbai, India,
nearly three months ago were of Pakistani origin -- the first acknowledgment by
Pakistan that more than one of its citizens had participated in the assault. The
country has confirmed that the lone surviving gunman, in Indian custody, is
Pakistani. PAGE A7

PALESTINIANS ASK FOR GAZA INQUIRY

The Palestinian Authority is pressing the International Criminal Court in The
Hague to investigate accusations of war crimes committed by Israeli commanders
during the recent war in Gaza. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the chief prosecutor at The
Hague, has received more than 200 requests to look into allegations of war
crimes during the recent fighting between Israel and Hamas militants. PAGE A9

U.N. SAYS ISRAEL IS BLOCKING AID

Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, repeated his demand
that Israel allow significantly more humanitarian aid and relief supplies into
the beleaguered Gaza Strip, and he announced that he would send a team to
investigate the bombings of United Nations facilities there. PAGE A9

IRAQI PREMIER BUILDS TIES TO FRANCE

During a visit to Iraq by President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, Prime Minister
Nuri Kamal al-Maliki signaled a desire to gradually diminish American power over
Iraqi politics and increase ties to other Western powers. PAGE A10

NETWORK APOLOGIZES FOR BEIJING FIRE

In a rare gesture of contrition by China's national television network, China
Central Television blamed an illegal fireworks display by its employees for
igniting a blaze that destroyed a futuristic luxury hotel and theater. Page A12

PLANNING A HARDER LINE WITH CHINA

Senior officials in the Obama administration said they planned to reallign the
United States' relationship with China by putting more emphasis on climate
change, energy and human rights, widening the focus beyond the economic concerns
of the Bush years. PAGE A12

National

TOWN REELS AFTER MAN IS ACCUSED

Of Tricking Teens on Facebook

The quiet town of New Berlin in eastern Wisconsin was rocked by charges against
an 18-year-old accused of setting up a fake profile on Facebook, the popular
social networking site, to dupe 31 male students at a local high school, some as
young as 15, into sending him nude photos of themselves over the past several
months. PAGE A13

REMEMBERING GETTYSBURG ADDRESS

Dignitaries will gather in Gettysburg, Pa., on Thursday, the 200th anniversary
of Abraham Lincoln's birth, to open a new National Park Service museum at the
home of David Wills, the lawyer who invited Lincoln to the town to deliver the
address and housed him while he was there. PAGE A14

CARWASHES CHARGED WITH ABUSE

The city attorney of Los Angeles accused the industry of systemic labor
violations and charged three men with 176 counts of worker abuse at four
family-owned carwashes. PAGE A14

DOWNSCALING ON THE STRIP

Because of structural defects, the MGM Mirage casino in Las Vegas said it would
to shorten a hotel-condominium project it is building on the Strip to 28 stories
instead of the planned 49. PAGE A14

SHINING A LIGHT ON PACKED PRISONS

A ruling by Federal judges in California that packed facilities are the chief
impediment to adequate health care in prisons is significant because of the
scale of its proposed prisoner reduction (55,000 prisoners in the next three
years), and also because it shines a harsh light on the failures of state
government to address the problem. PAGE A15

A SHORT-LIVED UPPER HAND

The Tennessee Republican Party gave up its new one-seat majority in the state
House of Representatives -- the first time it has controlled the house since
1869 -- when the chairwoman stripped the House speaker, Kent Williams, above, of
his Republican Party membership, citing ''dishonor, deception and betrayal''
after he rose to the post by circumventing the Party and being backed solely by
Democrats. PAGE A16

RIVALS DEFY PARTY ON STIMULUS

Senators Susan Collins and Olympia J. Snowe, both of Maine and hardly the best
of friends, broke with virtually every other Republican senator to back
President Obama's $800-billion-plus economic recovery plan. PAGE A18

NEW YORK

HIGH COURT NOMINEE KNOWS

How to Clear a Logjam

When Jonathan Lippman, the nominee to be chief judge of the New York Court of
Appeals, became the presiding justice of the Appellate Division in Manhattan in
2007, he inherited a court with its heels planted firmly in the mud. A year
later, the caseload was down by nearly 75 percent, and decisions were coming out
much more quickly. PAGE A24

CHARGES OF ILLEGAL PRESCRIPTIONS

A Staten Island doctor was charged with operating a walk-in wellness center that
illegally prescribed steroids to more than 200 customers, prosecutors said,
including one bodybuilder with a transplanted heart who died from taking the
drugs. PAGE A25

BEER DISTRIBUTOR TO MOVE TO PIERS

One of the city's largest beer distributors, Phoenix Beverages, has reached a
tentative agreement to move to two piers on the waterfront in Red Hook,
Brooklyn. PAGE A25

BUSINESS

AS GEITHNER OFFERS NEW PLAN

For Bailout, Stocks Plunge

Investors were expecting the Obama administration to unveil a shock and awe
solution for the nation's banking system. But shock was what prevailed after the
plan raised more questions than it answered, sending stock markets and the
shares of some banks sharply lower. PAGE B1

SPEND NOW, SAVE LATER?

It's your fault. Part of it is, anyway. You, the American consumer, spent too
much money. And now you're going to have to do your part to end the crisis. How?
By spending. John Maynard Keynes, the great 20th-century economist, would have
appreciated the apparent absurdity in these mixed messages, David Leonhardt
writes. PAGE B1

TECHNOLOGY'S FINGERPRINTS ON BILL

The biggest outlay on new initiatives in the $800 billion stimulus bill is
essentially a technology industry wish list. To many on K Street, the bill was
the clearest guide to the new administration's closest friends in the business
world. PAGE B3

BILLOWING BUILDINGS ON A BUDGET

Frank Gehry is using software called Digital Project to design Beekman Tower, a
wrinkled-looking residential skyscraper in Manhattan commissioned by the Forest
City Ratner Companies, testing the idea that an architect can provide software
to help keep costs down. PAGE B6

RENTS FALL IN GARMENT DISTRICT

The average asking rents for office space in New York's garment district have
fallen 23 percent since 2007, to around $42, says one real estate broker. PAGE
B7

Sports

A TOP DOG IS A CHIP

Off the Old, Long-Dead Block

Yes, a black standard poodle that took home the top prize in the nonsporting
group at Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show this week was conceived using
25-year-old frozen sperm from Snapper, another prize-winning poodle who died in
1990. PAGE B13

THE METS' HO-HUM START

Unlike the other baseball team in New York, the Mets have been largely devoid of
drama, and their biggest question is how far along their pitching ace, Johan
Santana, is in his recovery since knee surgery in October. PAGE B15

TWINS POWER A POTENT OFFENSE

Travis and Chavis Holmes are the highest-scoring twin brothers in N.C.A.A.
Division 1 history and have revived the basketball program at the Virginia
Military Institute, which has not had a winning season since 1997-98 and has not
reached a national postseason tournament since 1976-77. PAGE B13

Arts

DISTRIBUTOR OF AVANT-GARDE FILMS

Threatened With Eviction

The Film-Makers' Cooperative, which has been a stalwart guardian of avant-garde
American cinema, is facing eviction from its Lower Manhattan office space, which
is owned by P.S. 1, another champion of avant-garde art. The cooperative would
be removed to make room for a new Internet art radio project, which happens to
be the brainchild of P.S. 1's founder and former executive director. PAGE C1

TACKLING GEOPOLITICS, EFFUSIVELY

Dwight Garner writes that ''Great Powers'' by Thomas P. M. Barnett reads as if
the author is delivering a long, caffeinated PowerPoint lecture. It's packed
with cliches and long digressions, but also with lots of provocative ideas about
America's place in a rapidly globalizing world. PAGE C1

FINDING A MIDDLE, VIA RAY CHARLES

In recent collaborations between Willie Nelson, above, and Wynton Marsalis, the
pair wade deftly into the wide river of American music. At the first of their
two sold-out shows at the Rose Theater, they played songs associated with Ray
Charles, the artist who most credibly covered all the pertinent terrain. A
review by Nate Chinen. PAGE C1

Arts, Briefly C2

A CRUNCHED MET MOVES FORWARD

The Metropolitan Opera has announced that it will put on eight new productions,
at a time when the economic downturn has otherwise prompted the house to scale
back its ambitions. PAGE C3

Fondly Remembering a Mafioso C7

Dining

REMEMBERING TASTES OF HOME,

Wherever That May Be

New York is what it is for many reasons, but two of these are its pace and its
population seasoned by so many people from someplace else. Those that settle
here bring with them histories, languages, cultures and most of all food. For
meals that match the pace of New York but have a taste of home, there's no place
like, well, home. Page D1

OH NO, NOT THE CHECK!

The power lunch used to end with a mad scramble as a monetary one-upmanship
ensured, each person trying to outdo the other by paying for the check. That was
when corporate accounts were flush. Now that they're drier than the Mojave, that
little piece of paper sits on the table like medusa -- everybody is afraid to
even look at it. Page D1

The Pour

Italian Strangers, $10 to $20

Spending less than $10 on a bottle of wine can usually get you something
palatable that goes down easy. But if you raise that amount just slightly, there
is a vaster world to be had, Italy to be exact. Page D1

The Minimalist

Back in Brown D2

A Good Appetite

Third Time's the Charm D2

STRAIGHT FROM THE GARDEN

A vegetable appetizer from Corton in TriBeCa brings new meaning to garden
variety. A grouping of vegetables, flowers and leaves, each prepared separately
and strewn across a bed of dirt -- in this case, brioche crumbs and powdered
tomato. The dish owes its inspiration from Gargouillou, a dish whose ingredients
reflect the surrounding area. Page D2

Food Stuff

Importing Turkish Flavor D3

What's New in Rice Cookers D3

A Seedless Kumquat D3

VODKA DONE SOUTHERN STYLE

Fireflies, front porches, sweet tea and visions of the Kremlin. Okay, so that
last one doesn't match, but a vodka infused with sweet tea has the potential to
be so tasty it doesn't matter. Page D3

Dessert Ruined by Peanuts D6

FINDING NEMO, THEN EATING HIM

It's not easy to create a place that looks like no other and serves food that
tastes like no other, but, Frank Bruni writes, the John Dory may have done just
that. It's vivid, perhaps too much so, and it's not comfortable, but the food is
excellent. Oh, did we mention the aquarium? Page D7

Editorial

THE BAILOUT'S NEXT CHAPTER

When he announced the Obama administration's new-and-improved bank bailout plan
on Tuesday, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner certainly seemed to have
digested some of the flaws in the Bush administration's rescue attempt. But
someone should have told him that the one thing to avoid at a time of
uncertainty is raising more questions. Page A26

CONTINUITY OF THE WRONG KIND

The Obama administration failed -- miserably -- the first test of its commitment
to ditching the extravagant legal claims used by the Bush administration to try
to impose blanket secrecy on antiterrorism policies and to avoid accountability
for serial abuses of the law. Page A26

BANNING BOOKS IN MIAMI

The Miami-Dade school board decided a few years ago to ban the children's book
''A Visit to Cuba'' from its school libraries because it offers too positive a
portrait of life under the Castro regime. That was bad enough, but then last
week a federal appeals court upheld the ban. The Supreme Court should reverse
this disturbing ruling. If the school board wants to oppose the totalitarianism
of the Castro regime, banning books is an odd way to go about it. Page A26

Op-Ed

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

Leave it to a brainy Indian to come up with the cheapest and surest way to
stimulate our economy: immigration. Page A27

BONUS BABIES

In an Op-Ed article, Paul Wilmott, the founder an eponymous journal of
quantitative finance, explains the mystery behind the failure of bankers to
diversify their companies' portfolios: doing so would have lessened their
chances of big bonuses. Page A27

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING
(89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (74%); HAMAS (73%); LOCAL
TELEVISION STATIONS (71%); BOMBINGS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); US PRESIDENTS
(69%); ANNIVERSARIES (68%); FIRES (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (64%);
ADOLESCENTS (64%); HIGH SCHOOLS (60%)

COMPANY: FACEBOOK INC (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%); HAMAS
(55%)

TICKER: FB (NASDAQ) (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(51%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (55%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (50%); BARACK
OBAMA (50%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (77%); BEIJING,
CHINA (76%)

STATE: WISCONSIN, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (77%);
NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (68%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); ISRAEL (94%); INDIA (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); IRAQ (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); RWANDA (92%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); FRANCE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             862 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 27, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2432 words



International

BISHOP ISSUES APOLOGY

Over Holocaust Denial

A bishop whose recent remarks denying the full scope of the Holocaust has
apologized, according to a Catholic news agency. But while he apologized for the
anger his remarks caused, he did not directly address the content. Page A6

A BRIGHT SPOT IN MIDEAST PROGRESS

What was a barren scrap of the Jordanian desert a year ago is now home to the
training facility for the Palestinian guardsmen. The success of the guardsmen's
training, and vastly improved conditions, stands out against an otherwise bleak
state-building process. Page A6

ANOTHER SIDE TO A HERO'S STORY

When the Colombian politician Ingrid Betancourt returned from a year as a
hostage to Marxist guerillas, she was celebrated as a hero. But a book by three
American military contractors who were held alongside her tells a very different
and unflattering story. Page A6

Malbork Journal

History's Forgotten Victims

Europe has more than its share of mass graves, owing to large-scale violence in
the 20th century. And it can be too easy to see the Germans mostly as
perpetrators, and not victims. A mass grave recently uncovered holds the remains
of some 2,000 people near Malbork, Poland, people who authorities believe were
German refugees fleeing the Soviet counterattack. Page A7

OBJECTIONS TO OBAMA'S PLAN FOR IRAQ

Several Congressional Democrats have raised objections to the Obama
administration's troop withdrawal plan. The plan calls for 50,000 troops to
remain behind, which is a higher number than some Democrats expected. Page A8

IRAQ SENTENCES 28 TO DEATH

Twenty-eight members of a Shiite messianic cult were sentenced to death for
brutal attacks on Shiite pilgrims in Iraq, said an official from the federal
court in Dhi Qar Province. Page A8

CHINA SAYS RIGHTS REPORT DISTORTED

A Chinese state news agency responded angrily to a recent State Department
report on global human rights, saying it distorted and ignored the truth. The
report had called China's respect for rights poor and mentioned its increased
persecution of ethnic minorities and dissidents. Page A9

5 TOP SERBS FOUND GUILTY

The International Criminal Court at The Hague handed down long prison sentences
to five former Serbian officials for their roles in the 1999 war in Kosovo. Page
A11

national

9 STATES BALK AT STIMULUS MONEY,

And the Jobless Grow Furious

As governors in nine states threaten to reject millions of dollars in federal
stimulus money for increased unemployment insurance, there is growing anger
among the jobless in those states that they could be left out of a significant
government benefit. PAGE A13

SILENT KILLER OF ELEPHANTS SPREADS

In the last eight years, one of five Asian elephant calves born in North
American zoos has died of elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus, a disease that
accounts for more than half of all deaths of juvenile elephants in North
America, researchers say. Still, the researchers know little about the disease.
PAGE A13

U.S. BAN ON COFFIN PHOTOS IS LIFTED

The news media will now be allowed to photograph the flag-draped coffins of
America's war dead as their bodies are returned to the United States -- but only
if the families of the dead agree. The decision lifted an 18-year-old ban on
such photographs that some criticized as hiding the ultimate cost of the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan. PAGE A13

IN THE HOUSE, WITH STRINGS ATTACHED

The Senate approved a bill to provide the nation's capital with a voting
representative in the House, but it came with a catch. A controversial amendment
was added that would repeal most of the city's gun-control regulations. PAGE A14

LIMITS ON CHARITIES DRAWS IRE

Wealthy donors and the nonprofits they support were in an uproar over the Obama
administration's proposal to limit the value of deductions for charitable gifts,
which was included in the budget the president presented to Congress. PAGE A16

Ex-C.I.A. Official Is Sentenced A14

VICTORY FOR CHICAGO WORKERS

The 250 workers who staged a December sit-in at a Chicago window factory to
protest losing their jobs were celebrating after another window manufacturer
announced plans to reopen the plant and start hiring back the displaced workers
within months. PAGE A15

Bloggers to Aid Democratic Party A19

obituaries

WILBERT A. TATUM, 76

The often provocative former publisher and editor of The New York Amsterdam
News, he became almost synonymous with that oldest and best-known of the city's
black newspapers. PAGE B10

New York

JUST A (VERY LONG) MOMENT

Of Your Attention, Please

In the age of the sound bite, Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand's five-minute
answers are becoming a trademark. Constituents describe her as warm -- a good
listener who explains herself thoroughly, relentlessly even. Page A20

O'BYRNE'S OTHER JOB

Charles J. O'Byrne, a former aide to Gov. David A. Paterson, has rejoined the
Paterson administration in an unpaid role allowing him to attend to private
clients in his new career, which the governor's office has said is his business
alone. But some of Mr. O'Byrne's business relationships could pose potential
conflicts for the administration down the line. Page A20

Business

G.M. REPORTS $9.6 BILLION LOSS;

Its Chief Returns to Washington

The chief executive of General Motors is expected to ask Washington for more
money after reporting a $9.6 billion fourth-quarter loss. With G.M.'s reported
loss, the company also said that it was quickly going through its cash reserves,
which were down to $14 billion at the end of 2008. Page B1

GREEN AUTO FUND SEEMS STUCK

The Energy Department has allocated $25 billion for loans to help usher in a new
era in automotive technology: the electric car. But there has not been any
ushering, although 75 applications have been filed, including three from Detroit
automakers. Page B1

INSURANCE COMPANIES LEFT OUT

So far the Treasury's program to bolster the country's economy has left out
insurance companies, who are beginning to despair. Page B1

NEED FOR DEVICE DATABASE SHOWN

Conflicting data on the failure rate of a widely-used heart device has produced
quite a buzz among researchers. Some experts say that buzz would not be
occurring if federal officials, medical device makers and more doctors had
thrown their weight more fully behind efforts to develop a national database of
patients who get heart devices. Page B2

THE POWER OF MARKETING

In the world of blankets with sleeves, some thunder may have been stolen. The
Snuggie has often been called an original product, but is predated by the
Slanket. It proves a law of advertising that being first can be usurped by
aggressive marketing. Page B6

Sports

WOODS IS OUT IN SECOND ROUND

By a Challenger in Clark

In the second round of the Aperture Match Play Championship, Tiger Woods proved
to be no match for Tim Clark, who produced a bogey-free performance. It's a
major victory for Clark who has a total of zero PGA Tour wins to Woods's 65.
Page B12

BOND'S CASE GETS FAMILIAR JUDGE

Susan Illston was a successful trial lawyer in the 1980s, eventually hired by
the N.F.L. to fight a referee's wrongful termination suit. Her slavish reviewing
of game tape and studying of rulebook trivia before that case resulted in a very
well-informed judge, and a victory for the N.F.L. She is now the federal judge
presiding over the Barry Bonds case. Her courtroom has been a stage for
high-profile cases. This one may be the largest yet. Page B14

RECESSION COMES TO THE N.F.L.

As the N.F.L heads into free agency, players may feel the bite that has been the
scourge of retailers: everything is priced to move except the bare necessities.
Though the N.F.L.'s revenue is listed as $7.5 billion, teams and league offices
have cited the recession as the reason for layoffs and frozen pay. There is also
the concern that if the malaise continues, it will affect formerly reliable
income sources like marketing deals and box seats. Page B12

Escapes

HONORING A HISTORICAL CONFLICT

As Realistically as Possible

Every year, a force 1,500 strong descends on Indiantown Gap military base in
Annville, Pa. It comes to do battle, historically accurate, nonlethal battle.
World War II re-enactors attending the Battle of the Bulge Living History
Commemoration spend the weekend at war, and both sides come together for a Glenn
Miller-style dance. Page D1

Away

A Home Becomes a Life

Josh Kilmer-Purcell and Brent Ridge, a couple from Manhattan, first discovered
the home on an apple-picking trip in Sharon Springs, N.Y. What they at first
took to be a museum soon became their home and an all-encompassing way of life.
Page D1

Your Second Home

A Spa Retreat at Your Place

There's little doubt of the restorative powers of a nice, relaxing spa weekend.
Just imagine features like delicious food, massages and mineral baths. The only
thing that might top it is never having to leave your second home to enjoy it.
Here are a few ideas. Page D2

High & Low

Hudson Valley Heats Up

For years, Chatham in the Hudson River Valley was a draw for weekenders looking
for an affordable historic farmhouse as a second home. Now the prices are going
up as the area's popularity transcends that of its individual houses. Buyers
still get more land than in the Berkshires, but the price gap is smaller than in
the 1990s. Page D4

Weekend

REALITY AND CHARM IN A HAPPY RENDEZVOUS FOR FILM ENTHUSIASTS

Two heavyweights will arrive at the Cesar awards (the French Oscars) on Friday:
''Mesrine,'' a four-hour gangster epic, and ''Seraphine,'' a portrait of the
early 20th-century painter Seraphine de Senlis. The contenders have 19
nominations between them, and both are included in the 14th edition of
Rendez-Vous with French Cinema series, which begins next week at Lincoln Center.
And the 2009 series is the best in years, Stephen Holden writes. PAGE C1

Music Review

Monetary Policy and Reggae Beats

Perhaps only a band from Washington, like Thievery Corporation, would be so
determined to mix policy wonkery and dance-club rhythms. Even the Federal
Reserve was mentioned during the band's concert on Wednesday at Terminal 5. PAGE
C3

SEINFELD RETURNING TO NBC

Jerry Seinfeld will return to the network as the producer of a prime-time
reality series called ''The Marriage Refs.'' The show will be about funny
marital spats PAGE C3

Kids Rule at New York Film Festival C10

Theater Review

Mingling in Grover's Corners

Here come Howie Newsome and his horse, Bessie, delivering the morning milk, and
you're sitting in the middle of Main Street. The intimate production of Thornton
Wilder's ''Our Town'' -- which opened at the Barrow Street Theater on Thursday
-- is modest but highly rewarding, Charles Isherwood writes. PAGE C1

SCHOOL UNDOES 'RENT' CANCELLATION

A California high school production of ''Rent: School Edition'' that was
canceled because of concerns about content and the right of the principal to
review the musical's script, has now been approved by the principal for an April
2009 production, school officials announced. PAGE C2

Television Review

'Magnum P.I.' Finds Crime

Never move to a town with a heavenly sounding name. On Sunday on CBS, Tom
Selleck returns as Jesse Stone, the police chief of Paradise, Mass., in ''Thin
Ice,'' the fifth television movie in the Jesse Stone series. PAGE C16

Art Reviews

Create Compulsively, Die Young

At the Museum of Modern Art, works by the German artist Martin Kippenberger are
spilling out of top-floor galleries and down into the atrium. Mr. Kippenberger,
who died in 1997 at 44, made art in many forms and in prolific quantities.
''Martin Kippenberger: The Problem Perspective'' includes paintings, drawings,
sculptures, photographs, prints, posters and books. PAGE C21

BRuCKE: BAD BOYS OF GERMAN ART

''Brucke: The Birth of Expressionism in Dresden and Berlin, 1905-1913,'' packs
several galleries at Neue Galerie with the groups' saturated colors, rough-edged
motifs, unfinished surfaces and less-than-idealized nudes. PAGE C21

Museums Exchange Tycoons' Tastes C23

Looking Back at France's Bronze Age C26

Editorial

PRESIDENT OBAMA'S BUDGET

President Obama's first budget commits to cutting in half by 2012 the $1.75
trillion budget deficit that George W. Bush dumped on the nation. It also
recognizes what most of Washington has been too scared or ideologically blind to
admit: to recover from Mr. Bush's economic policies, taxes must go up. Page A22

PROGRESS ON HEALTH CARE

President Obama's budget plan makes a bold and long overdue commitment to
overhaul the dysfunctional and costly American health care system. It won't come
close to paying for universal coverage, but the president has now made health
care reform a top priority, and this plan is a sound start. Page A22

DRUG CARTELS' RIGHT TO BEAR ARMS

The hypocrisy grows all too gruesome: The Justice Department pronounced the
Mexican drug cartels ''a national security threat'' this week, even as American
gun dealers along the border were busily arming the cartels' murderous gangs.
Page A22

Op-ed

PAUL KRUGMAN

President Obama's new budget represents a huge break, not just with the policies
of the past eight years, but with policy trends over the past 30 years. If he
can get anything like the plan he announced on Thursday through Congress, he
will set America on a fundamentally new course. Page A23

YELLOW IS THE NEW GREEN

The way we dispose of sewage wastes energy and pollutes the water, writes Rose
George, the author of ''The Big Necessity,'' in an Op-Ed article. Instead of
sending urine into the wastewater supply to be treated at great expense, we
should divert it to other uses, like fertilization. Page A23

GLIDING ACROSS VERMONT

The 300-mile Catamount Trail runs from Massachusetts to Quebec. Cross-country
skiers along Section 15, which spans Vermont, are treated to winter-laced views
of the state's forests and farmlands. Page D1

Havens

Maine for Winter Sports

The Lakes District of Maine is defined by its excellent conditions for winter
sports. Skiers, snow-shoers and even ice fishermen have been drawn to the area
and residents say it is just as attractive in the warmer months. Page D3

ARE THERE WALRUSES?

The Porcupine Mountains Wilderness State Park on the south shore of Lake
Superior is the destination for a family's cold-weather camping trip. The
children can wander, and wonder, among one of the largest tracts of virgin
forest. There's time for a nap, a child's questions about walruses and even
s'mores. Page D4

Correction: March 3, 2009, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: A capsule
summary on Friday for a sports article about the federal judge presiding over
the perjury trial of Barry Bonds misstated her surname. As the article correctly
noted, she is Susan Illston, not Ellison.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); GENOCIDE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (88%); SENTENCING (86%); MAMMALS
(83%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); RELIGIOUS
PILGRIMAGES (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); HOSTAGE TAKING
(69%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (69%); REFUGEES (68%); VERDICTS (68%); JAIL
SENTENCING (64%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (64%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (63%);
VIRUSES (61%); ETHNICITY (60%); ETHNIC GROUPS (60%); HERPES INFECTIONS (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (66%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (93%); IRAQ (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); NORTH AMERICA (92%); SERBIA
(92%); JORDAN (90%); GERMANY (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); KOSOVO (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             863 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times: February 28, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2505 words


International

NEW LEADER OF A RUSSIAN REGION INHERITS BURDENS AND HOPES

Soon it will be spring, bringing a new season of war between Ingush militants
and the federal forces of Ingushetia, a tiny republic that neighbors Chechnya.
The country's new president has brought with him hope and a number of reforms.
But whether his new approach can bring the country under control is another
question -- and a crucial one for Russia. PAGE A6

PLAN FOR IRAQ PULLOUT ANNOUNCED

President Obama said he would withdraw combat forces from Iraq by August 2010
and all remaining American troops by December 2011. PAGE A6

Deployed Soldiers React A8

PAKISTAN'S RIFT MAY TEST OBAMA

An intensifying political struggle between Pakistan's pro-American president and
the main opposition leader is almost certainly diverting the government's
attention away from fighting the Qaeda and Taliban insurgency. That is exactly
what the Obama administration does not want. News Analysis. PAGE A7

MASS GRAVE FOUND IN BANGLADESH

Police officers combing through the headquarters of mutinous border guards in
Dhaka, Bangladesh, found a mass grave containing about 30 bodies, a local police
official said. PAGE A7

U.S. TRAINS AFGHAN PILOTS

The United States is training American pilots to fly the helicopters of the
former Soviet Union so the American pilots can in turn train, or retrain, Afghan
pilots who once flew for the Russians, the Taliban or powerful warlords. The
program is aimed at giving Afghanistan the ability to defend itself from the
skies and one day allowing the Americans to leave. PAGE A8

U.N. OFFICIAL FAULTS INTELLIGENCE

A United Nations human rights official, investigating practices at Guantanamo
Bay, has concluded that evidence obtained from the interrogations there is
tainted and that foreign law-enforcement and intelligence officials who took
part in those interrogations violated their legal obligation to reject the use
of torture and arbitrary detention. PAGE A8

FARMERS SEETHE IN ARGENTINA

Argentine farmers, already suffering from their country's worst drought in more
than a half-century, reacted angrily to reports that Argentina's president was
contemplating nationalizing domestic and foreign grain trading. Argentina's two
main daily newspapers reported that President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner was
considering the move to effectively monopolize the country's most important
export industry. PAGE A8

VATICAN CALLS APOLOGY INSUFFICIENT

The Vatican said that an apology by a bishop who has denied the scope of the
Holocaust was not sufficient to restore him to full communion with the Roman
Catholic Church. PAGE A9

EUROPE TO MEET TO UNIFY PLANS

European leaders have called an emergency meeting for this weekend to tackle
disarray and disagreement over how to rescue the hardest-hit economies in the
27-nation European Union. Fault lines between old and new members, and between
the union's historic core and countries in the east, are reopening with a
vengeance. PAGE A9

The Saturday Profile A9

This Weekend

MAGAZINE

Defeated at the polls, divided over issues and outflanked by the Democrats,
Republicans in Congress turn their lonely eyes to ... the former Speaker of the
House? PAGE 28

ARTS & LEISURE

U2 is arguably the last megaband, and 30 years into their run -- with no lineup
changes, no breakups, and no reunion -- the group, still, unabashedly, wants to
release blockbuster. PAGE 1

TRAVEL

On their first trip as a threesome, Matt Gross, his wife and their 6-week-old
daughter headed to Venice, which is notorious for horrible hotels and rip-off
rates. But the trio found that Venice in the wintertime was free of tourists and
decidedly infant-friendly -- giving them a chance to experience the city at an
Italian pace. PAGE 1

Fashion

BOOMING FASHION FOR THE SLUMP

What markets? With masterly crafted curvilinear dresses and sensuous curls of
fabric, the latest collection from Raf Simons seems a stimulus bill in itself.
Though under economic pressures like every other designer these days, Mr.
Simons, the designer at Jil Sander, has refused to let up. PAGE C10

National

DEMOCRATS LIMIT FUTURE FINANCING

Of Washington Voucher Program

Congressional Democrats have quietly inserted rules into a huge spending bill
that would place conditions on the small school-voucher program in Washington,
D.C., and are urging the schools chancellor to prepare the city's public schools
to re-enroll 1,700 students currently attending private schools at taxpayer
expense. But Republicans argue that the conditions were an effort to kill the
nation's only federally financed voucher program. PAGE A10

MAYOR RESIGNS AFTER E-MAIL OUTCRY

Dean Grose, the mayor of Los Alamitos, Calif., a small suburb of Los Angeles,
said he would resign after a public outcry over his e-mailing of a photo of the
White House that had been altered so that it appeared to be bordered by a huge
watermelon patch. PAGE A10

A BELLWETHER ON IMMIGRATION

The outcome of the case of Vialine Jean Paul, above, one of 30,000 Haitian
nationals who have been ordered deported from the United States, could be a test
of whether the Obama administration will break with the strict immigration
enforcement policies of the Bush administration. PAGE A11

DEMOCRATIC FISSURES ON BUDGET

Congressional Democrats cautiously embraced President Obama's budget, with its
ambitious blend of new spending and tax increases. Yet fault lines began to show
on important provisions regarding taxes, agriculture, energy and education. PAGE
A12

CONSERVATIVES WONDER WHAT'S NEXT

At the annual conference of the Conservative Political Action Committee, there
was a lot of serious thinking about what it means to be a conservative in the
age of Obama. Some said that it was time for the Republicans to move to the
center, but the hard right was pushing back at that notion. PAGE A13

CAPS, TRADES AND QUESTIONS

In proposing mandatory caps on greenhouse gases, linked to global warming, and a
system for auctioning permits to companies that emit them, President Obama is
taking on a huge political and economic challenge. And the full cost and
benefits of controlling greenhouse gas emissions remain unknown, and perhaps
unknowable. PAGE A13

OBAMA TO UNDO ABORTION RULE

In a move that had been expected for weeks, the Obama administration moved to
undo a last-minute Bush administration rule granting broad protections to health
workers who refuse to take part in abortions or provide other health care that
goes against their consciences. PAGE A15

Obituaries

WILLIAM J. JORDEN

A former diplomatic correspondent of The New York Times who became a diplomat
himself, serving as the United States ambassador to Panama and writing a highly
regarded memoir of his involvement in the Panama Canal treaty negotiations of
the 1970s. PAGE A20

New York

THE PERPETUAL PROTESTER,

Armed With Causes and Costumes

Every week, Robert Lesko scans NYProtest, a listing of street demonstrations
distributed by e-mail by a fellow activist, and chooses three or four that match
his leftist political leanings. He is one of the more ubiquitous activists at
Manhattan rallies and is known for the colorful costumes he uses to attract
press attention. PAGE A16

Crusader and Keeper of Secrets A16

SUSPECT ARRESTED IN FATAL BEATING

The police arrested a second suspect in the brutal beating death of an
Ecuadorean immigrant in Brooklyn. Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said that
the suspect, Keith Phoenix, made a full confession in the killing of Jose O.
Sucuzhanay, who was walking arm in arm with his brother on Dec. 7 when they were
attacked and Jose Sucuzhanay was beaten with a bottle and an aluminum baseball
bat. PAGE A17

Business

A TEXTILE CITY IS HOBBLED

By a Global Downturn

The once booming Chinese industrial city of Shaoxing had 20,000 textile and
garment factories, crowded with workers knitting and sewing the wares sold at
big American retailers like Gap and Wal-Mart. But those factories are closing as
demand in the United States has waned. PAGE B1

QUESTIONS SURROUND CITI BAILOUT

The federal government's latest rescue for Citigroup is the biggest and most
daring attempt yet to stabilize the nation's beleaguered banks. Will this plan,
the third since October, be the one that finally works? PAGE B1

PROPPING UP A HOUSE OF CARDS

Joe Nocera writes that a bailout of the American International Group, the
world's biggest insurer, is really a bailout of its trading partners -- which
essentially constitutes the entire Western banking system. But he suggests that
A.I.G. should evoke a special outrage. ''More than even Citi or Merrill, A.I.G.
is ground zero for the practices that led the financial system to ruin,'' he
writes. PAGE B1

CONTRACTORS AWAIT BUDGET DETAILS

President Obama's new budget increases military spending by 4 percent, but
military contractors are wondering what the priorities of the new administration
-- which has made clear it wants to shift spending from futuristic weapons
systems to simpler arms that troops can use now -- will mean for the industry.
PAGE B3

G.E. to Reduce Its Dividend B3

DRUG MAKER'S DOCUMENTS RELEASED

According to internal documents released in litigation, AstraZeneca covered up
unfavorable studies of Seroquel, its $4.4 billion blockbuster antipsychotic
drug. The lawsuit is between the company and lawyers for thousands of people who
sued the company because they said the drug, above, caused diabetes and weight
gain. PAGE B6

Arts

FAR FROM A FAIRY TALE:

The Walls of Bruno Schulz

The drawings of Bruno Schulz, a Jewish painter forced to illustrate a children's
playroom in a Nazi officer's home before being killed, are on view for the first
time at the Yad Vashem Holocaust Museum in Israel. And while this haunting
exhibition will not end the controversy over whether they should have remained
in Ukraine, it offers a look into artistic defiance in the face of overwhelming
cruelty. PAGE C1

THE RETURN TO 30 ROCK

The comedian Jimmy Fallon is returning to the building and the network where he
made his name during a six-year stint on ''Saturday Night Live,'' replacing
Conan O'Brien as the host of ''Late Night'' on NBC. Although nervous, he remains
excited with the sense that this is a job full of history and fraught with
questions about the future. PAGE C1

MEDIA TWITTERS CAN'T TYPE NO

As news anchors and television personalities who have their own programs, Web
sites, blogs and pages on Facebook and MySpace parcel out their lives 140
characters at a time, Twitter, the unfiltered and instant outlet for
self-expression, is beginning to look more like yet another gateway drug to
full-blown media narcissism, Alessandra Stanley writes. PAGE C1

ASSEMBLING THE QATAR ORCHESTRA

The Qatar Philharmonic, formed from scratch, is the latest effort by Persian
Gulf nations to cultivate culture at home and raise its international standing
abroad. The orchestra made its debut in Qatar in October and performed last week
at the Kennedy Center as part of the festival Arabesques: Arts of the Arab
World. PAGE C1

RENEWED PRAISE FOR A NOVELIST

In Oslo, a celebration is honoring the Norwegian novelist Knut Hamsun, who wrote
''Hunger'' and ''Pan'' and welcomed the brutal German occupation during World
War II. Shunned by his countrymen and heavily fined for his spectacular wartime
betrayal, Mr. Hamsun died in 1952 at 92. Why the festivities, then? Call it
reconciliation therapy, or a national airing out. PAGE C1

A Messiaen Piece Returns Home C3

When Indie Met Classical C4

Film Review: 'Street Fighter' C7

Sports

HOW THE N.B.A. LEARNED

To Love (or Tolerate) the Zone

Some of the N.B.A.'s top-tier players were less than enthused when the N.B.A.
legalized zone defenses -- in which players defend an area and not an individual
opposing players -- in 2001. But the introduction of zones was intended to
improve scoring and make games more aesthetically pleasing. And scoring is up,
even as the stigma surrounding the defenses lingers. PAGE B11

OPENING UP THEIR WALLETS

The N.F.L. has said that it has been deeply affected by the recession, so
Redskins owner Dan Snyder's spending spree in the early days of the league's
free agency is especially jarring. The team signed Albert Haynesworth, the prize
of the free agency class, to a contract worth $100 million, just hours after
re-signing cornerback DeAngelo Hall to a six-year contract that includes $22.5
million guaranteed. PAGE B9

FROM THE MAJORS TO ITALY'S DUGOUT

Mike Piazza is settling into his new role as the hitting coach for the Azzurri,
who will represent Italy at the World Baseball Classic. The team is a work in
progress, much like Piazza's Italian. PAGE B10

RODRIGUEZ TO MEET WITH OFFICIALS

Alex Rodriguez is scheduled to meet with investigators for Major League Baseball
on Sunday, according to a person with knowledge of the meeting. The
investigators want to meet with Rodriguez to discuss how he received
performance-enhancing drugs and whether the person or persons who supplied them
had access to team clubhouses and provided the substances to other players. PAGE
B11

MARBURY'S CELTICS DEBUT

Stephon Marbury's season debut came Friday night in Boston, where the former
Knicks guard was signed by the defending champion, the Celtics. Marbury, who had
developed a reputation as a malcontent, hopes to start anew, while the Celtics
are looking to pad their backcourt, which has been thinned by suspensions and
injuries. PAGE B11

Editorial

PLAYING WITH FIRE IN PAKISTAN

Almost no one wants to say it out loud. But between the threats from extremists,
an unraveling economy, battling civilian leaders and tensions with nuclear rival
India, Pakistan is edging ever closer to the abyss. PAGE A18

GUN SENSE AND NONSENSE

This week, the Supreme Court upheld an important restriction on gun ownership
that bars people convicted of crimes involving domestic violence from owning
guns. Unfortunately, the same good sense on gun violence did not prevail in
Congress. PAGE A18

EVIDENCE AND HEALTH CARE REFORM

Medicare has proposed not to pay for so-called virtual colonoscopies because
there is not enough evidence they would benefit people ages 65 and older. That
may be disappointing for older Americans, but those sort of judgments will be
fundamental to any successful health care reform effort. PAGE A18

Op-Ed

BOB HERBERT

Young people are getting hit especially hard in an employment environment that
is worse than many people realize. PAGE A19

GAIL COLLINS

We have long since gotten used to the idea that movies are awash with product
placements, that the basketball game we're watching is part of, say, the Doritos
Home Classic at the Dunkin' Donuts Center. Now, you have to wonder if the
postcrash networks are going to be taking things to a whole new level. PAGE A19

THE GREAT SOLVENT NORTH

Canadian banks were once notorious for their stodgy practices and government
coddling. Now that they have weathered the financial crisis relatively well,
these banks are widely praised for their conservatism. In an Op-Ed article,
Theresa Tedesco, chief business correspondent for The National Post, argues that
American banks could learn a few lessons from their neighbors up north. PAGE A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (pg. A2
 pg. A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (87%); RELIGION (86%); EXPORT TRADE (79%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ARMED FORCES (75%); EUROPEAN UNION
(74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); POLICE FORCES (72%);
BORDER CONTROL (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (68%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%); HELICOPTERS (66%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (66%); DROUGHT (62%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); CRISTINA FERNANDEZ DE KIRCHNER (57%)

CITY: DHAKA, BANGLADESH (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ARGENTINA (94%);
BANGLADESH (93%); EUROPE (93%); IRAQ (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (75%); CUBA (68%)

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             865 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cocaine Trade Helps Rebels Reignite War in Peru

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Andrea Zarate contributed reporting from Lima, Peru.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1416 words


CANAYRE, Peru -- First the soldiers came to Rio Seco, a coca-growing village in
the lush mountain jungles of southern Peru. ''They called us subversives and
they opened fire,'' said Benedicto Condor, 55, a coca farmer. They shot dead
four people at close range, including a woman who was five months pregnant,
witnesses said. Two children, ages 6 and 1, disappeared and are believed dead.

Four months later, the guerrillas arrived, accusing the villagers of helping the
military. They abducted the village leader, who has not been seen since.

The harrowing tales of violence trickling out of the jungle as dozens of
families have fled their villages in recent months raise an ominous specter: a
brutal war that terrorized the country for two decades may be sparking back to
life.

The war against the Shining Path rebels, which took nearly 70,000 lives,
supposedly ended in 2000.

But here in one of the most remote corners of the Andes, the military, in a
renewed campaign, is battling a resurgent rebel faction. And the Shining Path,
taking a page from Colombia's rebels, has reinvented itself as an illicit drug
enterprise, rebuilding on the profits of Peru's thriving cocaine trade.

The front lines lie in the drizzle-shrouded jungle of Vizcatan, a
250-square-mile region in the Apurimac and Ene River Valley. The region is
Peru's largest producer of coca, the raw ingredient for cocaine.

As the military and the rebels skirmish for control of isolated coca-producing
hamlets, the reports of rising body counts and civilians killed in the
cross-fire, still far lower than the carnage at the height of the Shining Path
war in the 1980s and early 90s, are rousing ghosts most Peruvians thought were
long dead.

''The soldiers think we are all terrorists, and with that idea they believe they
can destroy anything that moves,'' said Alfredo Pacheco, 45, a coca farmer who
fled his village, Nueva Esperanza, in September, after soldiers burned the mud
huts there in pursuit of the rebels.

Military officials contended that the huts were coca-leaf maceration pits and
cocaine labs.

Such conflicting views are practically built into the system. Coca, the mildly
stimulating leaf chewed raw here since before the Spanish conquest, is largely
legal; cocaine is not.

Coca, a hallowed symbol of indigenous pride, is ubiquitous here. Qatun Tarpuy, a
pro-coca political party, paints images of it on mud huts. Women harvest coca in
clearings along the winding dirt road, and children dry the leaves in the sun.

It is also nearly impossible to find a coca farmer here who admits that his
crops are sold for anything other than traditional use, but somehow, studies
have found, as much as 90 percent of the coca goes to produce cocaine.

In 2007, the latest year for which data is available, coca cultivation in Peru
increased by 4 percent, reaching the highest level in a decade, according to the
United Nations. At the same time, Peru's estimated cocaine production rose to a
10-year high of about 290 tons, second only to that of Colombia.

Since the Shining Path retreated here after the capture of its messianic leader,
Abimael Guzman, in 1992, it has followed the much larger Colombian rebel group,
the FARC, in melding a leftist insurgency with drug running and production.

While the Shining Path was involved in coca before, now it is a major focus.
According to military and anti-drug analysts, the faction here, while still
professing to be a Maoist insurgency at heart, is now in the business of
protecting drug smugglers, extorting taxes from farmers and operating its own
cocaine laboratories.

''The guerrillas now operate with the efficiency and deadliness of an elite drug
trafficking organization,'' said Jaime Antezana, a security analyst in Lima,
Peru's capital, who estimates that the Shining Path employs about 500 laborers
in the cocaine trade, in addition to about 350 armed combatants.

Concerned about the resurrected rebels and mounting cocaine, the government
intensified the counterinsurgency campaign last August, and the killings spiked.

The guerrillas killed at least 26 people in 2008, including 22 soldiers and
police officers, the bloodiest year in almost a decade, according to security
analysts.

Human rights groups, meanwhile, are demanding inquiries into claims that
Peruvian soldiers killed at least five civilians, as well as into the
disappearance of the two children in Rio Seco and the displacement of dozens of
families from far-flung villages.

Military officials chafe at the reports of abuses. ''Human rights people say,
'Some civilians have been killed, how horrible,' '' Defense Minister Antero
Flores Araoz said in an interview in Lima. As for Rosa Chavez Sihuincha, the
pregnant woman killed in Rio Seco, he suggested that she got what she deserved.

''What the hell was she doing in Vizcatan?'' he said. ''Was she praying the
rosary? No way. Either she was transporting coca leaves for processing or she
was taking chemical products or she was part of the logistics of this Shining
Path group.''

While the United States is not directly involved with the counterinsurgency
campaign here, it provided about $60 million in anti-drug aid last year, about
11 percent of what it spends annually on anti-drug and counterinsurgency efforts
in Colombia.

Officials here admit that they were slow to recognize what they were up against
when Mr. Guzman, a former philosophy professor, unleashed his peasant revolt in
the 1980s, an experience they bring to bear as they try to decipher today's
rebels.

''There are those who say, 'Why worry about a few hundred fighters in the
jungle?' '' said Alberto Bolivar, a counterinsurgency expert. ''But they easily
forget the Shining Path began their armed struggle in 1980 with just a few
hundred guys. Two decades later, 70,000 people were dead.''

But the Shining Path appears to have learned lessons, too.

Coca farmers here describe today's Maoists as a disciplined, well-armed force,
entering villages in groups of 20 in crisp black uniforms. Little is known about
their leaders, aside from the belief that two brothers, Victor Quispe Palomino,
known as Jose, and Jorge Quispe Palomino, alias Raul, are at the helm.

Soldiers speak respectfully of the rebels' command of the jungle terrain and of
their ability to harass with gunfire more than a dozen forward operating bases
that have been established in recent months. ''Their columns seem to melt into
the jungle,'' said Maj. Julio Delgado, an officer at a base in Pichari, one of
the largest towns in the valley.

A resupply mission from that base on a Russian-built MI-17 helicopter offered a
glimpse into the counterinsurgency's challenges. For half an hour, the
helicopter flew over what Peruvians call the ''ceja de selva,'' the eyebrow of
the jungle, where green canopy on jutting peaks provides impenetrable
camouflage.

The helicopter landed at a tiny special forces base in Sanabamba, where
commandos pointed rifles at the surrounding terrain, waiting to hear from their
hidden quarry. Once the helicopter took off again, green jungle quickly
swallowed the mountaintop outpost.

Coca harvesters below did not even bother to glance up.

The rebels contend that they no longer assassinate local officials or sow terror
with tactics like planting bombs on donkeys in crowded markets, atrocities the
group was infamous for in the 1980s. This metamorphosis was confirmed by
testimony from villagers who had come in contact with them, interviews with
imprisoned rebels and a 45-page analysis written by the rebels, tracing the
group's evolution from its origins under Mr. Guzman, that was captured by
military intelligence here in December.

According to the document, they consider Mr. Guzman a ''revisionist'' traitor
and condemn another Shining Path faction, in the Upper Huallaga Valley in the
north, for its openness to negotiations.

Perhaps the most notable difference between the new Shining Path and the old is
the new group's relationship with the villagers, which ostensibly favors
paternalism over terrorism.

The villagers refer to the guerrillas as ''los tios,'' the uncles, although any
familial affection is enforced by the threat of violence.

It is a volatile arrangement well understood from the highest generals to a
fruit peddler like Maria Auccatoma, 48, who sells mangoes near the village of
Machente at a spot marked with crosses for the three civilians and five
policemen killed by the guerrillas in an ambush.

''We can live in peace,'' Ms. Auccatoma said quietly, ''as long as we obey the
uncles.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A drug arrest last year in southern Peru, where Shining Path
rebels are resurgent. More photos and a video at nytimes.com/world. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY MOISES SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
A Peruvian policeman looked into a building as he searched for illegal drug labs
in a village during a mission last year in the Vizcatan region of southern Peru.

The Apurimac and Ene River Valley in Peru. The region is Peru's largest producer
of coca, the raw ingredient for cocaine.
 Peruvian children walked on dried coca leaves spread over a soccer field late
last year in a village in the Vizcatan region. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MOISES SAMAN FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A11) MAPS: Canayre is in one of the most remote parts of
the Andes. (pg.A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COCAINE (93%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MOUNTAINS (78%); CHILDREN (76%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (76%); FAMILY (76%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (71%); ILLEGAL DRUGS
(71%); TERRORISM (70%)

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (91%)

COUNTRY: PERU (97%); COLOMBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             871 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 7, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2252 words


International

SERIES OF CHECHEN KILLINGS

Put Moscow in Difficult Spot

The enemies of the Chechen president, Ramzan Kadyrov, keep turning up dead. Now
the Kremlin, which installed him as president and is relying on him to stamp out
an insurgency that threatened to wrest the republic from Moscow's control, is
being condemned for allowing violence, including the regime's use of abduction
and torture, to continue. PAGE A5

PAKISTANI JUDGE REBUKES OFFICIALS

The newly restored chief justice of Pakistan's Supreme Court forcefully
displayed his reputation as a human rights advocate by assailing the attorney
general and other officials over the Taliban's flogging of a 17-year-old girl.
PAGE A6

CAR BOMBINGS KILL 33 IN IRAQ

A series of six car bombings in and near Baghdad killed at least 33 people and
wounded scores of others in a convulsion of violence that underscored the
heightened tensions between Sunni fighters and Iraq's government. PAGE A6

ACCUSATIONS OVER ROLE IN TORTURE

Medical personnel were present as guards confined prisoners in small boxes,
shackled their arms to the ceiling, kept them in frigid cells and were deeply
involved in the abusive interrogation and torture of terrorist suspects held
overseas by the Central Intelligence Agency, a long-secret report by the
International Committee of the Red Crosshas concluded. PAGE A6

AFTER LULL, SOMALI PIRATES STRIKE

After a recent decrease in activity, pirates off Somalia's coast seized as many
as five ships in 48 hours, somehow eluding the armada of warships from more than
a dozen nations, including the United States, patrolling Somalia's seas. PAGE A8

CANDIDATE INSULTS IRAN'S LEADER

Rejecting the policies of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as ''extremist,'' Mir
Hussein Moussavi, a leading presidential candidate in Iran, said that he favored
improved relations with the West and greater individual freedoms at home. PAGE
A9

Diplomatic Memo

$1.1 Trillion in Name Only

It is an extraordinary number, $1.1 trillion in aid, to be pumped into the
world's financial bloodstream. On closer inspection, the figure looks as wishful
as the words in the communique issued by the Group of 20, with some of the money
yet to be pledged, some double-counted and some to be counted in a ''synthetic
currency.'' PAGE A12

U.S. MAY EXPAND DRONE STRIKES

Despite threats of retaliation from Pakistani militants, senior administration
officials said that the United States intended to step up its use of drones to
strike militants in Pakistan's tribal areas. PAGE A15

National

STUDY FINDS MANY TEACHERS

Are Departing the Profession

Over the next four years, more than a third of the nation's 3.2 million teachers
could retire, depriving classrooms of experienced instructors and straining
taxpayer-financed retirement systems, according to a new report on teaching.
PAGE A16

STRAY HORSES STIR CONCERN

As the economy continues to falter, law enforcement officials in Kentucky and
nationwide are seeing big increases in the number of neglected horses, some
abandoned, others left to starve by their owners. The situation has some states
looking at ways to bring slaughterhouses back. PAGE A16

SPAT OVER ETHNIC ENCLAVE'S NAME

In the last 30 years or so, an area of Los Angeles has grown into an enclave
commonly known as Koreatown, representing the group's largest concentration in
the United States. Now a divisive application calls for officially naming dozens
of square blocks in what many consider the heart of their neighborhood Little
Bangladesh. PAGE A17

Gunman Had a History of Racism A19

TEXAS OFFICER CHARGED IN SHOOTING

A grand jury in Harris County, Tex., indicted a police sergeant in the shooting
of a young man outside his home on New Year's Eve. The case has attracted
widespread attention because the victim's family accused the police of racial
profiling. PAGE A19

THE AFTERMATH OF THE STEVENS CASE

The case against Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska was to be an achievement for the
Justice Department's elite anticorruption unit. But in the aftermath of the
conviction's collapse, lawyers said the case had been poorly managed,
inadequately supervised and hampered by conflicts between prosecutors and F.B.I.
agents. PAGE A20

New York

NOTE TIED TO GUNMAN

Rails at the Police

A Syracuse television station received a letter apparently from Jiverly Wong,
the gunman responsible for one of the deadliest mass shootings in New York's
history. The envelope was packed with personal items, leading authorities to
believe that it was authentic. The note expresses anger at the police but offers
little insight into the motivation for the attack. Page A21

POSTWAR GANGS IN NEW YORK

In the name of status and a family of choice, alienated young Latino men in
post-World War II New York formed gangs, turning the city into a patchwork of
separate turf. Their five decades of history is one soaked in more colors than
red and has influenced the stage and screen. Page 21

Obituaries

EDGAR F. CALLAHAN, 80

As chairman of the National Credit Union Administration under President Reagan,
he brought stability to the credit union industry at a time of economic
uncertainty. PAGE A27

Business

CIVIL SUIT AGAINST FINANCIER OVER MADOFF SCAM

J. Ezra Merkin, a prominent New York financier whose clients lost more than $2
billion in Bernard L. Madoff's Ponzi scheme has been accused of fraud and
deception in a civil law suit. The suit does not accuse Mr. Merkin of knowing
about Mr. Madoff's fraud, but it contends that he failed to properly oversee or
investigate the situation beforehand. Page B1

Dealbook

F.D.I.C. Enters Buyout Game

There is a new buyout artist in town: the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
that's right, the F.D.I.C. Its recent plan is to offer $2 trillion to private
investors who would use the loans to buy toxic assets from the nation's banks
and if the investor loses money, he would owe the taxpayer nothing. But if we've
learned one thing, Andrew Sorkin writes, it's that risk-free investing is kind
of an oxymoron. Page B1

RISKS IN EXTRACTING MEDICAL DEVICE

Pulling a medical device off the market is one thing, but over the next several
years thousands may face risky surgical procedures to have a device removed from
their bodies. The Sprint Fidelis, a heart defibrillator cable has been linked to
five patient deaths, and 150,000 people around the country are still using the
it. Some are having the device removed as a preventative measure. Page B1

Frequent Flier

It Makes for Awkward Small Talk

From tech savvy thief, to felon, to author; Walter Pavlo Jr. never thought he'd
see the inside of an airplane again. Now that he's written a book about his
experiences, he travels the country promoting it. And consulting and lecturing
on white collar crime. But what do you do when your neighbor on the flight wants
to make small talk? Page B6

On the Road

New Airport Security Passes Tests

Whole-body scans passed their first airport tests and the Transportation
Security Administration plans to replace walk-through metal detectors with them.
The scans provide an image of the naked body, and critics are arguing that it is
tantamount to an invasive strip-search. Page B6

SPORTS

FOR HARRINGTON,

Augusta Remains Quiet

At the Augusta National Golf Club, no barrage of media hoopla or paparazzi
awaits Padraig Harrington. This suits Harrington just fine. As he tries to
become the first European golfer in modern times to simultaneously hold three
majors, he has been able to prepare quietly for the Masters. PAGE B10

HORSE TRAINER ADMITS GIVING DRUG

Jeff Mullins, who trains the Kentucky Derby favorite I Want Revenge,
acknowledged that he gave his horse Gato Go Win a dose of what he characterized
as a ''liquid cough medicine'' in the detention barn at Aqueduct on Saturday.
PAGE B11

ARTS

MAPPING THE CULTURAL BUZZ

Of Metropolitan Life

A new study, ''The Geography of Buzz,'' locates hot spots based on the frequency
and draw of cultural happenings: film screenings, concerts, fashion shows, and
gallery and theater openings. It finds that the buzziest areas in New York are
not the Lower East Side, Williamsburg or any other hipster-centric
neighborhoods. PAGE C1

Theater Review

A Comedy With Ammunition

Don't feel guilty about laughing so hard at ''Why Torture Is Wrong, and the
People Who Love Them,'' Christopher Durang's new comedy about all-American
violence. Though it tackles subjects that are sensitive to the point of rawness
just now, the production has a healthier heart and conscience than many a more
pious play, Ben Brantley writes. PAGE C1

Books of The Times

Admiration Becomes Obsession

Arthur Phillips's new novel, ''The Song Is You,'' reads like a mash-up of the
romantic comedy ''Sleepless in Seattle,'' in which the hero and heroine meet in
real life only in the last reel, and one of those creepy, straight-to-video
movies, in which a famous beauty is pursued around the world by an obsessive
fan, Michiko Kakutani writes. PAGE C1

CHANGING OF GUARD REVEALS A SHIFT

When Daily Variety's longtime editor in chief, Peter Bart, surrendered power
over the weekend, many industry people learned not from the company's Web site,
where it broke the news, but from an e-mail alert sent by a blog, thewrap.com,
that did not exist six months ago. So it goes for the venerable trade
publication in a Hollywood where independent bloggers have severely lessened its
impact. PAGE C1

Science Times

KEEPING UP APPEARANCES

When Pride Is All That's Left

The art of keeping up appearances when you're in desperate straits may seem
shallow, the very embodiment of denial, but many psychologists beg to differ. To
the extent that it sustains good habits and reflects personal pride, they say,
this kind of play-acting can be an effective social strategy, especially in
uncertain times. PAGE D1

NEW DNA TEST TOPS THE PAP SMEAR

A new DNA test for human papillomavirus or HPV, the virus that causes cervical
cancer does so much better than current methods that some gynecologists hope it
will eventually replace the Pap smear in wealthy countries and cruder tests in
poor ones. PAGE D1

LIMBS MAY EXPLAIN MUCH MORE

Biologists, learning how the diversity of limbs evolved, are also getting clues
that may someday make it possible to regenerate entire limbs for treatment of
injuries or birth defects. But for many experts, their most important
discoveries are how the rules for limb-building also apply to other parts of the
embryo. PAGE D1

Lab Rats of Public Policy D1

Baseball Embraces Science D1

WHEN ISAAC WILL MEET HAL 9000

Scientists are experimenting with computer programs and robots that sift raw
data to uncover fundamental laws of nature. The achievement could mean that
insights that once emerged from the genius of scientists like Isaac Newton might
now pop out of computers straight out of the film ''2001: A Space Odyssey.''
PAGE D4

SPINE CELLS MAY BE KEY TO ITCH

Scratching to relieve an itch has long been considered a mystery. But a new
study suggests that specialized cells in the spinal cord appear to be critically
involved in producing the sensation of itch and the feeling of relief after the
application of fingernails, at least in healthy people. PAGE D4

PUTTING A HUMAN FACE ON X-RAYS

An unusual medical study suggested that when patients' photographs are attached
to their X-rays, radiologists provided longer, more meticulous reports. And they
said they felt more connected to the patients, whom they seldom meet face to
face.

PAGE D5

DUST YIELDS CLUE TO ASTHMA

Children living in public housing suffer disproportionately from allergic
asthma. Now, a team of scientists from the Boston University School of Medicine
using an experimental model that required leaving the pristine conditions of the
lab for the messier ones of life have discovered that the allergen usually is
cockroaches. PAGE D5

Editorial

PUBLIC PLAN FOR HEALTH INSURANCE?

President Obama has rightly called for sweeping health care reform and charged
Congress with coming up with a program. Expect a tough political fight. Already
one of the most contentious issues is whether to include a new public plan
option to compete with private insurance plans. It seems worth trying. Page A28

CASH FOR CLUNKERS

President Obama's rescue plan for the automotive industry has given the
presidential seal of approval to a little-noticed movement in Congress to clear
the roads of gas-guzzling clunkers and replace them with more fuel-efficient
cars. It's an excellent idea, but there's a right and wrong way to do it. Page
A28

SO MUCH FOR PUBLIC TRANSIT

With each passing day, it becomes more likely that the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority will greatly increase the cost of public transit -- and
that these platinum-priced tickets will buy a lot less service than people are
accustomed to. The New York State Senate can prevent this unfortunate outcome.
But it shows no sign of doing so. Page A28

Op-Ed

DAVID BROOKS

Today, many psychologists, cognitive scientists and even philosophers embrace a
view of morality in which seeing and evaluating are not two separate processes,
they are linked and basically simultaneous. The question then becomes, what
shapes moral emotions in the first place? The answer has long been evolution,
but in recent years there's an increasing appreciation that evolution isn't just
about competition, it's also about cooperation within groups. Page A29

HOW THE INTERNET GOT ITS RULES

Today marks the 40th anniversary of the Request for Comments, those guardians of
network protocol. In an Op-Ed essay, Stephen D. Crocker, the author of the very
first R.F.C., reflects on the humble memos that shaped the Internet. Page A29

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
 A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (87%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); TALIBAN (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); CORRECTIONS (75%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); JUDGES (71%); SOMALI PIRACY (70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(70%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (68%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%); NAVAL VESSELS
(64%); MILITARY VESSELS (64%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (63%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (58%); MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (50%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (76%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); SOMALIA (93%); IRAQ (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             881 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Ginsburg Has Surgery for Pancreatic Cancer

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK; Neil A. Lewis contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1101 words


Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg underwent surgery at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center in New York on Thursday for what was apparently early-stage
pancreatic cancer, according to a statement released by the Supreme Court.

The surgery followed the discovery of a lesion during an annual check-up in late
January at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. A CAT scan
revealed a small tumor, approximately one centimeter across, in the center of
the pancreas, the court's statement said.

According to Dr. Murray Brennan, the attending surgeon, Justice Ginsburg will
most likely remain in the hospital approximately for seven to 10 days, the
statement added. A spokeswoman for Sloan-Kettering declined to elaborate.

President Obama was informed of the justice's condition early Thursday
afternoon, his spokesman said.

''He has not talked with the justice, but his thoughts and prayers are with her
and her family right now,'' said Robert Gibbs, the White House spokesman. ''We
hope for and wish her a speedy recovery.''

But the news of Justice Ginsburg's condition had to be a jolt for senior
administration officials, who were already aware of the crushing time frame to
deal with a series of major policy matters.

A senior White House adviser said that before taking office, Mr. Obama and his
top aides had anticipated that he would almost certainly have to nominate a new
justice sometime this spring when the Court's current term ends. The thinking
had always been, the adviser said, that there would be single voluntary
resignation from the court in June even if all the current justices remained in
good health. Justice Ginsburg's cancer surgery reinforces that view.

Justice Ginsburg, 75, was appointed to the court in 1993 by President Bill
Clinton. She was born in Brooklyn in 1933, graduated from Cornell in 1954 and
first attended law school at Harvard, where she was on the law review. After
moving to New York with her husband, she transferred to Columbia, joining its
law review as well. She taught at Columbia and Rutgers, and was a leading
courtroom advocate for women's rights.

As director of the Women's Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union
during the 1970's, she brought a series of cases before the court that helped
establish constitutional protections against sex discrimination. Her incremental
litigation strategy invited comparison to Thurgood Marshall, the architect of
the civil rights movement's legal attack on race discrimination.

She argued six cases in the court, winning five.

She was treated for colon cancer in 1999 and did not miss a day on the bench.
The court next hears arguments on Feb. 23.

According to the American Cancer Society, pancreatic cancer has one of the
lowest five-year survival rates, at about 5 percent overall for all stages. The
rate for lung cancer is about 15 percent, and the rates for colon and rectal
cancers are 64 percent. The survival rate for pancreatic cancer is so low
because the disease is often not diagnosed until its later stages. There is no
test for early detection, and such symptoms as weight loss and abdominal
discomfort are often overlooked.

Justice Ginsburg is the second woman to serve on the Supreme Court, after
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in
1981 and announced her retirement in 2005. Justice O'Connor herself underwent
surgery for breast cancer in 1988.

Other justices have also battled cancer in recent memory. Justice John Paul
Stevens underwent radiation treatment for prostate cancer in 1992. Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist was diagnosed with thyroid cancer 11 months before his
death in September 2005.

Before her appointment to the Justice Ginsburg had earlier served for 13 years
as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit.

Justice Ginsburg is a member of the court's liberal wing. Her appointment in
1993 marked the end of a 26-year gap during which no Democratic president made
an appointment to the Supreme Court. The last justice named by a Democratic
president before her was, fittingly perhaps, Justice Thurgood Marshall,
appointed by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1967. President Clinton also
appointed Justice Stephen G. Breyer, in 1994.

If Justice Ginsburg were forced from the court this spring because of health
reasons, it would increase the possibility of a second vacancy from among her
aging colleagues like Justice John Paul Stevens, who will turn 89 in April.

The nomination of even a single Supreme Court candidate and the ensuing
confirmation debate would by itself be a momentous event that would occupy a
large portion of the administration's political attention and energy.

That process would occur at the same time Mr. Obama would be pressing forward to
fulfill his pledge to close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, within
a year. That plan would likely include a complex legislative proposal to deal
with the vexing issue of what to do with the remaining prisoners and any
suspected terrorists captured in the future.

In preparation for a likely Supreme Court vacancy, some senior Obama advisers
have already discussed possible candidates. Many lawyers and court scholars have
believed that Mr. Obama would be obliged to lean toward selecting a woman with
his first selection because Justice Ginsburg is currently the only female in the
court. If Justice Ginsburg were to leave, the political imperative to choose a
woman would only increase.

Among those who have been talked about as candidates by court watchers,
academics and lawyers is Deval Patrick, the governor of Massachusetts, a friend
of Mr. Obama's and a former Justice Department official. Among women on the
lists of possible candidates are Sonia Sotomayor, a federal appeals court judge
in New York; Diane Wood, a federal appeals court judge in Chicago, and Elena
Kagan, who was the dean at Harvard Law School and was recently nominated to be
solicitor general.

Other candidates include Harold Hongjuh Koh, the dean of the Yale Law School;
Cass Sunstein, a law professor at Harvard and former colleague of Mr. Obama's at
the University of Chicago law school; and, Merrick Garland, a federal appeals
court judge in Washington.

Mr. Obama, a former teacher of constitutional law at the University of Chicago,
has not given any indication of his inclinations. He said before being elected
that he was impressed with the late Chief Justice Earl Warren, who was governor
of California, as a model for a justice because he was a practicing politician
before joining the bench.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CANCER (93%); ENDOCRINE SYSTEM DISORDERS (91%); SURGERY &
TRANSPLANTATION (90%); CANCER HOSPITALS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(79%); CIVIL RIGHTS (79%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); LUNG CANCER (78%);
WOMEN (78%); COLORECTAL CANCER (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); LITIGATION (77%);
HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); US PRESIDENTS
(74%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (74%); DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING (73%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (65%); LAW SCHOOLS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING CANCER CENTER (84%); NATIONAL INSTITUTES
OF HEALTH (57%)

PERSON: RUTH BADER GINSBURG (91%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); BILL CLINTON (56%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             882 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Claims of Torture Abroad Face Test Monday in Court

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 437 words


A case to be heard in San Francisco on Monday could provide an early look at
whether President Obama will fully break with the previous administration on
questions of government secrecy concerning the transfer of terrorism suspects to
countries where they may face torture.

The hearing grows out of a lawsuit filed on behalf of an Ethiopian native,
Binyam Mohamed, and four other detainees against a subsidiary of the Boeing
Company. The suit maintains that the subsidiary, Jeppesen Dataplan, helped
arrange rendition flights that took the detainees to nations where, they say,
they were tortured.

The suit was filed by the American Civil Liberties Union in the Federal District
Court in San Francisco in May 2007. It was dismissed last February after the
Bush administration asserted the ''state secrets privilege,'' claiming that the
disclosure of information in the case could damage national security.

In the appeal, to be heard Monday by a three-judge panel of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the civil liberties union argues that
the government has engaged in an inappropriate blanket use of the privilege and
that the case should be allowed to proceed.

''Every single torture case filed against a U.S. official has been thrown out
without any adjudication of law or facts'' because of the early and broad use of
the state secrets privilege, said Ben Wizner, an A.C.L.U. lawyer.

The practical effect, Mr. Wizner said, is that detainees are blocked from the
courts, and so ''there aren't any checks and balances over the conduct.''

In a conference call with reporters on Thursday, Anthony D. Romero, executive
director of the A.C.L.U., noted that as a presidential candidate, Mr. Obama
pledged to break with the past on the issues of rendition and torture. His
Justice Department, however, has not yet signaled whether it will continue to
assert the broad state secrets claim, alter it or simply ask for more time to
consider its options.

''The baton has been passed,'' Mr. Romero said. ''The runner must run in the
same direction or change course.''

A spokesman for the Justice Department, Charles Miller, declined to comment on
the case, as did a White House spokesman, Ben LaBolt.

But whatever the government's lawyer says on Monday will speak volumes about the
administration's views,  Mr. Wizner said.

''If he repeats the Bush administration's argument that this case must be
dismissed at the outset,'' Mr.Wizner said, ''then we'll know that despite the
change of administration, the policy of the United States that torture victims
be shut out of the courtroom has continued.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Binyam Mohamed, one of five detainees suing a subsidiary of the
Boeing Company.(PHOTOGRAPH BY REPRIEVE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); LAWYERS (78%); TERRORISM (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); APPEALS COURTS (74%); EXECUTIVES (73%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); JUDGES (72%); PARENT COMPANIES (71%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (50%); CONFERENCE CALLS (50%)

COMPANY: BOEING CO (72%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (72%); BA (NYSE) (72%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (72%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (72%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (72%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             891 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Germany, Whispers of 'Enough' at a War-Crimes Trial

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS KULISH

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: MUNICH


-- The paper next to the courtroom door announced the charge for the day's
hearing in tiny type that hardly seemed equal to its gravity. ''Mord,'' it read
in German. Murder.

The accused waited with his lawyer, standing unsteadily, gripping a crutch with
one arm. Josef Scheungraber, 90, is charged in the deaths of 14 Italian
civilians in June 1944, when he was a lieutenant in the Wehrmacht. He is an
accused war criminal, called to account more than six decades later.

The crimes against humanity committed under the Nazi regime remain the issue
that refuses to go away here, and every time it seems to be sinking out of view
it breaks through the surface again. I had just driven from the Mauthausen
concentration camp in Austria, where I was researching an article about Dr.
Aribert Heim, a Nazi doctor who allegedly murdered hundreds of people, most of
them Jews, through poison injections directly to the heart and surgery that
would better be described as butchery.

My colleagues and I found that Dr. Heim's flight from justice ended with his
death in 1992 in Cairo, where he had lived, hidden from Nazi hunters, as a
Muslim convert. He would never face his accusers in court, as Mr. Scheungraber
now must.

According to prosecutors, Mr. Scheungraber ordered the shooting of three Italian
men and a 74-year-old woman, then ordered that 11 more civilians be forced into
a barn, which was blown up. Ten of the 11 died. Mr. Scheungraber has been
convicted in absentia in Italy but has testified here that he was rebuilding a
nearby bridge when the civilians were killed, and that he  had nothing to do
with the order to kill civilians as revenge for an attack by Italian partisans.

The trial has played out quietly, largely out of the glare. A war-crimes trial
evokes images of packed benches and the strobe of flashbulbs, but on this recent
morning fewer than 15 people waited to watch the proceedings. I went not because
it was a news story but because I wanted to hear what Germans thought about the
continuing process, at a point when some of the accused criminals from the
Balkan wars of the 1990s, like Slobodan Milosevic, have already passed away from
natural causes.

''We have to remember,'' said Manfred Wenzel, 71, resolutely, before wavering
and adding, ''although I'm not sure these people should be pursued anymore.'' He
sighed and concluded, ''At some point there has to be peace.''

Mr. Wenzel seemed much happier describing a story in keeping with the European
Union's recent reign of open borders, rather than dwelling on the continent's
darkest years. ''The son of one of the Italian witnesses actually married a
German and they coincidentally live right here in Munich,'' Mr. Wenzel said.
''He showed no resentment at all.''

I first moved to Germany as a student in 1995, and was amazed to find a country
so ready not only to embrace its guilt for long-ago crimes, but to discuss it,
research it and commemorate it with unusual diligence. But lately I have noticed
a shift. When the Nazi era comes up in interviews, people plead to me with their
eyes to let it drop. There are fewer discussions and more awkward silences.

Increasingly, I get the sense that many Germans would like to move on. Not
forget, but move on.

''This case gives me a bad feeling,'' said Werner Berger, 36, who said he was at
the trial because he had studied history but also because he lives in the same
small town as Mr. Scheungraber. ''It's always only the Germans who they go
after, never the Soviets,'' he said. The accused was ''not a camp commander, not
in the SS,'' Mr. Berger said. ''What is the point?''

The same prosecutors who are trying Mr. Scheungraber are weighing whether to
bring a case again against the accused death camp guard John Demjanjuk, 88, a
Ukrainian accused of working as a guard at the Sobibor concentration camp in
Poland. It would be his second trip to the dock. He was convicted and sentenced
to death in Israel, only to be freed in 1993 after it turned out that he most
likely had been confused with a guard at Treblinka, the camp at issue in that
case.

''It's difficult,'' said Hans-Joachim Lutz, the prosecutor of Mr. Scheungraber,
in an interview at his office near the courthouse. ''There are very few
witnesses who are still alive,'' he said, ''and the people we have were lower in
the hierarchy,'' which means less documentation of their crimes. It was unclear
whether they could make the case against Mr. Demjanjuk. Asked how long before it
would be brought, he said some cases took months, others up to five years.

In Ludwigsburg, a city not far from Stuttgart, at the Central Office for the
Investigation of Nazi Crimes, Thomas Walther has worked on nothing but the
Demjanjuk case since last March. I sat with him in his darkened office later
that night, after the office had closed. Tired, with a twitch under one eye, his
longish white hair hanging down like a wilted Einstein's, Mr. Walther rejected
the notion that time could excuse the crimes of that era, or reduce their
heinousness.

''There was no border of old age for the victims,'' Mr. Walther said of Mr.
Demjanjuk and his alleged crimes at Sobibor. ''His oldest victim was 98. His
youngest was 3-and-a-half weeks old. The little ones were handled like cats,''
he said, snapping his wrist to indicate the smashing of tiny skulls. The only
statute of limitations, as Mr. Walther saw it, was biological. ''That is the
only way that it will end.''

In the courtroom, Mr. Scheungraber sat and watched Guiseppe Nocentini, 79,
testify by video link from Italy. Mr. Nocentini told a story of war  -- of
German soldiers confiscating a horse and provisions, of a young man killed after
he left his hiding place to find salt for a meal others were cooking, of an
exchange of fire with Italian partisans, and then of seeing black smoke rise
into the sky after the house was destroyed.

''I couldn't hear the blast but I saw the smoke,'' the courtroom interpreter
said. The judge gently told the witness that in a deposition he had said he
heard an enormous explosion.

''With the explosion, I'm not certain. With the smoke, I'm certain,'' Mr.
Nocentini said. ''I'm just not entirely sure. It was such a long time ago.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: DAY IN COURT: Josef Scheungraber waits to defend himself against
charges that he killed civilians in World War II.(PHOTOGRAPH BY OLIVER
LANG/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE  -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); WITNESSES (78%);
TESTIMONY (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); HOLOCAUST (77%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WORLD WAR II (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%); LAWYERS
(74%); SHOOTINGS (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (69%); JEWS & JUDAISM (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); NEWS
BRIEFS (66%); MURDER (58%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE (88%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (71%); AUSTRIA (56%)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             894 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama Backs Off A Reversal On Secrets

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ; David Johnston contributed reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


In a closely watched case involving rendition and torture, a lawyer for the
Obama administration seemed to surprise a panel of federal appeals judges on
Monday by pressing ahead with an argument for preserving state secrets
originally developed by the Bush administration.

In the case, Binyam Mohamed, an Ethiopian native, and four other detainees filed
suit against a subsidiary of Boeing for arranging flights for the Bush
administration's ''extraordinary rendition'' program, in which terrorism
suspects were secretly taken to other countries, where they say they were
tortured. The Bush administration argued that the case should be dismissed
because even discussing it in court could threaten  national security and
relations with other nations.

During the campaign, Mr. Obama harshly criticized the Bush administration's
treatment of detainees, and he has broken with that  administration on questions
like whether to keep open the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. But a
government lawyer, Douglas N. Letter, made the same state-secrets argument on
Monday, startling several judges on the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit.

''Is there anything material that has happened'' that might have caused the
Justice Department to shift its views, asked Judge Mary M. Schroeder, an
appointee of President Jimmy Carter, coyly referring to the recent election.

''No, your honor,'' Mr. Letter replied.

Judge Schroeder asked, ''The change in administration has no bearing?''

Once more, he said, ''No, Your Honor.''  The position he was taking in court on
behalf of the government had been ''thoroughly vetted with the appropriate
officials within the new administration,'' and ''these are the authorized
positions,'' he said.

That produced an angry response from Anthony D. Romero, executive director of
the American Civil Liberties Union, which is representing the plaintiffs.

''This is not change,'' he said in a statement. ''This is definitely more of the
same. Candidate Obama ran on a platform that would reform the abuse of state
secrets, but President Obama's Justice Department has disappointingly reneged on
that important civil liberties issue. If this is a harbinger of things to come,
it will be a long and arduous road to give us back an America we can be proud of
again.''

A Justice Department spokesman, Matt Miller, said the government did not comment
on pending litigation, but he seemed to suggest that Mr. Obama  would invoke the
privilege more sparingly than its predecessor.

''It is the policy of this administration to invoke the state secrets privilege
only when necessary and in the most appropriate cases,'' he said, adding that
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. had asked for a review of pending cases in
which the government had previously asserted a state secret privilege.

''The attorney general has directed that senior Justice Department officials
review all assertions of the state secrets privilege to ensure that the
privilege is being invoked only in legally appropriate situations,'' he said.
''It is vital that we protect information that, if released, could jeopardize
national security.''

The court papers describe horrific treatment in secret prisons. Mr. Mohamed
claimed that during his detention in Morocco, ''he was routinely beaten,
suffering broken bones and, on occasion, loss of consciousness. His clothes were
cut off with a scalpel and the same scalpel was then used to make incisions on
his body, including his penis. A hot stinging liquid was then poured into open
wounds on his penis where he had been cut. He was frequently threatened with
rape, electrocution and death.''

Ben Wizner, a lawyer for the A.C.L.U., told the judges that many of the facts
that the government is trying to keep secret are scarcely secret at all, since
the administration's rendition program and the particulars of many of the cases
have been revealed in news reports and in the work of government investigations
from around the world. ''The only place in the world where these claims can't be
discussed,'' Mr. Wizner said, ''is in this courtroom.''

What the A.C.L.U. is asking, he said, is that the case be allowed to go forward,
giving the courts a chance to decide, based on classified information revealed
solely to the judge, what should be allowed to be discussed.

But Mr. Letter said that the lower court judge, James Ware, did receive
classified information and came to the correct conclusion in dismissing the case
last year. He urged the judges to pore over the same material, and predicted
''you will understand precisely, as Judge Ware did, why this case can't be
litigated.''

In a related matter, Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is chairman of
the Senate Judiciary Committee,  on Monday proposed the establishment of a
''truth commission'' to investigate the Bush administration's treatment of
detainees and other issues, like the firings of United States attorneys by the
Justice Department. The commission, he said, could grant immunity to witnesses
to explore the facts without the threat of criminal prosecution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
APPEALS COURTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); APPEALS (78%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (78%);
PRISONS (76%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(71%); EXECUTIVES (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%); TERRORISM (56%)

COMPANY: BOEING CO (57%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (55%)

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (57%); BA (NYSE) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (57%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); MARY M SCHROEDER (79%); ERIC HOLDER (58%); JIMMY
CARTER (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             906 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times: February 14, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2163 words


International

BOMBER KILLS 35 IN ATTACK

On Shiite Pilgrims in Iraq

In the deadliest in a string of attacks in recent days against Shiite pilgrims,
a suicide bomber hiding explosives under her garments killed 35 people. They
were walking in an annual procession to the holy city of Karbala, which has
often been a target of extremists.  PAGE A6

A CEASE-FIRE IN GAZA?

Hamas officials said that it was days away from an announcement of an 18-month
cease-fire with Israel, and would include a substantial opening of Gaza's
borders with Israel in exchange for an end to rocket attacks on communities in
southern Israel. But a senior Israeli official said nothing had been agreed on
yet.  PAGE A6

5 CHILDREN DIE IN AFGHAN SKIRMISH

The Australian military said five children were killed in predawn fighting
between Australian special operations troops and Taliban guerrillas in south
central Afghanistan, which a provincial leader said would have a ''negative
effect'' on relations between Afghans and foreign troops in the country. The
deaths come amid growing complaints from Afghan officials, including President
Hamid Karzai, about civilian casualties.  PAGE A8

INDIA PRESSES PAKISTAN ON TERROR

India welcomed Pakistan's admission that the Mumbai terrorist attacks were
planned in part on its soil but pressed the government in Islamabad to ''act
effectively against the license that terrorist groups enjoy in its territory.''
PAGE A7

A ZIMBABWE LEADER IS ARRESTED

Roy Bennett, the third highest ranking member of the opposition party in
Zimbabwe that is supposed to share power with President Robert Mugabe, was
arrested by President Mugabe's security forces on the same day a new coalition
government was sworn in.  PAGE A6

BRITISH OFFICERS WON'T BE CHARGED

After a new review of a police shooting that killed a Brazilian man, mistakenly
identified as a terrorist bomber in the weeks after suicide bombers killed 56
people on the London transit system in 2005, the British agency that oversees
criminal prosecutions said it would not charge any of the police officers
involved.  PAGE A10

BLACKWATER CHANGES ITS NAME

Blackwater Worldwide is abandoning the brand name that has been tarnished by its
work in Iraq, settling on Xe (pronounced zee) as the new name for its family of
two dozen businesses. The company's rebranding effort was prompted by a shooting
incident in September 2007 involving Blackwater guards in Baghdad that left 17
Iraqi civilians dead.  PAGE A10

national

BRIBERY CASE AGAINST JUDGE

Sheds Light on Mississippi Leaders

Now that, Bobby DeLaughter, a 1990s civil rights hero turned Mississippi judge
has been indicted in a bribery scandal, the legal establishment in his home
state has been rocked, and some of the state's leading figures have come down
with it.   PAGE A12

SQUEEZING EVERY PENNY FOR LOVE

Homemade cards replace long-stemmed roses. A night in with Netflix instead of a
night out at the theater. And personal poems in place of personal jewelry. This
year, Valentine's Day is proving particularly vulnerable to the bursting of the
economic bubble.   PAGE A12

ARIZONA SHERIFF UNDER FIRE

Members of Congress asked the Justice and Homeland Security Departments to
investigate allegations that the sheriff in the prePhoenix metropolitan area,
Joe Arpaio, has engaged in a pattern of racial profiling and other abuses
against Latinos.  PAGE A12

Rulings for Mountain Coal Mining A13

FAMILIES SUE PENNSYLVANIA JUDGES

Several hundred families filed a class-action suit against two Pennsylvania
judges who pleaded guilty to accepting $2.6 million in kickbacks for sending
juveniles to private detention facilities.   PAGE A13

New York Report

BRONX TENANTS ACQUITTED

In Deaths of 2 Firefighters

Two tenants of an apartment building in the Bronx were acquitted in the 2005
deaths of two firefighters who jumped out a window to escape an out-of-control
blaze, after being accused of contributing to the deaths by illegally erecting
partition walls in their apartments that disoriented the firefighters.  PAGE A17

BACKING AWAY FROM SODA TAX

Gov. David A. Paterson's proposal during his State of the State speech last
month to impose an 18 percent tax on soda and other sugary drinks set off a
spirited debate in New York and around the country. But he retreated from that
position at a town hall meeting on Thursday, and said he put it forward largely
to fuel controversy and conversation about childhood obesity.  PAGE A17

Business

BETTING ON THE MARKET

For $8,000 Italian Suits

A year ago, Saks Fifth Avenue's decision to open a 2,000-square-foot boutique in
Manhattan dedicated to an Italian luxury label -- sunglasses, $1,395; pair of
jeans, $795 -- would not have raised an eyebrow. The decision to do so now,
however, underscores the fine line luxury retailers must walk in trying to
survive a downturn and maintaining their status as a vessel of elite brands.
PAGE B1

STIMULUS WOULD EXTEND BENEFITS

The economic stimulus bills that passed in the House on Friday would give states
incentives to extend benefits to more unemployed workers, including part-timers
and people in training programs.  PAGE B1

CLUBS STRUGGLE AS MARKET DRIES UP

The market and business model for once-thriving destination clubs, in which
affluent travelers could find the advantages of a fancy second home without the
inconvenience of upkeep for a one-time deposit, fell apart with the rest of the
economy, and many of the ventures are left with more bills than income.  PAGE B1

THE WISDOM OF PLAYING IT SAFE

Has the recent tumult in the stock markets created a generation of risk-averse
investors? A better question to ask is not whether people in the first half of
their working lives are becoming more risk-averse, but whether they should be.
Ron Lieber, Your Money. PAGE B1

AN UNPOPULAR IDEA GAINS STEAM

There's not much agreement on what steps the Treasury secretary, Timothy
Geithner, should take to restore confidence in the markets. But Joe Nocera
writes that a growing number of economists and financial experts are starting to
sound a similar refrain: It's time to nationalize the banks. PAGE B1

Arts

AN OSCAR CONTENDER DOUBLING

As Pitch for a Quiz Show

''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire'' is a major plot device in the Oscar darling
''Slumdog Millionaire,'' which has revived interest in the quiz show enough to
have accelerated talks for its prime-time revival. PAGE C1

WAGING DIGITAL WAR, UNEASILY

First-person shooter games usually don't try very hard to humanize the digital
bad guys the player is charged with dispatching. Seth Schiesel writes that
''Call of Duty: World at War'' takes a small step in that direction by making
players think a little longer about the cost of the violence they mete out.
PAGE C1

FILMMAKERS EMBRACE THE WORLD

The unofficial theme of the Berlin International Film Festival was an embrace of
globalism, though it was carried out with uneven results. PAGE C1

A Mash-Up of Theater Iconoclasts  C1

STILL JAMMING ON STAGE,

But Picking Their Spots

New Edition, the megapopular boy band from the 1980s -- or a splinter group of
three of the members, who call themselves the Heads of State -- performed at the
Nokia Theater in Manhattan on Thursday, though they couldn't exert themselves as
they once did. ''We are going to do as many songs as we can remember, being our
age,'' the singer Bobby Brown said. ''I just turned 40.'' PAGE C4

OLIVER TWIST, SOME MORE

''Masterpiece Classic'' takes aim at the Dickens tale, which Mike Hale writes
will irritate purists with the way it scrambles characters and events.  PAGE C10

Sports

VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT UNHAPPY

With Decision to Rest Mets Pitcher

President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, a leading critic of the United States and a
big baseball fan, has turned his ire on Major League Baseball -- and the New
York Mets, specifically. Mr. Chavez took issue with the Mets' request that Johan
Santana, the team's ace, skip the World Baseball Classic next month to protect
his surgically repaired knee, which would keep him out of Venezuela's rotation.
PAGE D2

JACOBS NAMED FRANCHISE PLAYER

The Giants have used their franchise player designation on Brandon Jacobs, a
move toward signing him, a free agent, to a long-term contract. Meanwhile, the
Atlanta Falcons are trying to find a team interested in the contract rights for
Michael Vick, who is scheduled to be released from jail in July. N.F.L. Roundup.
PAGE D3

Obituaries

ALISON L. DES FORGES, 66

A human rights activist who tried to call the world's attention to the looming
genocide in Rwanda in 1994, she later wrote what is considered the definitive
account of the eventual slaughter of more than 500,000 Rwandans.  PAGE A24

BEVERLY ECKERT, 57

She became a prominent spokeswoman for the families of 9/11 victims after her
husband was killed in the attacks. She and Ms. Des Forges were among the
passengers killed on Thursday when Continental Airlines Flight 3407 crashed near
Buffalo. PAGE A24

Editorial

CALIFORNIA'S CROWDED PRISONS

A three-judge panel has tentatively ordered California to reduce the population
of its desperately overcrowded prisons by as much as one-third, or as many as
55,000 prisoners, over the next three years. The ruling was an extreme step, but
a necessary one.  Page A22

VENEZUELANS' RIGHT TO SAY NO

Apparently Hugo Chavez doesn't believe Venezuelan voters, who more than a year
ago rejected his bid to eliminate the term limits blocking his continued rule.
On Sunday, he is giving them another chance. For the sake of Venezuela's
democracy, they should again vote no.  Page A22

DEPORTATION AND DUE PROCESS

In a nasty bit of mischief in his final days, the outgoing attorney general,
Michael Mukasey, ruled that immigrants have no constitutional right to effective
legal representation in deportation hearings. Vacating that 11th-hour strike
deserves a high place on Attorney General Eric Holder's to-do list.  Page A22

Op-ed

GAIL COLLINS

It's 8 p.m., American TV viewers, so you know it's time for ''Who Wants to Be
Secretary of Commerce?''  Page A23

VALENTINE'S DAY

As a jeweler, Clancy Martin hated Feb. 14 because customers paid scant attention
to the gifts they bought. In an Op-Ed article, Mr. Martin, now a novelist,
argues that Valentine's Day should be an occasion for carefully considered
expressions of love.  Page A23

This Weekend

Magazine

THE NO-STATS ALL-STAR

Inspired by the Bill James-led revolution in baseball, some N.B.A. front-office
types are learning how a player who doesn't score a lot of points or grab many
rebounds can be one of his team's most valuable players. Meet Shane Battier.

The Saharan Conundrum

Arts & Leisure

THE GOLD MAN'S STAGE

Under New Management

David Rockwell is finding himself under glass as he is filmed for a lead-in
segment for the 81st Academy Awards. As production designer, his goal is to
''redefine the show's DNA,'' returning it to when it was a spectacle in and of
itself. It's a needed change. Last year's viewership was an all-time low,
Patricia Leigh Brown writes.

Verdi, With Popcorn

Sunday Business

A NEW BOSS AT TOYOTA:

His Hands Are at 10 and 2

Akio Toyoda is in line to be Toyota's next president, and he makes a point of
being hands-on. The world's biggest car company has been riding a downhill slope
to riches, but that slope has bottomed out in the recession and the momentum is
spent, Micheline Maynard writes.

Why Google Pulls the Plug

Book Review

THE MEN WHO HELPED

Break the World

''The Lords of Finance,'' by Liaquat Ahamed, a veteran hedge fund manager, is a
grand, sweeping narrative of immense scope and power, writes Joe Nocera. It
examines a world far from memory, but not validity, as the West was immersed in
the Great Depression after World War I.

A Visit From Death

Style

WHEN THE ELYSIAN FIELDS

Of Excess Feel the Heat

Is paradise being affected by the economy? Miami Beach has an altered landscape
of half-full hotels, slowing sales and escalating rents that have forced out
restaurants and boutiques. But that's not stopping the droves of tourists and
party-goers. Eden is just a little dented.

Breakdown

In Stimulus Plan

EDUCATION

President Obama promised to increase education greatly, and he kept his promise.
The plan will provide about $100 billion in emergency money over two years for
public schools, universities and child care centers.  PAGE A14

HEALTH

About $87 billion of federal money will go to the states for Medicaid, the
health insurance program for low-income people, and to offer help to many of the
unemployed.  PAGE A14

TAXES

Roughly $282 billion of the stimulus package is made up of tax cuts for
individuals and businesses, including tax breaks for buyers of homes and cars.
PAGE A14

ENERGY

Receiving more than $45 billion in new spending and tax breaks, programs to
promote energy efficiency and renewable energy sources are big winners.  PAGE
A14

Research Aid Restored A14

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%);
SHOOTINGS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); HAMAS (76%);
MUMBAI TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (71%); POLITICS (71%); INDICTMENTS (69%);
SCANDALS (69%); ARRESTS (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (69%); BRIBERY (67%); BRANDING
(60%)

COMPANY: ACADEMI LLC (86%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS561612 SECURITY GUARDS & PATROL SERVICES (86%); NAICS561611
INVESTIGATION SERVICES (86%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (53%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA
(75%); LONDON, ENGLAND (74%)

STATE: MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (75%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); ZIMBABWE (94%); INDIA
(92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             912 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

PAKISTAN MAKES A TALIBAN TRUCE, CREATING A HAVEN

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ; Reporting was contributed by Ismail Khan from Peshawar,
Pakistan; Pir Zubair Shah and Salman Masood from Islamabad; and Helene Cooper
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1293 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


The government announced Monday that it would accept a system of Islamic law in
the Swat valley and agreed to a truce, effectively conceding the area as a
Taliban sanctuary and suspending a faltering effort by the army to crush the
insurgents.

The concessions to the militants, who now control about 70 percent of the region
just 100 miles from the capital, were criticized by Pakistani analysts as a
capitulation by a government desperate to stop Taliban abuses and a military
embarrassed at losing ground after more than a year of intermittent fighting.
About 3,000 Taliban militants have kept 12,000 government troops at bay and
terrorized the local population with floggings and the burning of schools.

The accord came less than a week before the first official visit to Washington
of the Pakistani army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, to meet Obama
administration officials and discuss how Pakistan could improve its tactics
against what the American military is now calling an industrial-strength
insurgency there of Al Qaeda and the Taliban militants.

The militants have also made deep gains in neighboring Afghanistan, where the
United States is sending more troops.

Pakistani government officials insisted the truce with the Taliban and the
switch to the Shariah, the Islamic legal code, were consistent with the
Constitution and presented no threat to the integrity of the nation.

But the truce offered by the Taliban, and accepted by the authorities, rebuffed
American demands for the Pakistani civilian and military authorities to stick
with the fight against the militants, not make deals with them.

Under the terms of the accord, the chief minister of the province, Amir Haider
Khan Hoti, said that Pakistani troops would now go on ''reactive mode'' and
fight only in retaliation for an attack.

Announced by the government of the North-West Frontier Province after
consultation with President Asif Ali Zardari, the pact echoed previous
government accords with the militants across Pakistan's semi-autonomous tribal
areas in North and South Waziristan.

Those regions have since become a mini-state for Qaeda and Taliban militants,
who are now the focus of missile strikes by remotely piloted American aircraft.
On Monday, what was thought to be a drone strike in Kurram, a separate area
close to the Afghan border, killed 31 people, Pakistani intelligence officials
said.

Analysts are now suggesting that the drone strikes may be pushing the Taliban,
and even some Qaeda elements, out of the tribal belt and into Swat, making the
valley more important to the Taliban.

Speaking in India on the last leg of his trip to Pakistan, Afghanistan and
India, the Obama administration's special envoy to the region, Richard C.
Holbrooke, did not address the truce directly but said the turmoil in Swat
served as a reminder that the United States, Pakistan and India faced an ''enemy
which poses direct threats to our leadership, our capitals, and our people.''

Pakistani legal experts and other analysts warned that the decision by the
authorities would embolden militants in other parts of the country.

''This means you have surrendered to a handful of extremists,'' said Athar
Minallah, a leader of a lawyers' movement that has campaigned for an independent
judiciary. ''The state is under attack; instead of dealing with them as
aggressors, the government has abdicated.''

Shuja Nawaz, the author of ''Crossed Swords,'' a book on the Pakistani military,
said that with the accord, ''the government is ceding a great deal of space'' to
the militants.

But some Pakistani officials have recently argued that a truce was necessary in
Swat because the army was unable to fight a guerrilla insurgency and civilians
were suffering in the conflict.

A former interior minister, Aftab Ahmad Sherpao, told the parliamentary
committee on national security this month that Shariah ordinances should be
introduced to ''calm the situation.''

Sherry Rehman, the government information minister, said the deal should not be
seen as a concession. ''It is in no way a sign of the state's weakness,'' she
said. ''The public will of the population of the Swat region is at the center of
all efforts, and it should be taken into account while debating the merits of
this agreement.''

In legislative elections a year ago, the people of Swat, a region that is about
the size of Delaware and has 1.3 million residents, voted overwhelmingly for the
secular Awami National Party. Since then, the Taliban have singled out elected
politicians with suicide bomb attacks and chased virtually all of them from the
valley. Several hundred thousand residents have also fled the fighting.

Many of the poor who have stayed in Swat, which until the late 1960s was ruled
by a prince, were calling for the Shariah courts as a way of achieving quick
justice and dispensing with the long delays and corruption of the civil courts.
The authorities in the North-West Frontier Province, which includes Swat, argued
that the Shariah courts were not the same as strict Islamic law. The new laws,
for instance, would not ban education of females or impose other strict tenets
espoused by the Taliban in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

The new accord, they said, would simply activate laws already agreed to by
Benazir Bhutto in the early 1990s when she was prime minister. Similarly, the
principle of Shariah courts in Swat was also agreed to by Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif in 1999. In both cases, the courts, though approved, were never put in
place.

A Pakistani official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the official
did not have permission to speak publicly, said that the government's acceptance
of the courts was an attempt to blunt efforts of the Taliban to woo Swat
residents frustrated by the ineffective judiciary.

''The Taliban was trying to take advantage of the local movement and desire for
a judicial system,'' the official said. The official insisted that the Obama
administration, informed of the accord, ''showed understanding of our
strategy.''

On Monday, a White House spokesman, Tommy Vietor, said only, ''We have seen the
press reports and are in touch with the government of Pakistan about the ongoing
situation in Swat.''

Provincial officials said the accord in Swat was struck with Maulana Sufi
Muhammad. He is the father-in-law of Maulana Fazlullah, a deputy to Baitullah
Mehsud, who is the head of the umbrella group for the Taliban in Pakistan.

Mr. Muhammad is often described as more benign than his son-in-law, but the
ranks of their followers and their lines of authority are fluid and overlapping.

In 2001, he took thousands of young men across the border into Afghanistan to
fight jihad against the Americans. After his return he was imprisoned by
Pakistani authorities.

He was released last April after agreeing to denounce violence and work to bring
peace to the area.

Despite the insistence that the new legal system in Swat was consistent with
existing civil law, some feared that the accord was an ominous sign of the power
of the militants to spread into the heartland of Pakistan, including the most
populous and wealthiest province, the Punjab.

''The hardest task for the government will be to protect the Punjab against
inroads by militants,'' wrote I. A. Rehman, a member of the Human Rights
Commission, in the daily newspaper, Dawn.

''Already, religious extremists have strong bases across the province and
sympathizers in all arenas: political parties, services, the judiciary, the
middle class, and even the media,'' he wrote. ''For its part, the government is
handicapped because of its failure to offer good governance, guarantee
livelihoods, and restore people's faith in the frayed judicial system.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Pakistanis in Miran Shah, near the Afghan border, on Sunday at
funerals of people described as victims of a United States missile attack on a
Taliban compound. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HASBANULLAH KHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(88%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ARMIES (78%); TERRORISM (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: ASIF ALI ZARDARI (58%); RICHARD HOLBROOKE (56%); BARACK OBAMA (52%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); INDIA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             913 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 17, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

My Savior, Their Killer

BYLINE: By FRANCOIS BIZOT.

Francois Bizot is the author of ''The Gate,'' a memoir. This essay was
translated by The Times from the French.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: Phnom Penh, Cambodia


AFTER 10 years of detention, Kaing Guek Eav, alias Comrade Duch, is to appear
today before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia,  charged with
war crimes and crimes against humanity. He was arrested in 1999, after 20 years
of living incognito, for crimes committed on his orders as commander of the Tuol
Sleng prison in Phnom Penh from 1975 to 1979, when the Khmer Rouge controlled
Cambodia and were responsible for the deaths of more than a million people.

I was his prisoner for three months in 1971, in a camp known as M13 hidden in
the forest of the Cardamom mountains. I had been doing field work in the
Cambodian countryside, searching for ancient Khmer Buddhist manuscripts, when I
was ambushed by Khmer Rouge militants fighting Cambodia's American-backed
government. I was accused of being a C.I.A. spy and sentenced to death.

Duch was in charge of the jungle camp, both my jailer and my prosecutor. I was
kept in chains and interrogated daily by him. Somehow, during the strange
dialogue that began between us, he became convinced that I really was just a
Frenchman who  wanted to study Buddhist texts. Duch undertook to secure my
release. My two Khmer assistants did not have the same good fortune: despite
Duch's promise to me, they were executed soon after I left the camp, as so many
thousands were in the years to come under his meticulous supervision.

I did not see Duch again until 2003, in the military prison in Phnom Penh.
Conditions there were rudimentary, but the general feel was not that of a jail.
I remember that he had the same look of determination that he had had 32 years
earlier, though the smile that he had occasionally flashed when he ruled over my
fate was gone.

In the whirl of conflicting emotions provoked by seeing him again, I asked him:
''How are things here? Is it all right?'' Compelled to repeat the question, I
felt its incongruity: the executioner was now on the other side of the gate, as
I had foreseen in my dreams, in the place once occupied by his victims.

In July 2007, he was transferred to one of the eight cells in the detention
center that is part of the vast complex where the war crimes court is based and
where his trial will take place. I visited him there. At the time, he enjoyed
the relative comfort of his new surroundings. Four  other elderly Khmer Rouge
leaders were also incarcerated there. They were well cared for; food, cells, a
television room, a visiting room -- everything was in conformance with
international rules, enough to make the guards jealous.

But Duch may today regret having left the tedium of the military prison. After
years of stalling, and many months of thorough preliminary investigations, the
trial that so few people wanted is about to begin. The sound of the preparations
for it rings out in the detention center as if it were an execution.

The death penalty, which Duch ordered at least 12,380 times, does not exist in
United Nations-backed  tribunals like this one. His condemnation will not have
the too-familiar instantaneousness of the Khmer Rouge hoe striking the back of
the neck, but his sentence will be long and relentless.

The worst that he risks, however, is not imprisonment itself, but seeing his
reasons for living disappear. His life now revolves around the visits from his
children, a right that was denied to his victims, and his faith in the judicial
process -- a process that did not exist at Tuol Sleng.

Duch does not raise any objection to his trial. In his heart lie the same fears
that haunted each of his victims -- ancient fears that have never ceased to
haunt mankind. Thus he has admitted his guilt, bowed over and humbled by the
horror of what he has done.

Last February, Duch was led, with his consent, to the scenes of his crimes. The
visit was a shock for all who witnessed it. This major judicial step took place
in an atmosphere of intense, palpable emotion.

''I ask for your forgiveness -- I know that you cannot forgive me, but I ask you
to leave me the hope that you might,'' he said before collapsing in tears on the
shoulder of one of his guards.

I was not there -- it was a closed hearing -- but those who were reported that
the cry of the former executioner betrayed such suffering that one of the few
survivors of Tuol Sleng screamed out, ''Here are the words that I've longed to
hear for 30 years!''

It could be that forgiveness is possible after a simple, natural process, when
the victim feels that he has been repaid. And the executioner has to pay dearly,
for it is the proof of his suffering that eases ours.

Let us not fool ourselves. Beyond the crimes that Duch committed against
humanity, those of the Khmer Rouge will also be judged. And beyond the crimes of
the Khmer Rouge, the capacity of the tribunals to mete out justice will be
tested, as well as our ability to judge man himself, and history. We shall all
be at the trial -- not just as judges, but also as victims, and the accused.

The genocide of the Khmer Rouge will be judged as a ''crime against humanity,''
a crime against ourselves. As such, Duch's guilt exceeds his immediate victims;
it becomes the guilt of humanity, in the name of all victims. Duch killed
mankind. The trial of the Khmer Rouge should be an opportunity for each of us to
gaze at the torturer with some distance -- from beyond the intolerable cry of
the suffering, which may veil the truth of the abomination. The only way to look
at the torturer is to humanize him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY EMILIANO PONZI)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PRISONS
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (76%);
RELIGION (69%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (94%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             920 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Says It Will Unseal Gaza Only if Soldier Is Freed

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel's security cabinet voted Wednesday to make the opening of Israel's border
crossings with Gaza, a central Hamas demand for any long-term cease-fire
arrangement, conditional on the release of an Israeli soldier held by Hamas.

The cabinet decision, widely seen as a hardening of the Israeli stance, seemed
to dim the prospects for a quick conclusion to the Egyptian-brokered talks for a
consolidated truce.

But the unanimous vote merely formalized the position that was being articulated
with increasing clarity in recent days by the Israeli prime minister, Ehud
Olmert, and seemed more focused on expediting a prisoner exchange deal with
Hamas for the soldier's return.

Hamas, the militant Islamic group that controls Gaza, is demanding the release
of as many as 1,400 Palestinian security prisoners in Israeli jails in return
for the captive soldier, Cpl. Gilad Shalit. He was seized in a cross-border raid
and taken into Gaza by Hamas and other militant groups in June 2006.

A government statement released after the five-hour cabinet meeting said the
release of the soldier was a ''top priority'' for Israel and would ''entail the
release of Palestinian prisoners.''

Significantly, the statement omitted any reference to a longstanding cabinet
decision barring the release of Palestinian prisoners with ''blood on their
hands,'' meaning those convicted of planning or perpetrating attacks in which
Israelis had died. Hamas has demanded the release of many such prisoners in
return for Corporal Shalit.

''We want to see this over,'' said Mark Regev, a spokesman for Mr. Olmert, in
reference to the Shalit case. ''We are willing to pay a difficult price.''

Mr. Regev said specific numbers of prisoners had been discussed in the cabinet
meeting, as well as some specific names, so that the ministers fully understood
what was involved. But a final list of prisoners has yet to be agreed on, he
said.

Hamas has rejected any link between an opening of the crossings as part of a
cease-fire and a deal to release Corporal Shalit.

Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman in Gaza, said the Israeli position ''imposes
new conditions at the last minute.''

''This completely contradicts the Egyptian and Palestinian positions,'' he
continued in a statement, and he accused Israel of ''blackmail.''

He added that Hamas ''had no objection'' to releasing the Israeli soldier if
Israel met his group's demands for a prisoner exchange.

This week, Egypt's president, Hosni Mubarak, also rejected any direct link
between the truce and the release of Corporal Shalit.

But Meir Sheetrit, the Israeli interior minister, who attended Wednesday's
cabinet meeting, told reporters afterward that Israel ''cannot come to any
agreement with Hamas or Egypt without solving the issue of Gilad Shalit.''

Egypt has been brokering talks for a long-term truce since Israel ended its
22-day war against Hamas in Gaza a month ago. Hamas is demanding open border
crossings and a lifting of the economic embargo that Israel has imposed on Gaza
since the militant group took over the area in 2007.

Israel demands an end to rocket and mortar fire by Gaza militants against
population centers in southern Israel, and a halt to weapons smuggling by Hamas.

In the meantime, the Israeli security cabinet said it would allow only ''partial
activities at the crossings'' to ''supply the immediate and basic humanitarian
needs of the Palestinian population.'' Human rights organizations and some
foreign officials have denounced the policy as collective punishment.

The recent sharpening of Israel's position has caused tension inside the
country, too. Amos Gilad, the Israeli Defense Ministry's liaison in talks with
the Egyptians, was quoted in the newspaper Maariv on Wednesday as having told an
associate that Israel was risking its relations with Egypt.

''I don't understand what it is that they're trying to do,'' Mr. Gilad was
quoted as saying about the Israeli government. ''To insult the Egyptians? We've
already insulted them. It's madness. It's simply madness. Egypt has remained
almost our last ally here.''

An Israeli government official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because
he was not authorized to comment publicly on the dispute, said Mr. Olmert had
called Mr. Gilad in and reprimanded him for his remarks, none of which Mr. Gilad
denied.

In Gaza, unexploded ordnance left behind by the Israelis has disappeared from a
storage site that was guarded by the Hamas police, United Nations officials and
Hamas police representatives said on Wednesday. The missing ordnance, including
bombs dropped from Israeli warplanes, was awaiting safe disposal by a team
working with the United Nations.

United Nations officials have been circumspect in blaming any specific party for
the disappearance of the bombs, but Israel has pointed a finger at Hamas.

A Hamas police officer said the ordnance disappeared when those guarding the
site were ''obliged to evacuate'' their positions after they heard remotely
piloted Israeli drones in the sky. He said the bombs could have been stolen by
''fighters, but we are still investigating.''

Mark Buswell, the technical director of the group working to clear the
unexploded ordnance, said it was the Hamas police who first brought in the
weapons, which included two guided missiles and powerful aerial bombs.

On Wednesday, Israel's president, Shimon Peres, began consultations with the
political parties recently elected to Parliament to determine which one should
form the next governing coalition.

The centrist Kadima Party, led by Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, narrowly won 28
seats in the 120-seat Parliament. The more conservative Likud Party, led by
Benjamin Netanyahu, won 27 seats, but has broader support in Parliament.

Both Ms. Livni and Mr. Netanyahu have claimed victory and the right to lead the
next government. Mr. Peres is likely to choose the party leader with the best
chance of forming a coalition. Most analysts believe that would be Mr.
Netanyahu.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Palestinian girl at play on Tuesday among tents in northern
Gaza for those who lost their homes during Israel's 22-day offensive.(PHOTOGRAPH
BY MARCO LONGARI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (92%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); EXTORTION (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); RELIGION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (59%); HOSNI MUBARAK (56%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (96%); EGYPT (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             925 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 20, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Upholds City Ban On Section 8 Rent Bias

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 713 words


A New York City law that makes it illegal for landlords to discriminate against
tenants who receive government subsidies has passed its first major legal test,
after a justice in Manhattan upheld a broad interpretation of the law.

The law, which went into effect last March, prohibits landlords from
discriminating against tenants based on their use of federal rent subsidies
known as Section 8 vouchers, or any other form of local, state or federal
government assistance.

Tenants and housing advocates had complained that as once-struggling
neighborhoods had gentrified, many property owners were refusing to accept the
vouchers, as a way to force low-income renters -- many of them black or Hispanic
-- out of their buildings or keep them out. Landlords said their reluctance to
take the vouchers had nothing to do with race or income, but stemmed from the
payment delays and other bureaucratic problems with the way the city administers
the federal Section 8 program.

Tenants who receive the Section 8 subsidies pay about 30 percent of their income
toward rent, and the vouchers cover the rest.

The Legal Aid Society sued about 30 landlords, alleging that they violated the
law by turning away about 30 voucher holders in the Bronx, Brooklyn and
Manhattan. All the tenants in the lawsuit were current tenants of the landlords
who had received their vouchers during their tenancy and had hoped to use them
to pay a large portion of their rent.

Lawyers for the landlords argued that the law as written did not apply to
current tenants, but only to new tenants seeking apartments. The law does not
specifically mention either existing or new tenants, though the preamble to the
law, which is technically not part of the statute, refers to ''current
tenants.'' The law states that ''to discriminate against any person'' because of
a lawful source of income in the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations
is illegal.

The justice, Emily Jane Goodman of State Supreme Court, ruled on Tuesday that
the law applied to both existing and prospective tenants. Justice Goodman called
the argument by lawyers for the landlords a ''strained interpretation'' that was
inconsistent with the purpose of the law.

The justice's ruling was praised by tenant advocates and City Council members
who had pushed for passage of the law, known as Local Law 10. Mayor Michael R.
Bloomberg opposed the bill, stating in part that it was the job of the
government to make its program more attractive to private landlords, instead of
forcing them to participate -- but the Council overrode his veto to pass it into
law.

''The message today should be loud and clear: Income discrimination when renting
an apartment is unlawful and will not be allowed to continue,'' Council Speaker
Christine C. Quinn said in a statement.

The city's largest landlord group, the Rent Stabilization Association, shared
the view that the law did not apply to existing tenants. Mitchell Posilkin, the
group's general counsel, said landlords in this case and similar ones were
prepared to renew the leases of the tenants, but wanted simply to avoid taking
part in the Section 8 program.

''We disagree with Judge Goodman's decision,'' Mr. Posilkin said. ''We believe
that she was determined to interpret this law in a way that benefited the
tenant.''

The city's Commission on Human Rights, which is in charge of enforcing the law,
said it had received 128 complaints of income discrimination. Of those, 45 have
been settled, and the landlord has agreed to accept the voucher, said Cliff
Mulqueen, the commission's deputy commissioner and general counsel. The rest
either are pending, have been dismissed or are at various stages of the
administrative hearing process.

The landlords in the lawsuit now have to accept the tenants' vouchers. One of
the tenants, Yevgeniya Timkovsky, 77,  who lives in Washington Heights, said she
would now be able to use a voucher she received in 2007 that will reduce her
rent to $311 from $675. She and her husband survive on about $1,000 a month in
Supplemental Security Income.

''Today I feel on seventh heaven,'' Mrs. Timkovsky said on Wednesday.

A lawyer representing Mrs. Timkovsky's landlord, 56 Bennett Associates L.L.C.,
did not return a phone call seeking comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); RENTAL PROPERTY
(90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); LITIGATION (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%);
LAWYERS (78%); LANDLORD & TENANT LAW (78%); CITIES (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%);
LEGAL AID (78%); RENT CONTROL (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); VETO
(78%); REAL ESTATE (77%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (76%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (71%); MAYORS (64%); GOVERNMENT
GRANTS & SUBSIDIES (58%)

ORGANIZATION: LEGAL AID SOCIETY (NEW YORK) (55%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             936 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Nominee Avoids Confrontation at Hearing

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Newly changed political realities were on vivid display on Wednesday as the
Senate Judiciary Committee met to question Dawn Johnsen, President Obama's
nominee to head the Office of Legal Counsel.

Ms. Johnsen, a law professor at Indiana University, had once worked as legal
counsel to an abortion rights group and was once of the most outspoken critics
of the Bush administration's interrogation and detention policies. She has been
sharply criticized by some conservatives and was expected to be given a rough
ride by the Judiciary Committee's Republicans, but their appetite for combat
seemed stilled on Wednesday.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat who ran the hearing, noted how
the Office of Legal Counsel under President Bush produced legal memorandums,
later repudiated, that appeared to condone torture and violation of
international law.

She said Ms. Johnsen, who was a critic of those memorandums, would serve as
''the conscience of the Justice Department.''

Ms. Johnsen had said earlier in the hearing that she believed torture was, in
all cases, illegal and that the procedure known as waterboarding was torture.

Senator Jeff Sessions, an Alabama Republican, noted that Michael B. Mukasey,
President George W. Bush's last attorney general, had declined to say
waterboarding was torture because he had not seen it in operation. Mr. Sessions
seemed to imply Ms. Johnsen was too hasty in forming her views, but he did not
say so explicitly.

Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, the committee's ranking Republican,
brought up comments made 20 years ago in a brief Ms. Johnsen filed before the
Supreme Court when she represented Naral, an abortion rights group.

Mr. Specter suggested that she had asserted that pregnancy was comparable to
slavery and that abortion rights should be protected by the 13th Amendment,
which abolished slavery.

Ms. Johnsen said that in a footnote in her brief, she had made a suggestion of
an analogy but never ''believed the 13th Amendment had any role'' in the
abortion issue. The footnote said forcing a woman to continue to bear a child
after she had no desire to do so was ''disturbingly suggestive of involuntary
servitude.''

Separately, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said at a news conference on
Wednesday that the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which he visited
this week, was a professionally run operation, but that the administration
remained determined to close it within a year.

''It will not be an easy process,'' said Mr. Holder, who has been named by Mr.
Obama to lead a review of detention policies. ''It's one we will do in a way
that ensures that people are treated fairly and that the American people are
kept safe.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dawn Johnsen and David Kris, nominees to Justice Department
posts, met with the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH
FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LAW SCHOOLS (90%); ABORTION
(89%); ABORTION LAWS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); SLAVERY (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (88%); CONSERVATISM (78%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); PREGNANCY
& CHILDBIRTH (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); SUPREME
COURTS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (57%); PRESS CONFERENCES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (91%); INDIANA
UNIVERSITY (58%)

PERSON: DAWN JOHNSEN (92%); BARACK OBAMA (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%); JEFF
SESSIONS (58%); ERIC HOLDER (58%); ARLEN SPECTER (58%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (58%);
MICHAEL MUKASEY (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (66%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             944 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Will Africa Let Sudan Off the Hook?

BYLINE: By DESMOND TUTU.

Desmond Tutu, the former Anglican archbishop of Cape Town, received the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1984.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: Cape Town


THE expected issuance of an arrest warrant for President Omar Hassan al-Bashir
of Sudan by the International Criminal Court tomorrow presents a stark choice
for African leaders -- are they on the side of justice or on the side of
injustice? Are they on the side of the victim or the oppressor? The choice is
clear but the answer so far from many African leaders has been shameful.

Because the victims in Sudan are African, African leaders should be the
staunchest supporters of efforts to see perpetrators brought to account. Yet
rather than stand by those who have suffered in Darfur, African leaders have so
far rallied behind the man responsible for turning that corner of Africa into a
graveyard.

In response to news last July that Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the court's chief
prosecutor, was seeking an arrest warrant for President Bashir for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, the African Union issued a communique to
the United Nations Security Council asking it to suspend the court's
proceedings. Rather than condemn the genocide in Darfur, the organization chose
to underscore its concern that African leaders are being unfairly singled out
and to support President Bashir's effort to delay court proceedings.

More recently, the Group of 77, an influential organization at the United
Nations consisting of 130 developing states and including nearly every African
country, gave Sudan its chairmanship. The victory came after African members
endorsed Sudan's candidacy in spite of the imminent criminal charges against its
president.

I regret that the charges against President Bashir are being used to stir up the
sentiment that the justice system -- and in particular, the international court
-- is biased against Africa. Justice is in the interest of victims, and the
victims of these crimes are African. To imply that the prosecution is a plot by
the West is demeaning to Africans and understates the commitment to justice we
have seen across the continent.

It's worth remembering that more than 20 African countries were among the
founders of the International Criminal Court, and of the 108 nations that joined
the court, 30 are in Africa. That the court's four active investigations are all
in Africa is not because of prosecutorial prejudice -- it is because three of
the countries involved (Central African Republic, Congo and Uganda) themselves
requested that the prosecutor intervene. Only the Darfur case was referred to
the prosecutor by the Security Council. The prosecutor on his own initiative is
considering investigations in Afghanistan, Colombia and Georgia.

African leaders argue that the court's action will impede efforts to promote
peace in Darfur. However, there can be no real peace and security until justice
is enjoyed by the inhabitants of the land. There is no peace precisely because
there has been no justice. As painful and inconvenient as justice may be, we
have seen that the alternative -- allowing accountability to fall by the wayside
-- is worse.

The issuance of an arrest warrant for President Bashir would be an extraordinary
moment for the people of Sudan -- and for those around the world who have come
to doubt that powerful people and governments can be called to account for
inhumane acts. African leaders should support this historic occasion, not work
to subvert it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRIAN STAUFFER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); CEMETERIES (69%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); AFRICAN UNION (56%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%); GROUP OF SEVENTY SEVEN (G77) (55%); UNITED
NATIONS (55%)

CITY: CAPE TOWN, SOUTH AFRICA (78%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (99%); UGANDA (79%); SOUTH AFRICA (78%);
AFGHANISTAN (71%)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             948 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 5, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A President, a Boy and Genocide

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 799 words


When the International Criminal Court issued its arrest warrant for Sudan's
president on Wednesday, an 8-year-old boy named Bakit Musa would have clapped
--  if only he still had hands.

I met Bakit a couple of weeks ago in eastern Chad, near the border of Darfur. He
and two friends had found a grenade left behind in fighting after Sudan's
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, armed and dispatched a proxy force to wreak
havoc in Chad. The boys played with the grenade, and it exploded, taking both of
Bakit's hands, one eye and the skin on half of his face.

So Bakit became, inadvertently, one more casualty of the havoc and brutality
that President Bashir has unleashed in Sudan and surrounding countries. Other
children laugh at him, so Bakit plays by himself in the dust on the outskirts of
a huge camp for people displaced by Mr. Bashir.

One of Mr. Bashir's first actions after the arrest warrant was to undertake yet
another crime against humanity: He expelled major international aid groups,
including the International Rescue Committee and the Dutch section of Doctors
Without Borders. In effect, he is now preparing to massacre the Darfuri people
in still another way, for Darfuris are living in camps and depend on aid workers
for food, water and health care  --  even as deadly meningitis has broken out in
one of the camps.

''The consequences are going to be dire,'' notes George Rupp, the president of
the International Rescue Committee, on which 1.75 million Sudanese depend for
water, sanitation, education and health care. ''If Sudan persists in this
decision, it's difficult to see how the outcome will be anything other than
serious suffering and death for hundreds of thousands of people.''

Mr. Bashir is now testing the international community, and President Obama and
other world leaders must respond immediately and decisively, in conjunction with
as many non-Western nations as possible.

The first step is to insist that aid groups be reinstated immediately to prevent
this genocide in slow motion. A second step could be to destroy one of Mr.
Bashir's military planes with a warning that if he takes his genocide to a new
level by depriving Darfuris of food and medical care, he will lose the rest of
his air force.

Yet it's also important to understand that Mr. Bashir engages in a consistent
pattern of destruction and slaughter, not because he is a sadistic monster, but
because he is a calculating pragmatist.

Mr. Bashir saw early in his career that atrocities can constitute an effective
policy  --  shooting villagers and gang-raping women is quite useful to
depopulate rural areas, thereby denying support to rebel militias. Best of all
from Mr. Bashir's perspective, there's no downside as long as the international
community averts its eyes or backs down. His aim in expelling aid groups is
apparently to divide the international community and to try to force the United
Nations Security Council to delay  International Criminal Court proceedings.

Mr. Bashir assumes, not unreasonably, that he can get away with it. That culture
of impunity is what the I.C.C. arrest warrant may begin to change. It is one way
of attaching costs to systematic brutality, and thus to change the calculations
of pragmatists like Mr. Bashir in Sudan and elsewhere.

So now President Obama and other leaders --  hello, Gordon Brown, you there?  --
need to back up the I.C.C. arrest warrant and push to reverse the expulsion of
aid workers, while working with Arab countries like Qatar that want to help.

Intriguingly, Khartoum is full of rumors that the handful of leaders just below
Mr. Bashir are thinking of throwing him overboard to save themselves. We can
encourage that by making it clear that Sudan will pay a price if the killings
continue.

We also must call on China to stop training the military pilots used by Mr.
Bashir to strafe villages, and to stop supplying weapons and spare parts to
Sudan as long as Mr. Bashir is in office. There are precedents: China was a
strong supporter of the Khmer Rouge and of Slobodan Milosevic, but distanced
itself from both when they came under the spotlight for genocide.

President Obama could also announce that from now on, when Sudan violates the
U.N. ban on offensive military flights in Darfur by bombing villagers, we will
afterward destroy a Sudanese military aircraft on the ground in Darfur (we can
do this from our base in Djibouti in the Horn of Africa).

I won't pretend that we can end all genocides. But we can attach enough costs so
that it is no longer in a leader's interests to dispatch militias to throw
babies into bonfires. The I.C.C. arrest warrant marks a wobbly step toward
accountability and deterrence.

So let's applaud the I.C.C.'s arrest warrant, on behalf of children like Bakit
who can't.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (73%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (68%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (68%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (68%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (66%); MEDICAL CHARITIES (66%);
MENINGITIS (65%); AIR FORCES (65%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (60%); ARMED FORCES (60%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (53%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE
(55%); DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); CHAD (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             952 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 6, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan's Leader Scolds the West and Assails Aid Groups

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR and MARLISE SIMONS; Neil MacFarquhar reported from
the United Nations, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


A defiant President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan lambasted the West on
Thursday for his indictment on war crimes charges stemming from the conflict in
Darfur, while Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations and a raft of
aid organizations denounced the decision to shut down some 13 relief agencies
that Sudan accused of conspiring in the court case.

Addressing the throngs clogging Khartoum, Sudan's capital, at a
government-organized rally, Mr. Bashir called the International Criminal Court
in The Hague a hangover from the worst days of colonialism and its indictment of
him a naked grab for Sudanese resources like oil.

''Here in Sudan, we are a liberation movement against this new colonization and
we are ready for any battle,'' he said, stabbing the air with his walking stick
while the crowd beneath the podium chanted ''Down, down U.S.A.!'' and burned in
effigy the court's chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo. ''We defeated them
before, and we will again.''

China joined the African Union and the Arab League in calling on the United
Nations Security Council to use its powers to suspend the indictment for a year,
lest it stymie peace talks between the government and the rebels in Darfur. ''We
don't wish to see our previous efforts and achievements on the Darfur problem
compromised by this kind of action,'' Qin Gang, China's Foreign Ministry
spokesman, was quoted as saying in reports from Beijing.

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, asked about the indictment while
traveling in Europe, said that if Mr. Bashir believed that he was wrongly
accused he could answer the charges in court. ''He can certainly contest it,''
Mrs. Clinton said.

Arab and African officials planned to send yet another joint delegation to the
Security Council to plead their case for a deferral under Article 16 of the
court's statute, but that was considered unlikely given the Council's sharp
divisions.

Sudan's decision to suspend operations of 13 aid organizations serving millions
of people in Darfur on accusations that they provided false evidence to the
court helped sour the mood toward Sudan. While Mr. Ban had issued what many
diplomats and aid groups considered a tepid endorsement of the indictment on
seven counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity, he and other senior
United Nations officials underscored the possible fallout from closing the
relief agencies.

If carried out, the decision will cause ''irrevocable damage to humanitarian
operations there,'' said Michele Montas, Mr. Ban's spokeswoman, adding that the
aid agencies ''are key to maintaining a lifeline.'' An estimated 2.5 million
people have been chased from their homes in Darfur, a sprawling, semiarid
province in western Sudan, and the United Nations says the conflict has
contributed to 300,000 deaths.

The aid agencies affected, including the International Rescue Committee, CARE,
Oxfam Great Britain, Save the Children and Doctors Without Borders, represent
about 40 percent of the 6,500 international and local aid workers in Darfur,
said Catherine Bragg, the deputy United Nations emergency relief coordinator.

The ouster of the groups would leave 1.1 million people without food, 1.1
million lacking health care, and more than 1 million without drinking water, she
said, adding that it would be extremely difficult for the remaining agencies and
the Sudanese government to fill the void. She also criticized the government for
its aggressive behavior toward some aid workers, detaining them for several
hours while Sudanese officials walked off with computers, cash and other assets.

The indictment from the International Criminal Court, which was formed in 2002
with the idea of creating a permanent venue to pursue the type of war criminals
who had emerged in conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, was the first
against a sitting head of state. Sudan called on the 30 members of the 53-member
African Union who have joined the I.C.C. to withdraw, with the country's United
Nations ambassador, Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem, saying the court represented ''the
same Euro-American justice that destroyed Iraq, Afghanistan and most recently
Gaza.''

The United States, despite the popular impression in Sudan that it was behind
the indictment, never joined the court, not least out of concern that its troops
on foreign missions might be subject to its jurisdiction.

Legally, only the court's 108 members are bound by its decisions, although the
Security Council issued a specific resolution in 2005 ordering Sudan, which is
not a member, to comply with the court. Critics, particularly in Africa, have
questioned the validity of the court for singling out African leaders. But its
defenders point out that three of the court's four criminal investigations,
involving Congo, the Central African Republic and Uganda, were brought by the
governments of those countries themselves.

Political analysts suggest that Mr. Bashir is likely to be weakened by the
arrest warrant, and that he is likely to try to counteract that by testing the
solidarity of the international community.

The first test will probably emerge in Qatar at the end of this month, when Arab
leaders hold their annual summit meeting. Mr. Abdalhaleem vowed that Mr. Bashir
would attend.

The court has no real enforcement powers but can serve a prompt arrest order to
any country where Mr. Bashir is traveling.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, waving a stick, headed
to a rally on Thursday in Khartoum to protest his indictment.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); EVIDENCE (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); CONSPIRACY (73%); PEACE PROCESS (53%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%); AFRICAN
UNION (55%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (89%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (91%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (70%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHINA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             954 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Holding Mr. Bashir Accountable

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 438 words


After the International Criminal Court this week ordered his arrest on war
crimes, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, Sudan's ever-ruthless leader, ordered the
expulsion of 13 international aid groups that keep millions of impoverished
Sudanese alive with food and medical care. If Mr. Bashir does not reverse the
expulsion, it should be considered added proof of his guilt.

It is the first time the 7-year-old court has sought to arrest a sitting head of
state. The warrant -- for war crimes and crimes against humanity -- is
undeniably deserved. The judges said that Sudan's president played an
''essential role'' in the murder, rape, torture and displacement of large
numbers of civilians in Darfur.

We share the concerns of those who fear that Mr. Bashir and his henchmen will
now crack down even harder on Darfur -- where an estimated 300,000 people have
been killed and 2.7 million driven from their homes -- and provoke a violent
backlash in other parts of Sudan. But the world must not cower before such
blackmail. That will not bring stability to Sudan or justice for its victims.
There can be no impunity for such atrocities.

The African Union (seeking to protect one of its own), some Arab states (Libya
rates special condemnation), and China (mesmerized by Sudan's oil riches) are
pressing the United Nations Security Council to delay the indictment for a year
to give peace talks in Darfur a chance. The United States and its allies should
block any such move. Mr. Bashir's defenders have made that same argument ever
since the court prosecutor sought the arrest warrant in November. Four months
later, government attacks continue, and it is clear that Mr. Bashir has
absolutely no interest in peace.

During the campaign, President Obama pledged strong action to halt genocide in
Darfur. Strong action is definitely needed.

A United Nations peacekeeping force is still short of troops and equipment. Mr.
Obama should press America's allies to contribute both -- and guarantee that the
Pentagon will get them there quickly. He should encourage China to stop
supplying the weapons wielded by Khartoum's army and militias and call on the
rest of the world to tighten sanctions on Mr. Bashir's cronies in hopes that
they will finally oust him.

Mr. Obama should also name a special envoy to revive a serious peace process.
And he should urge all of America's allies to comply with the arrest order if
Mr. Bashir decides to leave Sudan -- there is talk that he may try to attend an
Arab summit in Qatar later this month. Any country that continues to enable Mr.
Bashir should be branded as an accomplice to his many horrors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARRESTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (74%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); GENOCIDE
(73%); PEACE PROCESS (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); ARMED FORCES
(61%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); AFRICAN UNION (55%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

PERSON: OMAR AL-BASHIR (90%); BARACK OBAMA (74%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); LIBYA (79%); AFRICA (79%); QATAR
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             959 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudanese Government Frees Outspoken Opposition Critic

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal


The Sudanese government released one of its most vociferous critics on Monday, a
possible attempt to shore up domestic support now that the nation's president is
wanted internationally on war crimes charges.

The government offered no explanation for its decision to release the opposition
critic, Hassan al-Turabi, an Islamist leader, only two months after his arrest.
Mr. Turabi led the country's hard-line government for years alongside the
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, but later broke with his protege.

Analysts said Mr. Turabi's release was probably aimed at resolving some of the
nation's internal political divisions given the threat of arrest facing Mr.
Bashir. Last week, the International Criminal Court issued a warrant for Mr.
Bashir's arrest on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity related to
the conflict in Darfur, in which hundreds of thousands of people have died from
violence, hunger and disease since 2003.

Still, the decision to release Mr. Turabi came as a surprise because he was
initially arrested after he spoke out in favor of the court, suggesting publicly
that Mr. Bashir turn himself over for prosecution. His political party has long
had links to the strongest rebel group fighting in Darfur, the Islamist Justice
and Equality Movement.

Speaking to a throng of supporters who gathered outside his home in a suburb of
the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, Mr. Turabi reiterated his call for Mr. Bashir to
submit to international justice.

''We must accept all international policies, especially if they address
justice,'' he said.

Mr. Turabi also criticized the Sudanese government's decision to expel aid
agencies after the warrant was issued, telling reporters that it was a mistake
probably carried out in anger.

Verbose and flamboyant, Mr. Turabi has been a leading Islamist in Sudan for
decades. He was a key figure in the government that came to power in a coup in
1989, with Mr. Bashir at its head, and was among the leaders who invited Osama
bin Laden and other radical jihadist groups to take up residence in Sudan in the
1990s.

But a rivalry grew, and in 1999 Mr. Bashir stripped Mr. Turabi of his positions
as speaker of Parliament and leader of the governing party. Mr. Turabi, an
Islamic scholar, has emerged as one of Mr. Bashir's harshest critics.

Since the court issued its warrant, Mr. Bashir has been trying to rally the
country around him, characterizing the efforts of the Hague-based court as a
neocolonial plot to undermine Sudan's sovereignty.

Most of the country's political parties have put aside their differences with
Mr. Bashir, partly out of fear that the warrant could undermine the fragile
peace agreement between North and South Sudan. The agreement was signed in 2005,
creating a government of national unity and ending one of Africa's longest and
deadliest wars.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Hassan al-Turabi, center, greeted supporters Monday in his home
in a suburb of Khartoum. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ARRESTS (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); POLITICS (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); COUPS (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(60%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (52%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); NETHERLANDS (79%); AFRICA (79%); SENEGAL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             979 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Urged to Lift Antiterror Ban on Foreign Scholars

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 663 words


Tariq Ramadan, a respected Swiss academic and Muslim scholar, had a job all
lined up at the University of Notre Dame in 2004, but the Bush administration
prevented him from entering the country. Government officials said he had
contributed to a charity believed to have connections to terrorism.

A federal judge supported the government's position in December 2007, and an
appeal will be heard next Tuesday by the United States Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit, in New York.

Now, in a move leading up to that hearing, a coalition of academic and civil
liberties groups is calling on the Obama administration to break with the Bush
administration's policies on blocking visas of some foreign scholars, writers
and activists.

In a letter being released Wednesday, the coalition says so-called ideological
exclusion ''compromises the vitality of academic and political debate in the
United States at a time when that debate is exceptionally important.''

After Professor Ramadan was denied entry, the American Civil Liberties Union
sued on behalf of him and several organizations interested in his case,
including the American Academy of Religion, the American Association of
University Professors and PEN American Center. The groups claimed that they had
a First Amendment right to hear Professor Ramadan, who had visited the United
States dozens of times in the years before his visa was blocked.

The government initially barred Professor Ramadan by invoking a provision of the
chief antiterrorism law, the USA Patriot Act, that allows the authorities to
exclude foreigners who use ''a position of prominence within any country to
endorse or espouse terrorist activity.'' Then, after the suit was filed, the
government argued that from 1998 to 2002, Professor Ramadan contributed about
$1,300 to a charity in Switzerland that the Treasury Department later
categorized as a terrorist organization. The charity, Association de Secours
Palestinien, was a contributor to Hamas.

In its most recent brief in the case, last July, the government said both that
the courts did not have the power to review such decisions and that the Supreme
Court had repeatedly allowed the government to bar foreigners because of their
views. The Obama administration has filed no briefs and has given no indication
what course it will take.

Barring entry to the United States in similar cases is not new: during the cold
war, the writers Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Pablo Neruda and Doris Lessing, among
others, were kept out. Congress largely repealed a  law allowing ideological
exclusion in 1990, but the USA Patriot Act, adopted in 2001 and reauthorized in
2006, permits the government to block entry on antiterrorism grounds.

Francine Prose, the president of PEN American Center, called Professor Ramadan
''an important and very articulate spokesman'' who should be allowed back into
the country. Cary Nelson, the president of the American Association of
University Professors, said, ''It's particularly critical that we have access to
the views of moderates in the Muslim world.''

Even some of Professor Ramadan's harshest critics say the previous
administration made a mistake in keeping him out of the country. In 2007, Paul
Berman, a writer in residence at New York University, wrote a biting critique of
the professor in The New Republic, suggesting that he could be hiding a measure
of Islamic radicalism under a cover of seeming moderation. But this week Mr.
Berman said in an e-mail message that ''the Bush administration was foolish to
bar Tariq Ramadan from entering the United States.''

''The freer the debate,'' Mr. Berman wrote, ''the better for everyone.''

Jameel Jaffer, director of the National Security Project at the civil liberties
union, said the point of the First Amendment was to let people decide for
themselves which ideas were worth listening to.

''The government shouldn't have that power,'' Mr. Jaffer  said, ''and under the
First Amendment it doesn't.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tariq Ramadan, a Muslim scholar who has been barred from the
United States since 2004.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ALESSANDRO BIANCHI/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS
(90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CHARITIES
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); US PATRIOT ACT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TEACHER
UNIONS (88%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (77%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); APPEALS COURTS (76%); COLD WAR (76%); WRITERS (74%);
RELIGION (73%); HAMAS (73%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (72%); JUDGES (72%);
LITIGATION (72%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME (84%); AMERICAN ACADEMY OF RELIGION
(55%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SWITZERLAND (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             986 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Nazi Guard Deported to Austria

BYLINE: By KAREN ANN CULLOTTA

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 291 words


An 83-year-old man who admitted that as a Nazi concentration camp guard he took
part in a two-day killing spree in which 42,000 people were killed was deported
to Austria Thursday from his home in Wisconsin, immigration officials said.

The former guard, Josias Kumpf, admitted that he participated in a murderous
November 1943 Nazi operation that went by the code name ''Aktion Erntefest'' --
Operation Harvest Festival -- in which roughly 42,000 Jewish men, women and
children were murdered at three Nazi camps in eastern Poland in two days.

Mr. Kumpf acknowledged his role was as a guard and an assassin at the Trawniki
Labor Camp, where 8,000 men, women and children were shot dead in a single day,
Nov. 3, 1943, Justice Department officials said.

He was removed earlier this week from his home in Racine, Wis., by United States
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents.

Mr. Kumpf immigrated to the United States from Austria in 1956, and became a
citizen in 1964. A spokesman for the Justice Department said officials began
their efforts to deport him in 2003, when a federal lawsuit was filed in the
Eastern District of Wisconsin to strip him of his citizenship because of his
participation in war crimes. His citizenship was revoked in 2005.

''Josias Kumpf, by his own admission, stood guard with orders to shoot any
surviving prisoners who attempted to escape an SS massacre that left thousands
of Jews dead,'' Acting Assistant Attorney General Rita M. Glavin, said in a
written statement Thursday. ''His court-ordered removal from the United States
to Austria is another milestone in the government's long-running effort to
ensure that individuals who participated in crimes against humanity do not find
sanctuary in this country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); HOLOCAUST (90%); DENATURALIZATION
(90%); MEN (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
LITIGATION (87%); SHOOTINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); NATURALIZATION (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (83%); US IMMIGRATION & CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT (56%)

STATE: WISCONSIN, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             994 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Leader Goes Abroad, Testing Limit Of Warrant

BYLINE: By ANAHAD O'CONNOR; Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from the
United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 311 words


In a snub of the International Criminal Court, President Omar Hassan al-Bashir
of Sudan traveled on Monday to Eritrea, barely three weeks after the court
issued a warrant for his arrest on war crimes charges for atrocities committed
in Darfur.

It was Mr. Bashir's first trip abroad since the court issued its warrant, and it
seemed to come as something of a surprise to people in the region. The trip had
not been announced in Sudan, and foreign news agencies said that even those
close to the Sudanese government had not been apprised of Mr. Bashir's plans.

Leaving the confines of Sudan could place Mr. Bashir at greater risk of being
arrested. The criminal court charged him with war crimes and crimes against
humanity for playing what it called an essential role in the murder, rape and
displacement of vast numbers of civilians in Darfur.

More than 2.5 million Darfur residents have been chased from their homes and as
many as 300,000 have died in a conflict pitting the Arab-dominated government
against non-Arab rebels.

Mr. Bashir's trip  ''is an indication that we will never be blackmailed by the
I.C.C. verdict; it will not put us in a corner,'' said Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem,
Sudan's permanent representative to the United Nations. He  denied that the trip
was a surprise and said, ''His international schedule of visits will go on
unchanged.''

Under the court's guidelines, the court's 108 member states are obligated to
arrest Mr. Bashir if he sets  foot on their soil. And on the day it issued its
warrant, the court called for all countries to arrest him if given the chance.

Mr. Bashir has  scheduled another foreign excursion, a trip next Monday    to
Qatar  for  an Arab League summit meeting. Sudan has vowed Mr. Bashir will
attend, but last week a senior panel of Sudanese religious scholars gave him a
possible out by suggesting he not go.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARREST WARRANTS (91%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL
TOURISM (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); ERITREA (92%); QATAR (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             999 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

John Hope Franklin, Scholar of African-American History, Is Dead at 94

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1983 words


John Hope Franklin, a prolific scholar of African-American history who
profoundly influenced thinking about slavery and Reconstruction while helping to
further the civil rights struggle, died Wednesday in Durham, N.C. He was 94.

A spokeswoman for Duke University, where Dr. Franklin taught, said he died of
congestive heart failure at the university's hospital.

During a career of scholarship, teaching and advocacy that spanned more than 70
years, Dr. Franklin was deeply involved in the painful debates that helped
reshape America's racial identity, working with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr., W. E. B. Du Bois, Thurgood Marshall and other major civil rights figures of
the 20th century.

''I will always think of John Hope as the historian of the South who grasped the
complexity of Southern public life as shaped by the horror of personal
slavery,'' said Nell Irvin Painter, the Princeton University historian.
''Franklin was the first great American historian to reckon the price owed in
violence, autocracy and militarism.''

It was a theme Dr. Franklin wrestled with into his last years. In an article in
The Atlantic Monthly in 2007, he wrote, ''If the American idea was to fight
every war from the beginning of colonization to the middle of the 20th century
with Jim Crow armed forces, in the belief that this would promote the American
idea of justice and equality, then the American idea was an unmitigated disaster
and a denial of the very principles that this country claimed as its rightful
heritage.''

Dr. Franklin combined idealism with rigorous research, producing such classic
works as ''From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African-Americans,'' first
published in 1947. Considered one of the definitive historical surveys of the
American black experience, it has sold more than three million copies and has
been translated into Japanese, German, French, Chinese and other languages.

Robert W. Fogel, a Nobel Prize-winning economist at the University of Chicago,
called it ''a landmark in the interpretation of American civilization.''

Dr. Franklin also taught at some of the nation's leading institutions, including
Harvard and the University of Chicago in addition to Duke, and as a scholar he
personally broke several racial barriers.

He often argued that historians have an important role in shaping policy, a
position he put into practice when he worked with  Marshall's team of lawyers in
their effort to strike down segregation in the landmark 1954 case Brown v. Board
of Education, which outlawed the doctrine of ''separate but equal'' in the
nation's public schools.

''Using the findings of the historians,'' Dr. Franklin recalled in a 1974
lecture, ''the lawyers argued that the history of segregation laws reveals that
their main purpose was to organize the community upon the basis of a superior
white and an inferior Negro caste.''

Dr. Franklin also participated in the 1965 march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala.,
with Dr. King.

''One might argue that the historian is the conscience of the nation, if honesty
and consistency are factors that nurture the conscience,'' Dr. Franklin said.
Still, he warned, if scholars engage in advocacy as well as scholarship they
must ''make it clear which activity they are engaging in at any given time.''

President Bill Clinton, in awarding him the Medal of Freedom, the nation's
highest civilian honor, in 1995, said Dr. Franklin had never confused ''his role
as an advocate with his role as a scholar,'' adding that he had held ''to the
conviction that integration is a national necessity.''

Yet even on so august an occasion, Dr. Franklin could not escape the legacy of
discrimination. In a talk he gave in North Carolina 10 years later, he recalled
that on the evening before he received the medal at the White House, a woman at
a Washington club asked him to fetch her coat, mistaking him for an attendant,
and that a man at his hotel had handed him car keys and told him to get his car.

Dr. Franklin's prestige led Mr. Clinton to select him in 1997 to head the
Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race, which was formed to
promote dialogue about the country's race problems.

The panel, however, drew criticism. White supremacists protested at some of its
forums, and at others American Indians and other minorities complained that they
were being left out of the process. A group of conservative scholars repudiated
the panel and formed their own.

And when Dr. Franklin's group finally issued its report after 15 months, the
document was criticized as, in one disillusioned scholar's words, ''a list of
platitudes.''

The controversy did little to dim Dr. Franklin's standing as a groundbreaking
historian, however. He was the first African-American president of the American
Historical Association; the first black department chairman at a predominantly
white institution, Brooklyn College; the first black professor to hold an
endowed chair at Duke; the first black chairman of the University of Chicago's
history department; and the first African-American to present a paper at the
segregated Southern Historical Association, one of many groups that later
elected him its president.

John Hope Franklin was born on Jan. 2, 1915, in Rentiesville, Okla., the son of
Buck Colbert Franklin, a lawyer, and Molly Parker Franklin, an elementary school
teacher. His parents had moved to Rentiesville, an all-black town, after his
father was not allowed to practice law in Louisiana.

In the 1920s, the family moved to Tulsa, and at age 11 he was taken to hear the
great civil rights leader W. E. B. Du Bois, with whom Dr. Franklin later became
friends.

His youth was marked by frequent brushes with racism. He was forced off an
all-white train and made to sit in a segregated section of the Tulsa opera
house. He watched black neighborhoods of Tulsa -- including the one where his
father had his office -- being burned during the infamous 1921 race riot, and he
was barred from admission to the University of Oklahoma.

Instead, Dr. Franklin attended historically black Fisk University in Nashville,
receiving his B.A. in 1935. There he met Aurelia E. Whittington, who would
become his wife, and sometime editor, of almost 60 years. They had one son, John
Whittington Franklin, who survives him. Mrs. Franklin died in 1999.

In 1997, Dr. Franklin and his son edited an autobiography of his father, Buck
Franklin. The book told the tale of free blacks in the Southwestern Indian
territories in the late 1800s. Buck Franklin's father, a former slave owned by
Indians, became a cowboy and rancher, while Buck, who taught himself law by
mail, was an advocate of black pride and nonviolence.

Before graduating from Fisk, Dr. Franklin considered following his father into
law but was persuaded by a white professor, Ted Currier, to make history his
field. Professor Currier was said to have borrowed $500 to help Dr. Franklin
pursue graduate studies at Harvard. There, Dr. Franklin later recalled, he felt
the isolation of being one of only a handful of blacks on campus. He received
his master's degree in 1936 and his Ph.D. in 1941.

Two years later he published his first book, ''The Free Negro in North Carolina,
1790-1860,'' which explored slaveholders' hatred and fear of the quarter-million
free blacks in the antebellum South. Almost 20 other books followed, either
written or edited by Dr. Franklin.

In ''The Militant South, 1800-1861'' (1956), he described Southern whites'
''martial spirit'' and ''will to fight,'' which he said gave the pre-Civil-War
South its reputation for violence. He approvingly quoted Tocqueville's
observation that, because of slavery, ''the citizen of the Southern states
becomes a sort of domestic dictator from infancy.''

In ''Reconstruction After the Civil War'' (1961), he wrote that the end of
Reconstruction reforms left ''the South more than ever attached to the values
and outlook that had shaped its history.'' He lamented that ''in the postwar
years, the Union had not made the achievements of the war a foundation for the
healthy advancement of the political, social and economic life'' of the nation.

''The Emancipation Proclamation'' (1963), written a century after the
proclamation was issued, examined how it evolved in Lincoln's mind and its
impact on the Civil War and later generations. Dr. Franklin concluded hopefully,
''Perhaps in its second century, it would give real meaning and purpose to the
Declaration of Independence.''

And in ''The Color Line: Legacy for the 21st Century'' (1993) he argued that
race would remain America's great problem in the 21st century.

Despite his acute awareness of the South's troubled racial history, Dr. Franklin
was often angrier about Northern racism and frequently defended his adopted home
state, North Carolina.

His major biographical project was a 1985 study of George Washington Williams, a
self-educated black Civil War veteran and author of a 1,000-page 1882 history of
blacks in America from 1619 to 1880. He said he spent nearly 40 years of
intermittent research on the project, calling Williams ''one of the small heroes
of the world.''

Dr. Franklin's first passion was teaching, and he continued to log classroom
time despite his increasing prominence. His teaching career began at Fisk in
1936 and continued over the next 20 years at St. Augustine's College in Raleigh,
N.C., North Carolina College in Durham and Howard University in Washington.

As his first books drew national notice, Dr. Franklin left the world of
historically black colleges and went to Brooklyn College, where from 1956 to
1964 he served as chairman of what had been an all-white department.

''Having John Hope Franklin at Brooklyn College in the 1960's was like having a
real star in our midst,'' said Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California,
who was a student of Dr. Franklin's. ''Students who were lucky enough to get
into his class bragged about him from morning until night.''

Dr. Franklin later taught at the University of Chicago before returning to North
Carolina in 1982 to teach at Duke and at the Duke Law School.

Dr. Franklin was also a Fulbright professor in Australia and had teaching stints
in China and Zimbabwe. He taught at Cambridge University in England; Harvard;
Cornell; the University of Wisconsin; the University of Hawaii; the University
of California, Berkeley; and other institutions. Since 1992, he had been James
B. Duke professor emeritus of history at Duke. A John Hope Franklin Research
Center was established in his honor at Duke.

At his home in Durham, Dr. Franklin continued a lifelong hobby of cultivating
hundreds of orchids; one species was named for him, the Phalaenopsis John Hope
Franklin.

His honors, awards, and professional and civic affiliations were so numerous as
to fill several single-spaced pages of a long curriculum vitae. He received more
than 100 honorary degrees.

In 2006, he received the John W. Kluge Prize for the Study of Humanities in a
ceremony at the Library of Congress. In his prepared remarks he said he had long
struggled ''to understand how it is that we could seek a land of freedom for the
people of Europe and, at the very same time, establish a social and economic
system that enslaved people who happen not to be from Europe.''

''I have struggled to understand,'' he went on, ''how it is that we could fight
for independence and, at the very same time, use that newly won independence to
enslave many who had joined in the fight for independence.

''As a student of history, I have attempted to explain it historically, but that
explanation has not been all that satisfactory. That has left me no alternative
but to use my knowledge of history, and whatever other knowledge and skills I
have, to present the case for change in keeping with the express purpose of
attaining the promised goals of equality for all peoples.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Social Activism

PERSON: John Hope Franklin

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: John Hope Franklin took part in the 1965 civil rights march
from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. (PHOTOGRAPH FROM ''MIRROR TO AMERICA'')
 Speaking on race in 2005, with former President Bill Clinton. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
PETER FOLEY/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (94%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (91%); RACE & RACISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SLAVERY
(89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); LAWYERS (78%); SCHOOL DESEGREGATION
(78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); NOBEL PRIZES (66%); AWARDS &
PRIZES (65%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (60%); HEART DISEASE (57%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
(57%)

ORGANIZATION: DUKE UNIVERSITY (58%); PRINCETON UNIVERSITY (56%)

MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (79%); BILL CLINTON (59%)

CITY: DURHAM, NC, USA (88%); MONTGOMERY, AL, USA (79%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (67%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (67%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); GERMANY (67%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1001 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt: A Visit From Sudan's Leader

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 127 words


Egyptian officials welcomed President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan to Cairo on
Wednesday, apparently undeterred by the arrest warrant that has been issued
against him for war crimes and crimes against humanity by an international
court. The Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, and senior government ministers
received Mr. Bashir, left,  at the airport in Cairo, then held a meeting to
discuss the arrest warrant and conflict in Darfur, among other matters. It was
the second international visit by Mr. Bashir this week, following a trip to
Eritrea on Monday. Mr. Bashir has also pledged to attend an Arab League summit
meeting in Qatar next week. He has been defiant since the arrest warrant was
issued on March 4 by the International Criminal Court in The Hague.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (59%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (91%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); EGYPT (95%); ERITREA (79%); QATAR (79%); NETHERLANDS (50%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1002 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 26, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Envoy Denies Immunity Offer To Leader of Bosnian Serbs

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 599 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A member of the American team negotiating to remove the Bosnian Serb leader
Radovan Karadzic from power in 1996 said that he  was never promised immunity
from prosecution as part of a deal to step down, contradicting several accounts
cited in an article on Sunday in The New York Times.

Philip S. Goldberg, who was on the team led by Richard C. Holbrooke, issued a
statement saying that ''at no time during the negotiations in Belgrade or
elsewhere in the region was an immunity agreement made or contemplated.''

The Times article reported that a new study published by Purdue University said
that Mr. Karadzic had been promised that he would not be pursued by the war
crimes tribunal in The Hague if he left politics. Several people cited
anonymously in the study were also interviewed by The Times.

Mr. Holbrooke, now a special representative on Afghanistan and Pakistan for the
Obama administration, has repeatedly denied having  made such a promise.
Objecting to the publication of the article in The Times, he reiterated his
denial, cited in the article, and challenged the reliance on anonymous sources
by both the article and the Purdue study.

The people quoted ''should have the courage to identify themselves,'' he said in
an e-mail message to The Times. ''All of this is fabricated and untrue.''

Longstanding rumors of a deal have resurfaced because of the publication of the
Purdue study and because Mr. Karadzic has repeatedly said  that he had been
promised immunity at the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, forcing the court to
deal with this claim.

Mr. Karadzic, who was arrested last summer, faces charges of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The judges have ruled that no immunity
agreement would be valid in cases involving charges of genocide, war crimes or
crimes against humanity. Mr. Karadzic has appealed that ruling.

Two of the people interviewed for the article in The Times, a former senior
State Department official who served in the Balkans and an American who was
involved with peacekeeping in the 1990s, said Mr. Holbrooke had assured Mr.
Karadzic that he would not be pursued for war crimes. The second American said
that Mr. Holbrooke had personally and emphatically told him about the deal on
two occasions.

Contacted again this week, they stood by their version of the events.

Another American diplomat cited in the study as having drafted the agreement for
Mr. Karadzic to give up power, Christopher R. Hill, sent an e-mail message to
The Times on Tuesday denying any role in it. Mr. Hill, who had previously been
on Mr. Holbrooke's Balkans team, said that by that time he had already moved to
Macedonia as the United States ambassador.  ''I had nothing to do with anything
regarding Karadzic's departure either in Macedonia or before,'' he wrote. ''I
was not consulted, nor did I produce any papers.''

The study's co-editor, Charles W. Ingrao, said Tuesday that he would look into
Mr. Hill's contention.

After intense negotiations, Mr. Karadzic agreed to step down on July 18, 1996,
and signed a brief statement that made no mention of immunity.

American diplomats have said that rumors of an immunity deal emerged in Serbia
in recent years, circulated by Mr. Karadzic's relatives. David Binder, a former
Balkans correspondent for The Times who is now retired, said Wednesday that Mr.
Karadzic told him in 1996, shortly after he stepped down as the Bosnian Serb
president, that Mr. Holbrooke had offered him an immunity deal.

Obrad Kesic, who said he had met Mr. Karadzic in Pale, Bosnia, with Mr. Binder,
confirmed the account.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMUNITY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); GENOCIDE (74%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (70%); ARRESTS (69%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (61%)

ORGANIZATION: PURDUE UNIVERSITY (84%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (79%); BARACK OBAMA (53%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(94%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (92%); NETHERLANDS (88%);
SERBIA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1011 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 29, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice of the Peace

BYLINE: By ADAM LEBOR.

Adam LeBor is the author of '' 'Complicity With Evil': The United Nations in the
Age of Modern Genocide.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 818 words


MADAME PROSECUTOR

Confrontations With Humanity's Worst Criminals and the Culture of Impunity:A
Memoir

By Carla Del Pontewith Chuck Sudetic

434 pp. Other Press. $25.95

Cynics argue that because the United Nations was unable to stop the carnage in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, it set up war crimes tribunals instead, as a
kind of humanitarian consolation prize.

What the diplomats did not expect was Carla Del Ponte's determination to bring
the perpetrators to justice and to end the culture of impunity. As the attorney
general of Switzerland, she had fought against the muro di gomma, the wall of
rubber, that deflected her attempts to stop Mafia money-laundering. ''Madame
Prosecutor'' is her account of battling the muro di gomma across the Balkans,
Rwanda and Western capitals.

It is a relentless, sometimes (understandably) angry book, and an important
insider's account of the quest for international justice. Each of its 13 chapter
titles begins with the word ''Confronting'':  ''Confronting Kosovo,''
''Confronting Rwanda's Genocide,'' even ''Confronting the Tribunal
Bureaucracy,'' the heading for a chapter in which she accuses some of her own
officials of obstruction and incompetence.

Del Ponte's determination to make the Rwanda and Yugoslavia tribunals
functioning instruments of international criminal justice caused consternation.
She was a wild card, disrupting diplomacy's finely calibrated responses. Yet she
succeeded, at least in part. Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of Serbia,
was arrested on charges of genocide and died in his cell at the United Nations
detention center in The Hague in 2006. Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb
leader, is detained there now and is preparing his defense against charges of
genocide.

Del Ponte wrote ''Madame Prosecutor'' with Chuck Sudetic, who covered the
Yugoslav wars for The New York Times from 1990 to 1995. Sudetic, a fine reporter
and an elegant writer, is the author of ''Blood and Vengeance,'' one of the best
books on the former Yugoslavia. ''Madame Prosecutor'' is less evocative but is
clearly written and generally well paced, although occasionally the depth of
detail, as Del Ponte outlines yet another meeting with obstructive Serbian or
Croatian officials, slows down the narrative.

The book's microfocus on her political battles also means it lacks sufficient
geopolitical context. Del Ponte had a ringside seat at one of the most momentous
shifts in international diplomacy in recent history: the setting up of new legal
instruments to bring dictators and war criminals to justice. There are
occasional insider snippets, as when, in March 2001, Kofi Annan, then the
secretary general of the United Nations, wrote to Del Ponte admonishing her for
calling for economic aid to Yugoslavia to be made conditional on better
cooperation with the tribunal. However, the reader is left wishing that Del
Ponte were as indiscreet about her dealings with the superpowers as she is, for
example, about her relations with her own officials.

Only a tiny fraction of Yugoslav war criminals have been indicted. By the time
Del Ponte left her post, at the end of 2007, the tribunal had issued 161
indictments, mostly concentrating on senior figures. Local courts are now
expected to take up the burden. Some of the horrors chronicled make for grim
reading, and one incident in particular haunts long after the book has been
closed.

In February 2007, a protected prosecution witness gave evidence at the trial of
seven senior Bosnian Serb army officers, charged with the massacre of up to
8,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica in 1995. The witness had been a driver,
delivering food and drink to the executioners as they lined up their victims and
sprayed them with gunfire.

And then, suddenly, the shooting stopped. A very young boy emerged from the heap
of bodies, covered in blood and mangled flesh. He began walking toward the
gunmen, crying for his ''Babo'' (father). The soldiers lowered their weapons.
The commanding officer ordered them to shoot the boy, but they refused, telling
him to do it himself. The witness intervened on behalf of the boy: ''All of a
sudden he took me by the hand. . . . I don't want any one of you to experience
that, . . . the grip, the grip of him on my hand, and I was amazed at his
strength.'' He took the boy to his van and put some music on, while the gunmen
returned to their work.

Later in February 2007, another witness testified at the Srebrenica trial. It
was the boy (now a young man) who had crawled out from the pile of corpses.

The Yugoslav tribunal is scheduled to close down by the end of 2011. Meanwhile,
in January, the International Criminal Court in The Hague began its first trial,
that of Thomas Lubanga, a former Congolese warlord. Survivors of Congo's horrors
have already taken the witness stand. For this, too, Carla Del Ponte deserves
considerable credit.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Madame Prosecutor (Book); Madame Prosecutor (Book)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DENIS LOVROVIC/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); WRITERS (88%); MONEY LAUNDERING (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ORGANIZED CRIME (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); ARRESTS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); RWANDA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); CROATIA (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1013 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Focusing on Afghanistan and Pakistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 691 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Remembered War'' (editorial, March 28):

President Obama's strategy review for Afghanistan and Pakistan, unveiled last
week, finally focuses the government's attention and resources where they are
most needed. After years of our country's being bogged down in Iraq, the
president recognizes that the key to our national security is defeating Al
Qaeda, and that to do so we must address both Pakistan and Afghanistan.

But while the president clearly understands that the greatest threat to our
nation resides in Pakistan, the strategy he unveiled last week has the potential
to escalate rather than diminish this threat.

While the Obama administration's plan and rhetoric recognize the vital need to
confront this threat, the decision to send 21,000 additional troops to
Afghanistan before fully confronting the terrorist safe havens and instability
in Pakistan could very well prove counterproductive.

Increased military engagement against the Taliban in Afghanistan could push it
further into Pakistan while aggravating the militant extremism that has spread
to more and more parts of that country.

New Taliban safe havens could emerge from which attacks in Afghanistan or
Pakistan, like last week's bombing in the Khyber Pass, could be planned. More
Pakistanis could fall under the control of those who would violate basic human
rights, particularly the rights of women and girls.

Already weak government institutions could deteriorate further, undermining the
legitimacy of the Pakistani state. And a country with nuclear weapons could be
dangerously destabilized.

President Obama has stated clearly that we cannot prevail in Afghanistan without
addressing Pakistan -- but that recognition alone is not enough. We need to
address the insecurity in Pakistan before any decision to send significantly
more troops to Afghanistan.

Russ Feingold U.S. Senator from Wisconsin Washington, March 30, 2009

To the Editor:

Your editorial appropriately refers to the 9/11 attacks in discussing President
Obama's Afghanistan-Pakistan policies.

It should be kept in mind that the perpetrators of the 1993 bombing of the World
Trade Center had connections with the terrorist camps of Afghanistan.

Violent anti-American jihadism has been deeply rooted in the
Kabul-Peshawar-Kandahar triangle for about two decades. The challenges facing
Mr. Obama are even more profound than those identified in your excellent
editorial.

Edward A. Friedman Hoboken, N.J., March 28, 2009

The writer, professor emeritus of technology management at Stevens Institute of
Technology, was director of a U.S.A.I.D. program to establish an indigenous
college of engineering at Kabul University, 1970-73.

To the Editor:

While President Obama's new plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan is, as your
editorial puts it, ''a good first step toward fixing the dangerous situation''
there, don't forget that it was Congress that in response to 9/11 hastily and
recklessly gave President Bush a blank check to invade Afghanistan.

Congress has an equally important responsibility to replace that blank check
with a new authorization focused on bringing to justice those who planned and
carried out the 9/11 attacks. This new authorization should clearly state the
United States' political, economic, legal and military objectives.

Tony Green Gualala, Calif., March 28, 2009

To the Editor:

Certainly it's a relief to hear President Obama express a clear goal for our
Afghan operation after years of George W. Bush's vagaries about somehow creating
a representative democracy in a country that has never been hospitable to
anything like that.

Mr. Bush apparently believed in ''nation-building.'' President Obama, however,
in announcing a more realistic policy, seemed to put all thoughts of
nation-building behind him.

But we will now spend $1.5 billion a year to develop Pakistani infrastructure.
We will also send at least 4,000 troops to train the Afghan Army and police, and
hundreds of civilians to improve the Afghan economy. And if that's not
nation-building and a potential quagmire, I don't know what is.

John Corry New York, March 28, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); WRITERS
(73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); AL-QAEDA (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); WOMEN (70%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (70%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%);
COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (63%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); RUSS FEINGOLD (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); WISCONSIN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1014 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foe of Chechen President Is Victim of Dubai Shooting

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ; A reporter for The New York Times in Dubai
contributed to this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


A former general in Chechnya and foe of the republic's Kremlin-backed president
was shot over the weekend in the Persian Gulf emirate of Dubai, and the police
there said Monday that he had died.

The former general, Sulim B. Yamadayev, was shot at least three times outside an
elite apartment complex in Dubai in what appeared to be an assassination, the
police said. It was unclear exactly when the attack took place.

The identity of the man who was killed was the subject of conflicting reports.
Officials of the hospital in Dubai said that two Chechen brothers, whose names
were not released, had been shot during the attack. One died, they said, while
the other was in critical condition.

The attack evokes others on Chechens, in Russia and abroad, who ran afoul of
President Ramzan A. Kadyrov.

The Kremlin has invested Mr. Kadyrov with almost unchecked authority in a bid to
return stability to Chechnya after nearly a decade of bloody war and political
turmoil. With Moscow's blessing, Mr. Kadyrov has created a personality cult and
imposed his own interpretation of Islamic morality in Chechnya, whose population
is predominately Muslim.

He has also built a powerful security force that has all but crushed Chechnya's
separatist movement, often, rights groups say, with the help of torture and
extrajudicial killings.

In January, a Chechen hit man tracked down and killed Umar S. Israilov, a former
bodyguard of Mr. Kadyrov, who had received asylum in Austria after accusing the
president, and officials in his circle, of kidnapping, torture and murder.
Ruslan Yamadayev, one of Sulim's brothers, was shot dead in his car last
September as he waited in a traffic jam in Moscow just outside the White House,
the government building where the offices of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin
are situated.

Mr. Kadyrov's government has denied responsibility for these deaths and others,
and Alvi A. Karimov, Mr. Kadyrov's spokesman, said Monday that the president had
no information about the killing in Dubai. ''We hope that the truth will be
established and the guilty found,'' Mr. Karimov said.

Sulim Yamadayev, who until last year commanded his own heavily armed fighting
force in Chechnya, was perhaps Mr. Kadyrov's most powerful and well-known
adversary and had often clashed  with the president.

A separatist fighter in Russia's first Chechen war in the 1990s, Mr. Yamadayev,
36, switched allegiances and fought with pro-Moscow forces in the second war,
which began in 1999. He was later named head of the Vostok Battalion, a
contingent of former separatists, co-opted into the Russian Army, that became
notorious for its daring raids on militants' hide-outs and its callous disregard
for civilian casualties. Mr. Putin awarded both Mr. Yamadayev and Mr. Kadyrov
the Hero of Russia medal, the country's highest honor.

Mr. Yamadayev ultimately emerged as something of an independent power center in
Chechnya. He was backed by Moscow, but his growing authority brought him into
conflict with Mr. Kadyrov. Last April, an altercation on a country road between
troops from the Vostok Battalion and guards from Mr. Kadyrov's motorcade ended
in gunfire. Some reports said Mr. Kadyrov had personally intervened to avoid
bloodshed.

Soon, Mr. Yamadayev was stripped of his command and charged with involvement in
kidnappings and murders, though there have been persistent reports that he
commanded his Vostok troops in fighting last August during Russia's war with
Georgia.

According to Russian news reports citing relatives of Mr. Yamadayev, he, his
wife and their six children left Russia in December and were living in Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%);
TORTURE (87%); EXECUTIVE MOVES (78%); MURDER (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); RELIGION (72%); CIVIL WAR (72%);
ARMIES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); PRIME
MINISTERS (67%); ARMED FORCES (60%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (96%); INDIAN OCEAN (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (97%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); GULF STATES
(90%); AUSTRIA (58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

First Khmer Rouge Trial Opens a Torture House Door

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Testimony opened Monday at the first trial of a Khmer Rouge official, with a
detailed description of the internal workings and methods of interrogation in
the regime's central torture house.

In statements included in a long indictment read by court officials, the
defendant, Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, admitted ordering and taking part in
systematic torture that sometimes continued for days.

In his statements, made during pretrial investigations, he said he was working
on orders from the top Khmer Rouge leadership, an assertion that appeared to
implicate four other defendants who are awaiting trial.

Thirty years after the regime was deposed, Duch is the first person to take the
stand and answer for one of the most horrific episodes of mass killing in the
past century, in which 1.7 million people are estimated to have died from 1975
to '79 of starvation, overwork, disease or execution.

The trial has opened, with the backing of the United Nations, amid controversy
over allegations of corruption and political influence by the government, which
critics contend has tried to limit the scope of the indictments.

The former commandant of Tuol Sleng prison, Duch, 66, is charged with crimes
against humanity, war crimes and murder in the deaths of at least 14,000 people;
almost all were tortured before they were executed. Only a handful of the
prisoners at Tuol Sleng survived.

Some inmates were also subjected to medical experiments, including ''live
autopsies''  and experimentation with homemade medications, according to Duch's
statements in the indictment.

Testimony on Monday involved the reading of a detailed description of the
charges against Duch (pronounced DOIK). Statements from the prosecution and the
defense should follow, and then accounts from witnesses and the defendant. The
trial is expected to last about four months.

Through his French lawyer, Francois Roux, Duch has admitted his role and
apologized to the victims, but he was quoted Monday as saying that he feared for
his life if he did not follow orders.

Neatly dressed in a long-sleeved white shirt, Duch stood at the start of the
proceedings to give his name and a string of aliases, and to confirm that he
understood the charges.

A former schoolteacher, Duch disappeared after the Khmer Rouge were routed by a
Vietnamese invasion in 1979. He was found in 1999 by a British journalist,
living quietly in a small Cambodian town, where he said he had converted to
Christianity. He was arrested shortly afterward.

According to the charges read Monday, the prisoners brought to Tuol Sleng were
presumed guilty. Even if they had been mistakenly arrested, they were killed to
preserve the secrecy of the prison, the indictment said.

Much of the prison's work involved internal purges that consumed the Khmer Rouge
regime, according to the indictment. Those who were arrested were not told the
charges against them, but were forced to confess to crimes in coerced statements
often hundreds of pages long.

Many of the arrests were made on the basis of names given by prisoners under
torture, and were followed by further arrests of the new prisoners' family
members and associates in a widening net -- an attempt to root out supposed
enemies.

Duch implicated his superiors directly, according to the indictment, telling
investigators, ''I always reported to the superiors and they always ordered the
arrest of the persons implicated.''

The four other defendants are surviving members of the Khmer Rouge leadership:
Ieng Sary, who was foreign minister; Nuon Chea, known as Brother No. 2; Khieu
Samphan, who was head of state; and Ieng Thirith, who was minister of social
affairs. All have denied the charges against them, which include crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

Several other top figures have died, including the Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot,
known as Brother No. 1, in 1998.

Witnesses quoted in the indictment said Duch instructed them in methods of
torture that included beatings, electric shocks, putting  plastic bags over
prisoners' heads and removing fingernails and toenails.

Duch was quoted as saying he introduced three methods of interrogation:
''cold,'' ''hot'' and ''chewing.'' The cold method employed propaganda without
the use of torture or insults. The hot method included ''insults, beatings and
other torture authorized by the regulations.''

The chewing method consisted, in Duch's quoted words, of ''gentle explanations
in order to establish confidence, followed by prayers to the interrogated
person, continually inviting her or him to write'' a confession.

Another witness told investigators that torture could be used if ''chewing''
failed to bring results in two or three days.

One quoted witness said Duch took part in an interrogation in which a woman was
stripped to her underwear and beaten long into the night. The witness said Duch
beat her until he tired,  then had another torturer take over.

Interrogations followed a schedule: 7 a.m. to 11 a.m., 2 p.m. to 5 p.m., and 7
p.m. to 11 p.m. But they could last long past midnight, the indictment said.
They could go on for days and were considered complete only when a confession
was obtained.

The indictment quoted Duch as saying that he and his superiors were ''skeptical
of the veracity of the confessions,'' which he said were used as ''excuses to
eliminate those who represented obstacles'' to the regime.

The indictment said untrained medical workers, sometimes including unsupervised
children, worked to keep prisoners alive until they confessed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, center, a Khmer Rouge prison
chief, at his trial on Monday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL PHOTO BY PRING SAMRANG)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); WITNESSES (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); ARRESTS (88%); DEPOSITIONS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); MEDICAL
RESEARCH (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); AUTOPSIES
(76%); CORRUPTION (71%); RELIGION (60%); MURDER (58%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1017 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 1, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debating Release of Interrogation Memos

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Obama administration is intensely debating whether and when to release
documents from the Bush administration related to harsh interrogation methods
used on  prisoners belonging to Al Qaeda, according to administration and
Congressional officials.

Some officials, including Gregory B. Craig, the White House counsel, and
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., have argued for disclosing the material as
quickly as possible to distance the new administration from the most
controversial policies of the Bush years. Mr. Holder and other top officials
have condemned the most extreme of the past interrogation techniques,
waterboarding, as illegal torture, and they see no reason to hide from public
view what they consider the mistakes of their predecessors.

But some former and current Central Intelligence Agency officials say a rush to
release classified material could expose intelligence methods and needlessly
offend dedicated counterterrorism officers. Some administration and
Congressional officials said John O. Brennan, a C.I.A. veteran who now serves as
President Obama's top counterterrorism adviser, has urged caution in disclosing
interrogation documents.

One test on the disclosure issue will come this week in federal court in New
York. By Thursday, the Justice Department must tell a judge overseeing a Freedom
of Information Act lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union whether it will
release three legal memorandums from 2005, signed by Steven G. Bradbury, who
worked in the department's Office of Legal Counsel under President George W.
Bush, that offered legal justification for harsh interrogation.

The Justice Department had asked Judge Alvin K. Hellerstein of Federal District
Court in Manhattan to delay a decision on whether to order the release of the
memorandums, suggesting that the government might voluntarily release them.
Government lawyers could turn them over this week or seek a further delay.

A White House spokesman, Ben LaBolt, declined to comment on internal talks about
the disclosure issue, noting that the matter involved current litigation. A
Justice Department spokesman, Matt Miller, said only that ''the memos are being
reviewed for possible release.''

The Obama administration has already made public some legal opinions from the
Bush Justice Department, and both President Obama and Mr. Holder have pledged a
new policy of openness. But they are listening to the objections of intelligence
officials. Newsweek reported this week that Michael V. Hayden, who stepped down
in February as C.I.A. director, was lobbying against disclosing the Bradbury
memorandums.

Meanwhile, some Congressional Democrats have become frustrated with what they
consider to be the slow pace in releasing information.

On Tuesday, two Democratic senators, Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Sheldon
Whitehouse of Rhode Island, wrote to the Justice Department to complain about
delays in the release of a report by the its ethics office on the role of
department lawyers in providing legal advice on waterboarding and other
interrogation methods under President Bush.

A draft of the report completed in December by the department's Office of
Professional Responsibility is described by officials who have been briefed on
its contents as highly critical of three authors of legal memorandums on
interrogation: Jay S. Bybee, John C. Yoo and Mr. Bradbury.

Answering a query from the two senators last week, M. Faith Burton, the acting
head of legislative affairs at the Justice Department, suggested that the report
was far from ready for public release. She said copies had been given to the
former department lawyers whose work it criticizes and the department was
awaiting their comments before beginning additional reviews.

''Due to the complexity and classification level of the draft report, the review
process described above likely will require substantial time and effort,'' Ms.
Burton wrote.

In their reply on Tuesday, Mr. Durbin and Mr. Whitehouse objected to the delays
and expressed concern that the multiple reviews might water down the report.

In his presidential campaign, Mr. Obama repeatedly criticized the C.I.A.'s
interrogation program and other counterterrorism programs. Vice President Joseph
R. Biden Jr. repeated the criticism at C.I.A. headquarters  during the swearing
in of the agency's new director, Leon E. Panetta. But Mr. Obama has said he
prefers to look forward rather than backward and has not endorsed a
Congressional proposal for a ''truth commission'' to investigate Bush
counterterrorism programs.

The question of what documents will be declassified and released promises to be
a continuing challenge for the administration. As part of its lawsuit, the
A.C.L.U. is seeking, among many other documents, material related to the
destruction of C.I.A. interrogation videotapes, reports by the agency's
inspector general and Defense Department documents related to the abuse and
death of prisoners.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. has argued for releasing
classified material. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (87%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); JUDGES (77%); LOBBYING (77%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (77%); ETHICS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(69%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); ERIC HOLDER (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (89%); JOHN O
BRENNAN (79%); MICHAEL HAYDEN (58%); RICHARD DURBIN (58%); GREG CRAIG (58%);
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1018 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 1, 2009 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Defendant Apologizes for Atrocities

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


A Khmer Rouge torture house commandant apologized in court on Tuesday for
atrocities he had committed but said that he had feared for his own life and
that he was a scapegoat for others.

''I would like to express my regret and heartfelt sorrow,'' said the commandant,
Kaing Guek Eav, also known as Duch. He is the first defendant in the
long-delayed trial regarding the deaths of 1.7 million people from starvation,
overwork and disease, as well as torture and execution under the Khmer Rouge
from 1975 to 1979.

Those deaths, amounting to nearly a quarter of Cambodia's population, were
carried out by one of the 20th century's most brutal and repressive regimes.

''My current plea is that I would like you to please leave an open window for me
to seek forgiveness,'' he said in an 18-minute address. One of five defendants
in the United Nations-backed trial, he faces a life sentence on charges of
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as homicide and torture.

He concluded by presenting the court with a pencil sketch of men at desks and
piles of skulls that he said explained the workings of the regime's hierarchy.

In an intense second day of testimony, one of the prosecutors, Robert Petit,
portrayed the 66-year-old Duch (pronounced DOIK) as a committed and ruthless
chief of Tuol Sleng prison and questioned the sincerity of his expressions of
remorse.

''The accused was knowingly and intentionally in control of the entire Tuol
Sleng criminal enterprise,'' Mr. Petit said, noting that his contrition had come
only many years later. ''Rather than a victim of fear, he was the one who
created fear,'' Mr. Petit said.

He illustrated what he said was Duch's brutality by describing the fate of his
''teacher and mentor,'' Chay Kim Huor, who recruited him into the Communist
Party in 1964. ''Fifteen years later the accused would supervise the torture and
execution of Chay,'' Mr. Petit said. ''That single fact I submit as highly
revealing.''

At a news conference after the court session, a lawyer representing civil
parties in the case said Duch's apology addressed a deep need among victims,
whose traumas had not been publicly acknowledged for three decades.

''The most important thing is that he spoke today and expressed regret, remorse,
and sought forgiveness, which was something the civil parties have been waiting
for a long time,'' said the lawyer, Martine Jacquin.

Duch's biographer, Nic Dunlop --  who discovered him living incognito 10 years
ago -- said that even if it was tactical, Duch's apology was significant. Mr.
Dunlop said Duch's cooperation and truth-telling would offer some of the
historical clarification that many Cambodians are seeking.

Duch's lawyers presented a vigorous defense of a man who has admitted to
overseeing the torture and execution of at least 14,000 people, portraying him
as someone trapped in a giant killing machine who now finds himself singled out
for prosecution.

Asserting that Tuol Sleng was just one of 196 similar institutions -- and far
from the worst of them -- one of his lawyers, Kar Savuth, asked: ''Is it fair?
Is this called justice?

''Each prison had the same orders from Angkar,'' he said, referring to the Khmer
Rouge leadership, ''all conducted torture and execution. Why is only Duch
brought to trial? He is only a scapegoat.''

He added: ''It would be better not to try anyone than to try some and leave
others at large.''

Duch's second lawyer, Francois Roux, said Duch was part of a hierarchy of terror
in which all the actors were in effect victims as well as perpetrators.

''It was because of the terror that every link in the chain of command acted
zealously to please superiors,'' he said.

Duch had admitted his part in sowing fear among his subordinates, he said.
''Does this mean therefore that we should cloak in silence the fact that he
himself received orders? What we agree happened below happened equally above
him.''

Taking his argument of moral equivalence a step further, Mr. Roux said that just
as Duch had dehumanized his victims, his accusers and victims were guilty of
dehumanizing him.

''Duch remains a human being,'' he said, addressing prosecutors. ''Maybe there
are certain points at which he has a bit of trouble admitting certain things.
But maybe you as well have trouble admitting certain things.''

Addressing the court, Duch also suggested an equivalence with survivors of the
Khmer Rouge, saying he felt remorse and shame ''in the eyes of those who were
victims and those who lost loved ones in the regime, including my own loved
ones, who lost family members as well.''

He said he did not dare to think of challenging his superiors. ''So it was a
life-or-death situation for me myself, and my family as a whole,'' he said. ''As
the person in charge, of Tuol Sleng, I never attempted to find an alternative
other than obeying an order, even though I knew that obeying the order meant
that numerous people would perish.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 3, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Wednesday about the Cambodia war-crimes trial of Kaing
Guek Eav, a Khmer Rouge torture house commandant also known as Duch, misstated
the name of one of his lawyers in some editions. It is Kar Savuth, not Kat
Savuth.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A television image shows Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, speaking
in court.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TORTURE (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); TESTIMONY (78%); HOMICIDE (76%); POPULATION SIZE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); STARVATION (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1022 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 3, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Rules Some Prisoners at Bagram Have Right of Habeas Corpus

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE; Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A federal judge ruled on Thursday that some prisoners held by the United States
military in Afghanistan have a right to challenge their imprisonment, dealing a
blow to government efforts to detain terrorism suspects for extended periods
without court oversight.

In a 53-page ruling that rejected a claim of unfettered executive power advanced
by both the Bush and Obama administrations, United States District Judge John D.
Bates said that three detainees at the United States' Bagram Air Base had the
same legal rights that the Supreme Court last year granted to prisoners held at
the American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The three detainees -- two Yemenis and a Tunisian -- say that they were captured
outside Afghanistan and taken to Bagram, and that they have been imprisoned for
more than six years without trials. Arguing that they were not enemy combatants,
the detainees want a civilian judge to review the evidence against them and
order their release, under the constitutional right of habeas corpus.

The importance of Bagram as a holding site for terrorism suspects captured
outside Afghanistan and Iraq has increased under the Obama administration, which
prohibited the Central Intelligence Agency from using its secret prisons for
long-term detention and ordered the military prison at Guantanamo closed within
a year. The administration had sought to preserve Bagram as a haven where it
could detain terrorism suspects beyond the reach of American courts, telling
Judge Bates in February that it agreed with the Bush administration's view that
courts had no jurisdiction over detainees there.

Judge Bates, who was appointed by President George W. Bush in 2001, was not
persuaded. He said transferring captured terrorism suspects to the prison inside
Afghanistan and claiming they were beyond the jurisdiction of American courts
''resurrects the same specter of limitless executive power the Supreme Court
sought to guard against'' in its 2008 ruling that Guantanamo prisoners have a
right to habeas corpus.

Dean Boyd, a Justice Department spokesman, said that the administration was
reviewing the decision and that it had made no decision about whether to appeal.

Judge Bates emphasized that his ruling was ''quite narrow.'' He said that it did
not apply to prisoners captured on the battlefield in Afghanistan, and that a
determination of whether prisoners might challenge their detention in court
would depend on a case-by-case analysis of factors like their citizenship and
location of capture.

''It is one thing to detain those captured on the surrounding battlefield at a
place like Bagram, which respondents correctly maintain is in a theater of
war,'' the judge wrote. ''It is quite another thing to apprehend people in
foreign countries -- far from any Afghan battlefield -- and then bring them to a
theater of war, where the Constitution arguably may not reach.''

Moreover, the judge has put off ruling that a fourth prisoner -- also captured
outside Afghanistan, but holding Afghan citizenship -- had a right to challenge
his detention. He said any order to release the detainee could lead to frictions
with the Afghan government, and asked for additional briefings on that case.

The United States is holding about 600 people at Bagram without charges and in
spartan conditions. United States officials have never provided a full
accounting of the prison population, but an American government official,
speaking on condition of anonymity because it is against policy to discuss
details of the Bagram prison, said that fewer than a dozen detainees fell into
the category affected by the ruling -- non-Afghans captured beyond Afghan
borders.

Judge Bates has been involved in several high-profile executive power cases. In
2002, he sided with the Bush administration in a lawsuit over whether Vice
President Dick Cheney's energy task force records were required to be disclosed.
But in 2008, he sided with Congress in an executive-privilege dispute over
whether top aides to Mr. Bush were immune from subpoenas related to the firing
of federal prosecutors.

David Rivkin, an associate White House counsel in the administration of the
first President Bush, predicted that Judge Bates's ruling would be overturned on
appeal. He warned that the ruling ''gravely undermined'' the country's ''ability
to detain enemy combatants for the duration of hostilities worldwide.''

But Tina Foster, the executive director of the International Justice Network,
which is representing the four Bagram detainees, praised Judge Bates's decision
as ''a very good day for the Constitution and the rule of law.''

Ms. Foster said that the Bagram ruling meant that changes to the Bush detention
policies would go beyond merely closing Guantanamo and extend ''to any place
where the United States seeks to hold individuals in a legal black hole.''

The power of federal judges to review decisions by the executive branch to
imprison a terrorism suspect was among the most contentious legal issues that
arose after the 2001 terrorist attacks. The Bush administration began a policy
of holding prisoners indefinitely and without trials, arguing that federal
judges had no authority to second-guess its decisions about whom to name an
''enemy combatant.''

But human-rights lawyers challenged those policies, winning Supreme Court
decisions in 2004, 2006 and 2008 that gradually expanded the reach of the
American legal system over detainees.

After taking office, Mr. Obama ordered a review of the evidence against each of
the roughly 240 prisoners at Guantanamo as a first step toward closing the
prison within a year.

He did not extend the steps he was taking to resolve the fate of the Guantanamo
prisoners to those held at Bagram, although a comprehensive review of detainee
policies is due to be completed in July. Ms. Foster said that the Bagram case
may force the administration to speed up its decisions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (94%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); HABEAS CORPUS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); JURISDICTION (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); APPEALS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); EVIDENCE (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); NAVIES (73%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (79%); CUBA (72%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1031 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 5, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iowa Decency

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 351 words


Like the state's earlier landmark civil rights cases  -- striking down slavery
in 1839, for example, and segregation in 1868 and 1873 -- the  ruling on gay
marriage by Iowa's Supreme Court is a refreshing message of fairness and common
sense from the nation's heartland.

A unanimous decision by the seven-member court on Friday approved marriage for
couples of the same sex and brought the nation a step closer toward realizing
its promise of equality and justice.

Iowa is only the third state, following Massachusetts and Connecticut, to
legalize gay marriage. California allowed such marriages for five months until
November's election, when residents rejected the idea in a voter initiative. A
ruling on the validity of that initiative is expected soon from California's
Supreme Court.

In finding no ''persuasive justification'' for the different treatment of
committed gay and lesbian couples, the Iowa Supreme Court affirmed a lower court
holding of two years ago. That ruling overturned, on equal protection grounds, a
1998 state law confining civil marriage to a union between a man and a woman.
Same-sex marriages could begin in Iowa before the month is out.

The new decision says marriage is a civil contract and should not be defined by
religious doctrine or views. ''We are firmly convinced the exclusion of gay and
lesbian people from the institution of civil marriage does not substantially
further an important governmental objective,'' wrote Justice Mark Cady, a
Republican appointee. ''The legislature has excluded a historically disfavored
class of persons from a supremely important civil institution without a
constitutionally sufficient justification.''

The immediate impact of Iowa's ruling was to make the failure to respect gay
people's freedom to marry, by courts and legislatures in states like New York,
seem all the more shameful.

''When all is said and done, we believe the only lasting question about today's
events will be why it took us so long,'' said a statement by Iowa's State Senate
majority leader, Michael  Gronstal, and House speaker,  Pat Murphy, both
Democrats.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARRIAGE (92%); GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); EQUAL PROTECTION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); COHABITATION (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); MARRIAGE LAW (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); RELIGION (51%)

ORGANIZATION: IOWA SUPREME COURT (91%); SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA (56%)

STATE: IOWA, USA (95%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%);
CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1038 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 8, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel, Gaza and Accountability

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 950 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Israel on Trial'' (Op-Ed, April 4):

I believe that George Bisharat unfairly pillories Israel. He acknowledges that
there is a special fact-finding investigation under way. Why does he not wait
for the results to be reported, rather than pre-empt them with his own
accusations based on his presuppositions and limited information?

If Hamas is also guilty of war crimes, as Mr. Bisharat alleges, why does he call
only Israel to accountability? Is Lady Justice blind, or does she peek out to
select her favorites and use the assertion of legal principles to advance their
interests where advantage can be gained by allegation?

Peter A. Pettit  Allentown, Pa., April 4, 2009

The writer is a member of the executive committee of Christians for Fair Witness
on the Middle East.

To the Editor:

George Bisharat itemizes Israel's alleged ''violations of international law,''
but dismisses the violations by Hamas in a single sentence.

Where is the Op-Ed article detailing the crimes of Hamas? Why should only Israel
be on trial?

Barry Salwen  Wilmington, N.C., April 5, 2009

To the Editor:

The charge that Gaza ''remains occupied'' rings hollow when Israel evacuated all
Israelis, living and dead, from Gaza in 2005.

The ''chilling testimony by Israeli soldiers'' that George Bisharat refers to
was based on hearsay, secondhand accounts of foolish braggadocio.

Hamas's charter calls for destroying Israel, for murdering Jews everywhere. Gaza
has been a launching pad for thousands of illegal rocket attacks against Israel
for years. Hamas violated the Geneva Conventions by launching rockets from
residential neighborhoods and using civilians as human shields. Israel warned
civilians of impending attacks with leaflets and phone calls.

Israel's use of white phosphorus has not been found to be illegal. Israel has
allowed hundreds of trucks of humanitarian goods into Gaza and never completely
cut off electricity. Israeli hospitals treat Palestinians and Israelis with
equal care. The charge of criminal intent is more appropriately leveled at
Hamas.

Joel Abramson  Southbury, Conn., April 5, 2009

To the Editor:

Two phenomena provide the context for the serious allegations by George Bisharat
of Israeli war crimes in the Gaza war (and of Hamas war crimes for launching
rockets against Israeli civilians): Israel's settlement building in the occupied
territories, and America's continuous and substantial aid.

In the late 1970s, an extremist, Likud-led coalition began the settlement
project to achieve its vision of a ''Greater Israel'' sovereign over all the
Holy Land. This drive effectively negated the possibility of a two-state
solution, as evidenced by the huge settlements in the West Bank. It consigned
Palestinians to permanent underclass status and thus ensured a dynamic of
endless violence.

America's steadfast political, financial and arms support has enabled Israel to
pursue its unique and destabilizing territorial expansion against the opposition
of much of the international community.

These concrete exercises of power cannot be denied or dismissed. They have
determined the broad course of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict over the last
three decades.

The United States has undermined its declared goal of a two-state solution by
its decisive material backing of Israel. Israel's extremists have thus won a
signal victory. To believe that negotiations can now achieve a viable
Palestinian state alongside Israel is to prefer illusion to reality.

Benjamin Solomon  Evanston, Ill., April 5, 2009

To the Editor:

As a single, Canadian-educated Palestinian woman locked inside Gaza, I have very
little hope for the future.

Every morning that I awake and find we have electricity, which continues to be
only a few days a week, the first thing I do is get on the Internet and scan
American newspapers to get a feel if Israel's closest -- if not sometimes only
-- ally is awakening to the crimes against humanity that are being carried out
by Israel with American weapons against Palestinians in Gaza.

I must say I was pleasantly surprised to read George Bisharat's Op-Ed article,
which lays out in simple and clear facts what those crimes are. I applaud Mr.
Bisharat for writing what most of the world already believes -- that Israel must
be stopped.

Maha Mehanna  Al Rimal, Gaza, April 4, 2009

The writer is a liaison officer at Handicap International.

To the Editor:

George Bisharat's April 4 Op-Ed article was a refreshingly clear call for
holding the Israeli Army accountable for the crimes that have been documented in
Gaza -- a call made in the name of our collective interest as a world facing
transnational problems that require international cooperation and therefore a
commitment to developing international law.

Emily Crawford  Amman, Jordan, April 4, 2009

The writer is the international relations coordinator for the Amman Center for
Human Rights Studies.

To the Editor:

The dismissive response by much of the Israeli public to the crimes of the
Israel Defense Forces invasion of the Gaza Strip has been appropriately capped
by the formation of the Likud coalition that will be Israel's next government.

It is the government that best expresses the truth of Israel today. The words
and program of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Foreign Minister Avigdor
Lieberman bring to an end the Israeli public relations success in hiding the
colonialization process driving Israel's militarism and ethnic nationalism.

It's sad for many of us, and tragic for Palestinians, but the sadness and
tragedy are nothing new. Only now there should be no doubt even to the casual
observer.

Garth Massey  Portland, Ore., April 4, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY FOGELSON-LUBINER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); EVIDENCE (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW OF WAR (76%); BOMBINGS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%);
WRITERS (73%); RELIGION (68%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); MURDER (58%); ARMED
FORCES (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

CITY: ALLENTOWN, PA, USA (56%); WILMINGTON, NC, USA (55%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA
(67%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1051 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

New York's Missing Civil Right

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 381 words


New York State, as Mayor Michael Bloomberg observed on Thursday, is where Susan
B. Anthony began her struggle for women's suffrage. It is the state where the
N.A.A.C.P. was founded. Now New York can finally honor its historic commitment
to personal freedoms by becoming the next state to end discrimination against
civil marriage for same-sex couples.

On Thursday, as he reintroduced a bill that will give same-sex couples the right
to marry, New York's governor, David Paterson, issued an appeal at once personal
and universal. Mr. Paterson, the state's first black governor, compared the
fight for same-sex marriage to the battle to end slavery and discrimination.
''Anyone who has ever faced intolerance of any kind,'' he said, ''knows the
solemn importance of protecting the rights of all people.'' And he reminded
listeners that gay couples are often denied health benefits, the right to visit
loved ones in the hospital and spousal rights to inherit property.

What could be even more important was his response to New York's new archbishop,
Timothy Dolan, who said Wednesday that he would speak out against same-sex
marriage. ''This is a civil government,'' the governor -- who is Catholic --
said. He is right. Religious organizations can make rules for marriage, but the
state is separate and must treat people equally under the law.

Mr. Paterson had plenty of supporters lined up with him at the announcement --
Mayor  Bloomberg, Senators Charles Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand and other
members of Congress, union representatives and gay rights advocates. It will
take hard work from all -- especially Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Schumer -- to get
this essential legislation passed. They need to press the State Senate hard,
with Mr. Schumer coaxing fellow Democrats and the mayor convincing his
Republican allies.

The Assembly is expected to pass the measure easily, but some advocates of
same-sex marriage have said they want Albany's legislators to make sure they can
win before the Senate votes. Knowing the outcome in advance is the way law is
usually made in Albany. But, as Mr. Bloomberg argued, ''that is not democracy.''
It's time for Albany's backroom specialists to allow full debates and real votes
on whether thousands of New Yorkers should be allowed this basic right.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARRIAGE (92%); GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); COHABITATION (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (90%); GOVERNORS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LGBT RIGHTS (89%);
LEGISLATION (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(79%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); RELIGION (71%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (84%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (89%); DAVID PATERSON (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (79%);
KIRSTEN E GILLIBRAND (59%)

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (89%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1056 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 18, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Uproar Over the C.I.A. and Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1150 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Memos Spell Out Brutal C.I.A. Mode of Interrogation'' (front page, April
17) :

President Obama has decided that the C.I.A. employees involved in the torture of
terrorism suspects will not be prosecuted and has justified his position by
stating that ''this is a time for reflection, not retribution.''

I find it hard to believe that a man as intelligent as Mr. Obama, who once
taught constitutional law, would equate the pursuit of justice with retribution.
It makes it appear as if his decision is one of political expediency.

If holding the C.I.A. operatives accountable for violating federal or
international laws is retribution, then the prosecution of ordinary citizens for
crimes is also retribution.

The president does not have the authority to be selective about who should or
should not be charged with a crime, and he has made a grievous error by
confusing the pursuit of justice with retribution or retaliation.

If the president reached his conclusion not to prosecute because the C.I.A.
agents were merely following orders, I would remind him that that defense did
not hold up at the Nuremberg trials. Those involved must be tried and held
accountable regardless of the political consequences.

Seeking justice is moving forward, not backward. The whole world is watching.

Chase Webb Gresham, Ore., April 17, 2009

To the Editor:

The overall idea put forth on Thursday by torture apologists that the C.I.A. and
other government employees were only following Department of Justice legal
opinions and essentially didn't know that waterboarding and other tortures they
committed were illegal and wrong is complete nonsense.

Why was torture only whispered about throughout government in hushed,
embarrassed tones? Why did the F.B.I. open a ''war crimes file''? Why did the
news of Abu Ghraib immediately shame all Americans?

It's true, and proved repeatedly in social psychology experiments, that
otherwise good people will tend to conform to authority. It's true that people,
under such circumstances, often fail to listen to their consciences. But don't
conflate this obedience factor with not being able to appreciate the
wrongfulness.

In choosing to appease powerful interests by trying to sweep this horrible
wrongdoing under the rug, President Obama undoubtedly had to overcome the pangs
of his own conscience.

Coleen Rowley Apple Valley, Minn., April 17, 2009

The writer is the retired F.B.I. agent who exposed F.B.I. lapses that led to the
9/11 attacks.

To the Editor:

Expressing my personal views based solely on the public record, I believe that
President Obama should not sanction impunity for high-ranking government
officials who approved or facilitated the use of torture.

Although licensed legal or medical professionals who aided and abetted torture
certainly should at the very least be disciplined for their role in war crimes
and crimes against humanity, the principal focus of the needed criminal
investigation should be on the policy-making officials and advisers at the
highest levels of our government -- the White House, the Departments of Justice
and Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency -- who authorized or enabled
such criminal conduct. This would also include many lawyers who provided legal
cover for lawlessness.

Using torture is not merely an ethics violation. It is also a domestic and
international crime, and Judge Baltasar Garzon in Spain should not be the only
one investigating these reprehensible actions with an eye to criminal
proceedings. The United States should finally put its own house in order.

John S. Koppel New York, April 17, 2009

The writer is a career attorney (1981-present) on the appellate staff of the
Justice Department's Civil Division.

To the Editor:

Call me naive, but I found the recent publication of the torture memorandums
strangely hopeful.

This is not to make light of the unimaginable horrors endured by human beings in
our custody. We as a nation looked the other way and allowed the Bush
administration to act out our darkest desires for vengeance on the bodies of
other human beings. All of this is devastatingly shameful.

Of course powerful nations have routinely exploited their power through all
manner of coercion and torture. What seems new -- and it is here that I root my
hope -- is the decision by the Obama administration to release this information
and thereby affirm international standards that transcend any one nation's claim
to power. One such standard is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (Rev.)
Tom Martinez Brooklyn, April 17, 2009

To the Editor:

I, for one, am quite happy that the Justice Department and the C.I.A. put the
security of America ahead of the comfort of those who would harm us.

Perhaps I'm alive today because they did. I believe that they acted responsibly,
in a very difficult situation. I hope -- and believe -- that President Obama
would do the same.

William Bradford New York, April 17, 2009

To the Editor:

The director of national intelligence, Dennis C. Blair, defends those under
President Bush who justified torture, saying that what they wrote appears
''graphic and disturbing'' only because we are reading it ''on a bright, sunny,
safe day.''

The law does not care whether the sun is shining. Its very purpose is to be a
constant yardstick by which we judge the actions of individuals -- even in times
of great anger, or great fear. Where individual moral compasses failed, the law
stood firm: torture was, is and must always be illegal.

Given all the immediate problems at hand, perhaps the Obama administration is
right not to burn its energy prosecuting torturers, but it certainly should not
defend them.

Paul Cantrell Minneapolis, April 17, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''Report Outlines Involvement of Medical Workers in Abusive C.I.A.
Interrogations'' (news article, April 7):

The ethic of medicine is rooted in the basic idea that society can trust
physicians to ''do no harm.'' If the Central Intelligence Agency's use of health
personnel in torture included physicians, this trust will have been threatened.

The A.M.A.'s Code of Medical Ethics clearly states that physicians must oppose
and must not participate in torture for any reason, because participation in
torture undermines the physician's role as healer. For this reason, the A.M.A.
opposes any direct physician participation in an interrogation.

In addition, physicians must help support victims of torture, strive to prevent
torture, and report any instance of torture and coercive interrogation.

As the nation's largest professional association of physicians, the A.M.A.
stands ready to play a constructive role to ensure that our professional ethic
is upheld and strengthened.

Rebecca J. Patchin  Chicago, April 10, 2009

The writer, a medical doctor, is chairwoman-elect of the board of trustees,
American Medical Association.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING EDEL RODRIGUEZ)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); WRITERS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (70%); CIVIL SERVICES (69%); PSYCHOLOGY (61%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%)

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (53%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); GERMANY (53%)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1061 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torturers' Manifesto

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 989 words


To read the four newly released memos on prisoner interrogation written by
George W. Bush's Justice Department is to take a journey into depravity.

Their language is the precise bureaucratese favored by dungeon masters
throughout history. They detail how to fashion a collar for slamming a prisoner
against a wall, exactly how many days he can be kept without sleep (11), and
what, specifically, he should be told before being locked in a box with an
insect -- all to stop just short of having a jury decide that these acts violate
the laws against torture and abusive treatment of prisoners.

In one of the more nauseating passages, Jay Bybee, then an assistant attorney
general and now a federal judge, wrote admiringly about a contraption for
waterboarding that would lurch a prisoner upright if he stopped breathing while
water was poured over his face. He praised the Central Intelligence Agency for
having doctors ready to perform an emergency tracheotomy if necessary.

These memos are not an honest attempt to set the legal limits on interrogations,
which was the authors' statutory obligation. They were written to provide legal
immunity for acts that are clearly illegal, immoral and a violation of this
country's most basic values.

It sounds like the plot of a mob film, except the lawyers asking how much their
clients can get away with are from the C.I.A. and the lawyers coaching them on
how to commit the abuses are from the Justice Department. And it all played out
with the blessing of the defense secretary, the attorney general, the
intelligence director and, most likely, President Bush and Vice President Dick
Cheney.

The Americans Civil Liberties Union deserves credit for suing for the memos'
release. And President Obama deserves credit for overruling his own C.I.A.
director and ordering that the memos be made public. It is hard to think of
another case in which documents stamped ''Top Secret'' were released with hardly
any deletions.

But this cannot be the end of the scrutiny for these and other decisions by the
Bush administration.

Until Americans and their leaders fully understand the rules the Bush
administration concocted to justify such abuses -- and who set the rules and who
approved them -- there is no hope of fixing a profoundly broken system of
justice and ensuring that that these acts are never repeated.

The abuses and the dangers do not end with the torture memos. Americans still
know far too little about President Bush's decision to illegally eavesdrop on
Americans -- a program that has since been given legal cover by the Congress.

Last week, The Times reported that the nation's intelligence agencies have been
collecting private e-mail messages and phone calls of Americans on a scale that
went beyond the broad limits established in legislation last year. The article
quoted the Justice Department as saying there had been problems in the
surveillance program that had been resolved. But Justice did not say what those
problems were or what the resolution was.

That is the heart of the matter: nobody really knows what any of the rules were.
Mr. Bush never offered the slightest explanation of what he found lacking in the
1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act when he decided to ignore the law
after 9/11 and ordered the warrantless wiretapping of Americans' overseas calls
and e-mail. He said he was president and could do what he wanted.

The Bush administration also never explained how it interpreted laws that were
later passed to expand the government's powers to eavesdrop. And the Obama
administration argued in a recent court filing that everything associated with
electronic eavesdropping, including what is allowed and what is not, is a state
secret.

We do not think Mr. Obama will violate Americans' rights as Mr. Bush did. But if
Americans do not  know the rules, they cannot judge whether this government or
any one that follows is abiding by the rules.

In the case of detainee abuse, Mr. Obama assured C.I.A. operatives that they
would not be prosecuted for actions that their superiors told them were legal.
We have never been comfortable with the ''only following orders'' excuse,
especially because Americans still do not know what was actually done or who was
giving the orders.

After all, as far as Mr. Bush's lawyers were concerned, it was not really
torture unless it involved breaking bones, burning flesh or pulling teeth. That,
Mr. Bybee kept noting, was what the Libyan secret police did to one prisoner.
The standard for American behavior should be a lot higher than that of the
Libyan secret police.

At least Mr. Obama is not following Mr. Bush's example of showy trials for the
small fry -- like Lynndie England of Abu Ghraib notoriety. But he has an
obligation to pursue what is clear evidence of a government policy sanctioning
the torture and abuse of prisoners -- in violation of international law and the
Constitution.

That investigation should start with the lawyers who wrote these sickening
memos, including John Yoo, who now teaches law in California; Steven Bradbury,
who was job-hunting when we last heard; and Mr. Bybee, who holds the lifetime
seat on the federal appeals court that Mr. Bush rewarded him with.

These memos make it clear that Mr. Bybee is unfit for a job that requires legal
judgment and a respect for the Constitution. Congress should impeach him. And if
the administration will not conduct a thorough investigation of these issues,
then Congress has a constitutional duty to hold the executive branch
accountable. If that means putting Donald Rumsfeld and Alberto Gonzales on the
stand, even Dick Cheney, we are sure Americans can handle it.

After eight years without transparency or accountability, Mr. Obama promised the
American people both. His decision to release these memos was another sign of
his commitment to transparency. We are waiting to see an equal commitment to
accountability.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (75%); LEGISLATION (75%); WRITERS (73%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); HISTORY (72%); IMMUNITY (70%); JUDGES (69%); ELECTRONIC MAIL
(60%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (74%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); BARACK OBAMA (71%); DICK CHENEY (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Museum Lets Local Voices Memorialize Distant Death

BYLINE: By SUSAN SAULNY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: SKOKIE, Ill.


Barbara Steiner survived life as a child in the Warsaw ghetto and three Nazi
death camps, emerging against dreadful odds without family or belongings but
with a powerful story to tell. Yet for decades she was quiet about her trauma,
concentrating on a new life raising her children in this placid suburb northwest
of Chicago.

Thirty-two years ago this summer, however, that peace was shattered when a group
of American neo-Nazis threatened to march through the village, a destination
carefully picked for its psychological punch: at the time, Skokie was home to
many thousands of Jews like Ms. Steiner who were Holocaust survivors or their
relatives.

The threatened march put Skokie at the bull's-eye of a national debate about
free speech and democratic ideals. And although the march never materialized
here, it prompted a movement among the death camp survivors that manifested
itself in an urge to speak up and teach the lessons of their lives.

And so they organized a group and got to work.

All those decades of effort came to fruition this weekend in the form of the $45
million Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center, in the very village the
neo-Nazis had hoped to horrify. The museum was shaped by what may be the last
generation of Holocaust survivors to have such influence over their own stories.

''It's a dream come true and more,'' Ms. Steiner said, preparing for the public
opening on Sunday morning, at which former President Bill Clinton was scheduled
to give a keynote address.

''Magnificent is the only word for something so beautiful,'' she said.

The 66,000 square feet of exhibit space asks universal questions about human
rights, as many Holocaust memorials do. But unlike similar institutions, the
Skokie museum is almost totally anchored in the local, brought to life with the
personal pictures, documents, clothing, testimonies and other artifacts of the
building's own neighbors.

And several of the Holocaust survivors are working as docents and other staff
members, weaving their first-person stories into the history, exploring issues
of genocide around the world. They are candid about how their sense of
tranquillity was shattered by the threat of having to encounter the swastika on
Skokie's streets, decades after their desperate escapes from the Nazis.

''The rightful place for this is here, because of the march,'' said Samuel R.
Harris, the president of the museum and learning center, whose parents and
siblings were killed at the Treblinka death camp. ''You must know what fear the
swastika brings to a survivor. The fear is immense, more than you can write. I
felt, what can I do? Very simple solution: education.''

The museum's co-curator, Yitzchak Mais, former director of the Yad Vashem museum
in Jerusalem, explained its significance as filling a largely unexplored niche.

''These are your neighbors from the Midwest,'' Mr. Mais said. ''You'll realize
that you walked on the street with them, shopped with them at the grocery, sat
with them at the movie theater.''

''You've lived with the witnesses,'' he went on. ''It removes the distance. This
didn't happen a thousand miles away. It's about right here, and that's very
clear.''

Long before the group of survivors, officially called the Holocaust Memorial
Foundation of Illinois, had a sparkling new building complete with art galleries
and a children's wing, it did its work out of a modest storefront on Main Street
in a residential neighborhood next to a pub.

Without large donors or the attention of designers and architects, they cobbled
together a modest but poignant exhibit that welcomed busloads of schoolchildren
and anyone else who wanted to hear their stories. There were about 20 or 30
members, Ms. Steiner recalls. (Of that original group, she said, only three are
alive today.)

They worked with little fanfare until an epiphany of sorts. It was time to do
some repairs to the storefront. What if they skipped the repair work and instead
put their energy into fund-raising for a whole new center?

''They began to dream,'' said Richard S. Hirschhaut, the museum's executive
director. ''And this is an organization that had an annual budget at its high
point of $200,000.''

But, as Mr. Hirschhaut said, it was a group known for its ''luck and pluck.''
''They started asking, 'What if we could do more, reach more people? And how do
we do it?' '' he said. ''It was an easy sell for newcomers who have fallen in
love with the survivors, who adore and respect them, to go forward.''

One such relative newcomer to the group was J. B. Pritzker of Chicago, the
philanthropist scion of the Hyatt hotel chain and other investments, who said he
had become enchanted by the survivors, adopting their dream as his own.

Approached to be the capital campaign chairman about 10 years ago, Mr. Pritzker,
the managing partner of a private investment firm, accepted. He brought the
group from having essentially nothing in the bank to where it is today, several
tens of millions of dollars later.

Ms. Steiner, a former bookkeeper at Sears and other department stores, remembers
the planning stages.

''When they were talking about millions, I said, 'Wait! You're talking about
millions! You're kidding, right? How are we able to do that?' '' she recalled
telling Mr. Pritzker in a meeting. ''He said, 'Don't worry, we'll have the
money.' Thank God I was wrong. He was right.''

Mr. Pritzker, leading a pre-opening tour, said, ''The lesson we're trying to
teach is that in small ways in everyday life we can rise and be up-standers.
This is the universal message that the museum is all about.''

Among the people who will be telling their stories at the museum is Aaron
Elster, who moved to Skokie in 1955 by way of New York City. This is where his
nightmares of hiding in a Polish family's attic for two years during the
Holocaust began to subside.

''Like many people, I didn't want to speak about my background,'' said Mr.
Elster, 76, a retired insurance executive. ''I didn't want to be known as a
victim. But while we can, I feel that it's incumbent on every survivor to speak
up.''

So many are already gone.

''I personally believe that their souls are here,'' Mr. Elster said. ''And it
becomes a holy place for people like myself.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Samuel R. Harris, president of a new museum about the Holocaust
in Skokie, Ill. Local residents spent years raising money for it.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
BETH ROONEY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
In 1977, Skokie, home to many Holocaust survivors, drew national attention when
a group of neo-Nazis tried to march there.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Barbara Steiner in 2005 in front a German rail car from the Nazi era. The car
is now a centerpiece of the new museum.(PHOTOGRAPH BY M. SPENCER
GREEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A19)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (91%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); CHILDREN
(78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); EXHIBITIONS (71%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (70%); POLITICAL DEBATES (69%); US PRESIDENTS (64%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (56%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (88%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (72%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1064 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 19, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Feeling Secure Enough to Sin, Baghdad Returns to Its Old Ways

BYLINE: By ROD NORDLAND; Riyadh Mohammed, Suadad al-Salhy and Muhammed al-Obaidi
contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


Vice is making a comeback in this city once famous for 1,001 varieties of it.

Gone, for the most part, are nighttime curfews, religious extremists and
prowling kidnappers. So, inevitably, some people are turning to illicit
pleasures, or at least slightly dubious ones.

Nightclubs have reopened, and in many of them, prostitutes troll for clients.
Liquor stores, once shut down by fundamentalist militiamen, have proliferated;
on one block of busy Saddoun Street, there are more than 10 of them.

Abu Nawas Park, previously deserted for fear of suicide bombers seeking
vulnerable crowds, has now become a place for assignations between young people
so inclined. It is not that there are hiding places in the park, where trees are
pretty sparse; the couples just pretend they cannot be seen, and passers-by go
along with the pretense.

It is a long way from Sodom and Gomorrah, but perhaps part way back to the old
Baghdad. The Baathists who ruled here from the 1960s until the American invasion
in 2003 were secular, and more than a little sinful. Baghdad under Saddam
Hussein was a pretty lively place, with street cafes open until 2 or 3 a.m., and
prostitutes plying their trade even in the bowling alley of Al Rashid Hotel.

''Everything is going back to its natural way,'' said Ahmed Assadee, a
screenwriter who works on a soap opera.

Men gather in cafes to smoke a hookah and gamble on dice and domino games. On
weekends, the Mustansiriya Coffee Shop's back room is crammed with low bleachers
set up around a clandestine cockfighting ring. On one recent day, the 100 or so
spectators were raucous while watching the bloody spectacle, but they placed
their bets discreetly.

Gambling, after all, is illegal.

Walid Brahim, 25, a bomb disposal expert with the Iraqi Army, and his brother
Farat, 20, an electrician, recently sat side by side at a table in the Nights of
Abu Musa bar, on an alley off Saddoun Street, working their way through a bucket
of ice and a bottle of Mr. Chavez Whiskey, an Iraqi-made hooch.

''This is great,'' Walid Brahim said. ''We used to buy alcohol and just drink
secretly in our house.''

The bar is men-only, as pretty much all respectable taverns are, but the
brothers look forward to an even brighter future.

''If this security continues,'' Farat Brahim said, ''within a year all the
waiters will be girls.''

The local police, weary of years of dodging assassins and cleaning up after car
bombings, are blase about a little vice.

''Today we are dealing with more normal things. All the world is facing such
problems,'' said Col. Abdel Jaber Qassim Sadir, assistant police chief in
Karada, a central Baghdad neighborhood.

''Prostitution, this kind of behavior cannot be stopped,'' Colonel Sadir said.
''It's very hard to find it in public; it goes on in secret, isolated places.''

Actually, not so secret. There are a half-dozen night spots in  Karada now where
the entry fee is $50. With $150 a week considered a good wage, customers would
not pay that much merely for the privilege of drinking.

At the Ahalan Wasahalan Club on Al Nidhal Street one recent night, the owner,
Tiba Jamal, was holding court, as she usually does, on the dais at the front of
a room with a mostly empty dance floor and lots of tables.

Ms. Jamal calls herself the Sheikha, or a female sheik, an honorific title she
has apparently  adopted.  She dresses in a head-to-toe, skin-tight black chador,
and she is adorned with several pounds of solid gold bracelets, pendants,
necklaces, earrings and rings, her response to the financial crisis.

The female workers in the nightclub wore rather less clothing, but nothing that
would be considered risque on a street in Europe -- in August. At one point in
the evening they outnumbered the men, as they sat in a big group until being
summoned to one of the men's tables.

''It's nice to see people having fun again,'' Ms. Jamal said.

One regular customer said, ''You can have any of those girls to spend the night
with you later, only $100.'' First, though, patrons are expected to spend a few
hours buying $20 beers or even more costly whiskey.

A young woman who said she was 28 but looked 18 sat smoking, and downing soft
drinks while her ''date'' drank Scotch. A university student, she would give her
name only as Baida, but she was frank about her nighttime profession. Had
something happened to force her into this? ''No,'' she said. ''I go out with men
so I can get money.'' To support her family? She seemed stunned by the question.
''No, for myself.''

One police detective said he would not dream of enforcing the law against
prostitutes. ''They're the best sources we have,'' said the detective, whose
name is being withheld for his safety. ''They know everything about JAM and Al
Qaeda members,'' he said, using the acronym for Jaish al-Mahdi or Mahdi Army, a
Shiite militia.

The detective added that the only problem his men had was that neighbors got the
wrong idea when detectives visited the houses where prostitutes were known to
live. They really do just want to talk, he said.

''If I had my way, I'd destroy all the mosques and spread the whores around a
little more,'' the detective said. ''At least they're not sectarian.''

Others are uncomfortable with the prostitutes' presence.

''It is terrible to see prostitution increased like this,'' said Hanaa Edwar,
secretary general of the Iraqi human rights group Al-Amal. ''These are women
from displaced families, poor people, people who have to sell themselves to get
money for their families and children.''

She was incensed after she raised the subject before the Iraqi Parliament.
''They were shocked and didn't agree to open discussion on this issue,'' she
said. The shock, she said, was that she dared to mention the problem.

Al Amal commissioned a report last year that surveyed prostitutes working on the
streets in Baghdad. One was a 15-year-old girl who had been thrown out of school
for dressing inappropriately, then took to prostitution, the report said.
Another was an 18-year-old forced to become the second wife of an older man; she
ran away and had no other way to support herself. One girl was 12.

Certainly, vice often has an ugly side. During a recent undercover operation in
Karada aimed at a human trafficking ring, a pimp offered a plainclothes officer
an opportunity to buy a young woman to take to Syria, according to a detective,
who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss
the sting.

Drug abuse, at least, is one problem that has not shown up much, or has stayed
well underground, the police say. ''The only problems we see are some illegal
pills occasionally,'' Colonel Sadir said.

Not surprisingly, the Baghdadis' drug of choice is Valium, the colonel said.

Most people have had enough excitement these past six years just staying home.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: An underground cockfighting den in Baghdad, where illegal
gambling is common
below, one of the city's new nightclubs.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JEHAD NGA FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)(A1)
A reopened liquor store in Baghdad. The stores were tolerated by Saddam Hussein
but shut by militiamen after his ouster.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPH BANGERT FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)
 Tiba Jamal, the owner of a nightclub, said of the recent changes in Baghdad,
''It's nice to see people having fun again.''(PHOTOGRAPH BY JEHAD NGA FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); RESTAURANTS
(89%); PROSTITUTION (89%); CURFEW (89%); RELIGION (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); DRINKING PLACES (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); BEER WINE & LIQUOR STORES (76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (75%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (71%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); BOWLING (66%);
BOWLING CENTERS (66%); MEN (65%); ARMIES (52%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (67%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (96%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1065 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2009 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Calls Israel Racist At Meeting In Geneva

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR; Nick Cumming-Bruce contributed reporting from
Geneva, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1012 words


President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran on Monday used the platform of a United
Nations conference  in Geneva on combating racism to disparage Israel as a
''cruel and repressive racist regime,'' prompting delegates from European
nations to desert the hall and earning a rare harsh rebuke from Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon.

As Mr. Ahmadinejad began to speak, two protesters wearing rainbow-hued clown
wigs -- their statement on the tenor of the proceedings -- pelted him with red
foam noses. Hustled out the door by security agents, they were soon followed by
lines of stony-faced diplomats from the 23 European nations attending the
conference. They walked out to the sound of some other delegates applauding Mr.
Ahmadinejad.

The United States and more than a half-dozen other nations had already boycotted
the gathering out of concern that it would focus on maligning Israel rather than
on the global problems of discrimination, replaying the disputes that marked the
first United Nations conference on combating racism in Durban, South Africa, in
2001.

Years of negotiations intended to avoid just such a scenario failed,
underscoring the uneasy gap that exists between the rest of the world and the
West when it comes to certain issues,  like whether Israel's treatment of the
Palestinians under occupation belongs at a forum on discrimination and
xenophobia.

The speech and the reaction are also likely to complicate but not necessarily
derail recent attempts between the West and Iran to forge new negotiations over
the Islamic Republic's nuclear development program.

Member states, who wrangled for months over the draft document for the Geneva
conference, had ultimately removed controversial statements about Israel; about
what constitutes defamation of religion,  a position pushed by Muslim states;
and about compensation for slavery.

But a reference in the draft document that endorsed the communique that emerged
from the contentious Durban meeting -- where the United States and Israel walked
out -- set off the boycott. Besides the United States, the countries staying
away included Germany, Italy, Poland, the Netherlands, New Zealand and
Australia. Canada and Israel announced months ago that they would not attend.

Mr. Ahmadinejad, who seems to take visible delight in his diatribes against
Israel and denying events like the Holocaust because it so irks Iran's
opponents, brought the contention roaring back to the fore. He was the only head
of state to attend.

''Following World War II they resorted to military aggressions to make an entire
nation homeless under the pretext of  Jewish  suffering,'' Mr. Ahmadinejad said,
grinning as he spoke, his remarks coincidentally falling on the day that Jewish
communities mark the Holocaust. ''And they sent migrants from Europe, the United
States and other parts of the world in order to establish a totally racist
government in occupied Palestine.''

Portraying Israel as a regional boogeyman has been a cornerstone of Iran's 1979
revolution, although Mr. Ahmadinejad, facing a presidential election in June, is
often criticized at home for spending too much time on Palestinian issues and
not enough fixing the economic woes of Iranians.

The speech prompted the normally mild-mannered Mr. Ban and other top United
Nations officials to voice uncommon criticism of the leader of a member state.
''I have not experienced this kind of destructive proceedings in an assembly, in
a conference, by any one member state,'' Mr. Ban said.

''I deplore the use of this platform by the Iranian president to accuse, divide
and even incite,'' he said, urging members to ''turn away from such a message in
both form and substance.''

Mr. Ban also criticized members of nongovernmental organizations for heckling
Mr. Ahmadinejad.

Navi Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, criticized
Mr. Ahmadinejad for ''grandstanding'' from a United Nations dais and said  his
performance should not be an excuse to derail the important topic of the
conference.

She also made a not-so-subtle dig at Iran's treatment of its own minorities,
after noting that the president's remarks were outside the scope of the
conference. ''This is what I would have expected the president of Iran to come
and tell us: how he is addressing racial discrimination and intolerance in his
country,'' Ms. Pillay said.

Mr. Ahmadinejad's speech prompted a chorus of condemnation. Israel recalled its
ambassador to Switzerland to protest both the conference and meeting Sunday
between the Swiss president, Hans-Rudolf Merz, and Mr. Ahmadinejad.

At the United Nations, Ambassador Alejandro D. Wolff, the deputy permanent
representative for the United States, said the Iranians deserved better.

''It shows disregard for the organization to which he is speaking -- the United
Nations -- and does a grave injustice to the Iranian nation and the Iranian
people,'' he said, suggesting that Iranian leaders show ''much more measured,
moderate, honest and constructive rhetoric when dealing with issues in the
region.''

Not everyone at the conference was critical of the speech, which also wandered
through topics like the economic collapse and Iraq and Afghanistan.

''If we actually believe in freedom of expression, then he has the right to say
what he wants to say,'' the Pakistani ambassador to the United Nations in
Geneva, Zamir Akram, told The Associated Press. ''There were things in there
that a lot of people in the Muslim world would be in agreement with, for example
the situation in Palestine, in Iraq and in Afghanistan, even if they don't agree
with the way he said it.''

Those who supported the Obama administration's attending the conference said
their attitude was not altered by Mr. Ahmadinejad's remarks. ''It is unfortunate
that the inappropriate and out-of-line remarks of Ahmadinejad would obscure the
only international forum to address racism, racial discrimination and
xenophobia,'' Representative Barbara Lee, Democrat of California, said in a
statement by the Congressional Black Caucus.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 22, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Tuesday about a speech that disparaged Israel, made by
the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, at a United Nations conference on
racism in Geneva, quoted incorrectly in some editions from his comment about the
creation of Israel. He said, ''Following World War II they resorted to military
aggressions to make an entire nation homeless under the pretext of Jewish
suffering.'' He did not say ''under the pretext of Nazi suffering.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Diplomats from 23 European nations left a conference in Geneva
on Monday during President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's address.(PHOTOGRAPH BY LAURENT
GILLIERON/KEYSTONE, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (91%); RACE &
RACISM (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE
(89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); BOYCOTTS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); RELIGION (69%); WORLD WAR II (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (91%); BAN KI-MOON (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); SWITZERLAND (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND (92%); NEW ZEALAND (79%); CANADA (79%); AUSTRALIA (79%);
SOUTH AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (73%); GERMANY (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

My Tortured Decision

BYLINE: By ALI SOUFAN.

Ali Soufan was an F.B.I. supervisory special agent from 1997 to 2005.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 861 words


FOR seven years I have remained silent about the false claims magnifying the
effectiveness of the so-called enhanced interrogation techniques like
waterboarding. I have spoken only in closed government hearings, as these
matters were classified. But the release last week of four Justice Department
memos on interrogations allows me to shed light on the story, and on some of the
lessons to be learned.

One of the most striking parts of the memos is the false premises on which they
are based. The first, dated August 2002, grants authorization to use harsh
interrogation techniques on a high-ranking terrorist, Abu Zubaydah, on the
grounds that previous methods hadn't been working. The next three memos cite the
successes of those methods as a justification for their continued use.

It is inaccurate, however, to say that Abu Zubaydah had been uncooperative.
Along with another F.B.I. agent, and with several C.I.A. officers present, I
questioned him from March to June 2002, before the harsh techniques were
introduced later in August. Under traditional interrogation methods, he provided
us with important actionable intelligence.

We discovered, for example, that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed was the mastermind of
the 9/11 attacks. Abu Zubaydah also told us about Jose Padilla, the so-called
dirty bomber. This experience fit what I had found throughout my
counterterrorism career: traditional interrogation techniques are successful in
identifying operatives, uncovering plots and saving lives.

There was no actionable intelligence gained from using enhanced interrogation
techniques on Abu Zubaydah that wasn't, or couldn't have been, gained from
regular tactics. In addition, I saw that using these alternative methods on
other terrorists backfired on more than a few occasions -- all of which are
still classified. The short sightedness behind the use of these techniques
ignored the unreliability of the methods, the nature of the threat, the
mentality and modus operandi of the terrorists, and due process.

Defenders of these techniques have claimed that they got Abu Zubaydah to give up
information leading to the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh, a top aide to Khalid
Shaikh Mohammed, and Mr. Padilla. This is false. The information that led to Mr.
Shibh's capture came primarily from a different terrorist operative who was
interviewed using traditional methods. As for Mr. Padilla, the dates just don't
add up: the harsh techniques were approved in the memo of August 2002, Mr.
Padilla had been arrested that May.

One of the worst consequences of the use of these harsh techniques was that it
reintroduced the so-called Chinese wall between the C.I.A. and F.B.I., similar
to the communications obstacles that prevented us from working together to stop
the 9/11 attacks. Because the bureau would not employ these problematic
techniques, our agents who knew the most about the terrorists could have no part
in the investigation. An F.B.I. colleague of mine who knew more about Khalid
Shaikh Mohammed than anyone in the government was not allowed to speak to him.

It was the right decision to release these memos, as we need the truth to come
out. This should not be a partisan matter, because it is in our national
security interest to regain our position as the world's foremost defenders of
human rights. Just as important, releasing these memos enables us to begin the
tricky process of finally bringing these terrorists to justice.

The debate after the release of these memos has centered on whether C.I.A.
officials should be prosecuted for their role in harsh interrogation techniques.
That would be a mistake. Almost all the agency officials I worked with on these
issues were good people who felt as I did about the use of enhanced techniques:
it is un-American, ineffective and harmful to our national security.

Fortunately for me, after I objected to the enhanced techniques, the message
came through from Pat D'Amuro, an F.B.I. assistant director, that ''we don't do
that,'' and I was pulled out of the interrogations by the F.B.I. director,
Robert Mueller (this was documented in the report released last year by the
Justice Department's inspector general).

My C.I.A. colleagues who balked at the techniques, on the other hand, were
instructed to continue. (It's worth noting that when reading between the lines
of the newly released memos, it seems clear that it was contractors, not C.I.A.
officers, who requested the use of these techniques.)

As we move forward, it's important to not allow the torture issue to harm the
reputation, and thus the effectiveness, of the C.I.A. The agency is essential to
our national security. We must ensure that the mistakes behind the use of these
techniques are never repeated. We're making a good start: President Obama has
limited interrogation techniques to the guidelines set in the Army Field Manual,
and Leon Panetta, the C.I.A. director, says he has banned the use of contractors
and secret overseas prisons for terrorism suspects (the so-called black sites).
Just as important, we need to ensure that no new mistakes are made in the
process of moving forward -- a real danger right now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY WESLEY BEDROSIAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); APPROVALS (72%); DIRTY BOMBS
(70%); ARRESTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1080 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Iraq Trip, Clinton Reassures a Nation Still Jittery After Recent Suicide
Attacks

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER; Nazila Fathi contributed reporting from Tehran.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived unannounced here on Saturday
to reassure Iraqis that the United States will support them, even as it
withdraws combat troops. But with Iraq reeling from a wave of suicide bombings,
she got a jittery reception from a country that still plainly relies on the
United States for security, stability and economic survival.

In an encounter with Iraqi students, journalists and activists, she was peppered
with questions about how the United States could help Iraq in ways large and
small -- from restoring confidence in the Iraqi armed forces to supplying
farmers with more up-to-date machinery.

Mrs. Clinton, making her first visit to Baghdad as secretary of state, promised
to help. But, she told the audience of 120, there were some things Iraq had to
do for itself.

''The more united Iraq is, the more you will trust the security services,'' she
said in response to a question from a young Iraqi journalist. ''The security
services have to earn your trust, but the people have to demand it.''

Mrs. Clinton insisted that last week's suicide bombings, which killed 160 people
and wounded hundreds more, did not mean that Iraq was slipping back into the
sectarian violence that convulsed it two years ago.

At her first stop here, Mrs. Clinton received a security briefing from the
American commander in Iraq, Gen. Ray Odierno. ''His view is my view,'' she said,
''that these are tragic and terrible events, but they do not reflect any
diversion from the security progress that has been made.''

Appearing alongside Mrs. Clinton, Iraq's foreign minister, Hoshyar Zebari, said
the attacks would not ''derail the government's determination to pursue plans to
stabilize the country.''

Mrs. Clinton, who had flown in from Kuwait on a military transport plane, was
greeted by Mr. Zebari; the new American ambassador to Iraq, Christopher R. Hill;
and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen. She was driven
into the city in a heavily armed motorcade, though she did not wear an armored
vest over her bright rose-colored jacket.

Earlier, Mrs. Clinton described the violence as a last gasp. The attacks, she
said, are ''in an unfortunately tragic way, a signal that the rejectionists fear
that Iraq is going in the right direction.''

Mrs. Clinton, who came to Iraq three times as a senator, said she was pleased to
be back, but the attacks cast a shadow over her visit.

While the violence is far below the worst levels in 2006, 18 major attacks this
month have kindled fears that Baathist jihadist elements could be reconstituting
themselves into a smaller, but still deadly, insurgency that will exploit the
withdrawal of American troops between now and 2011.

Mrs. Clinton compared these suicide bombings to a  terrorist attack that
occurred several months after the Good Friday peace accord ended years of
conflict in Northern Ireland.

At times, her analysis echoed that of former Vice President Dick Cheney and
former Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. Mr. Cheney spoke of the insurgency
being in its ''last throes'' during a period of extreme violence; Mr. Rumsfeld
talked of ''dead-enders'' who kept fighting a lost cause.

Mr. Zebari said that Islamic militants came to Iraq from several Persian Gulf
and North African countries. Iraqi forces, he added, were coordinating efforts
with the United States so that when American troops departed, there would not be
a dangerous vacuum.

At least half the dead from the recent bombings were Iranian pilgrims, and on
Saturday, Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, blamed
American troops for the killings.

''They have occupied an Islamic country claiming that they want to fight
terrorism while tens of thousands of people are being killed and insecurity is
on the rise,'' the ISNA news agency quoted him as saying.

Mrs. Clinton brushed aside the charge, saying the attacks were ''clearly traced
to the Al Qaeda remnants and other violent groups.'' Mr. Zebari also dismissed
American involvement, though he expressed condolences to the families of the
pilgrims, whom he described as ''soft targets,'' and he pledged to improve
security.

The violence did not curtail Mrs. Clinton's crowded schedule during her 14-hour
visit. In addition to official meetings, she played host at a round table of
Iraqi women -- something she had done in previous trips to Iraq. She roamed the
stage at the town-hall-style event.

This is a format that Mrs. Clinton mastered as a presidential candidate, and
that, as secretary of state, she has used from South Korea to Belgium. But the
audience in Baghdad seemed less dazzled by her celebrity than in those
countries, and more worried about the American commitment.

Among those questioning Mrs. Clinton was a human rights activist who asked
whether the Obama administration, consumed by the economic crisis, had put Iraq
on the back burner.

''Let me assure you, and repeat what President Obama said,'' she replied. ''We
are committed to Iraq; we want to see a stable, sovereign, self-reliant Iraq.''
But, she added, there is a transition under way.

Mr. Hill, the new ambassador, beat Mrs. Clinton to Baghdad by one day.

In Iraq, Mr. Hill will lead the shift in emphasis by the United States from
military to civilian operations. Judging by the questions Mrs. Clinton received,
he will be busy. When time at the meeting ran out on Saturday, she offered to
listen to the pleas of Iraqis again on her next trip.

''Is that a promise?'' an Iraqi woman in the audience shouted. ''That's a
promise,'' Mrs. Clinton replied.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUICIDE BOMBINGS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(79%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); VEHICLE & BODY
ARMOR (73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (70%)

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (53%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (53%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (53%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (91%); RAY ODIERNO (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); KUWAIT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1083 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Surveillance Effort Draws Civil Liberties Concern

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


A growing number of big-city police departments and other law enforcement
agencies across the country are embracing a new system to report suspicious
activities that officials say could uncover terrorism plots but that civil
liberties groups contend might violate individual rights.

Here and in nearly a dozen other cities, including Boston, Chicago and Miami,
officers  are filling out terror tip sheets if they run across activities in
their routines that seem out of place, like someone buying police or firefighter
uniforms, taking pictures of a power plant or espousing extremist views.

Ultimately, state and federal officials intend to have a nationwide reporting
system in place by 2014, using a standardized system of codes for suspicious
behaviors. It is the most ambitious effort since the Sept. 11 attacks to put in
place a network of databases to comb for clues that might foretell acts of
terrorism.

But the American Civil Liberties Union and other rights groups warn that the
program pioneered by the Los Angeles Police Department raises serious privacy
and civil liberties concerns.

''The behaviors identified by L.A.P.D. are so commonplace and ordinary that the
monitoring or reporting of them is scarcely any less absurd,'' the A.C.L.U. said
in a report last July.

''This overbroad reporting authority,'' the report adds, ''gives law enforcement
officers justification to harass practically anyone they choose, to collect
personal information and to pass such information along to the intelligence
community.''

Muslim-American groups here also view the program with suspicion, especially
after the police department's counterterrorism and criminal intelligence bureau
proposed in November 2007 to create a map detailing the Muslim communities in
the city, ostensibly as a step toward thwarting radicalization. Muslim leaders
said the idea amounted to racial or religious profiling, and it was dropped.

Cmdr. Joan T. McNamara, assistant commander of the counterterrorism bureau, said
her department was vetting information from the some 1,500 reports so far in the
year-old program. Commander McNamara said in an interview that police officers,
intelligence analysts and top commanders were training in what kind of
suspicious behavior to look for, based on a 65-item checklist that she and her
staff created, as well as in privacy and civil liberties issues.

The Los Angeles program has not foiled any terrorism plots, said Commander
McNamara and Lt. Robert Fox, who runs the department's suspicious reporting
program. But they said 67 of the reports had been referred to the local Joint
Terrorism Task Force, headed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

About 20 reports have led to arrests in cases involving explosives, weapons,
bomb threats and organized crime, they said, but they declined to give details
because the cases are under investigation.

''We're able to connect the dots like we were never able to before,'' said
Commander McNamara, a 26-year veteran and highly decorated former narcotics
officer.

The approach is based on experience showing that terrorists typically surveil
their targets before an attack, conducting dry runs of their operations to note
guard schedules, to gauge how emergency personnel react to false alarms or
abandoned packages and to seek out security weaknesses.

Some programs are in their infancy, but senior police officers in other cities
said a searchable network of standardized databases could help with reporting
and analyzing suspicious behavior possibly linked to terrorism that might
previously have fallen through the cracks.

''This is the piece of the whole puzzle that's been missing,'' said Earl O.
Perkins, a deputy superintendent with the Boston Police Department who oversees
its intelligence center.

Mr. Perkins said that his department had not detected any terror plots in the
nine months the program had been operating but that it had led to arrests
involving credit-card fraud and identify theft, crimes associated with terrorism
cells in the past.

A branch of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence is sponsoring
the national pilot program that in addition to Boston and Los Angeles includes
police departments in Chicago, Houston, Las Vegas, Miami, Phoenix, Seattle and
Washington, as well as state intelligence fusion centers in Florida, New York
and Virginia. Nearly two dozen other cities have expressed interest.

The New York City Police Department has an extensive reporting system that works
closely with the F.B.I., said Paul J. Browne, a department spokesman.

After issuing the report critical of the Los Angeles program, A.C.L.U. lawyers
have met in recent months with police and federal officials to try to work out
tougher safeguards on vetting information that goes into the reports, police
training and privacy and civil liberties protections.

''Our concern lies with the investigation of noncriminal, ordinary activity,''
said Peter Bibring, a staff lawyer with the A.C.L.U. of Southern California, who
met recently with Los Angeles police officials. ''It remains to be seen how much
of my feedback they take.''

Civil liberties advocates praise the transparency of the police efforts in Los
Angeles and a few other cities. But they also cite problems in places where
police or other law enforcement officials have overreached -- examples they say
will multiply if the program to report suspicious activity expands.

In September 2007, a 24-year-old Muslim-American journalism student at Syracuse
University was stopped by a Veterans Affairs police officer in New York for
taking photographs of flags in front of a V.A. building as part of a class
assignment. The student was taken into an office for questioning, and the images
were deleted from her camera before she was released.

Also that year, a 54-year-old artist and fine arts professor at the University
of Washington was stopped by Washington State police for taking photographs of
electrical power lines as part of an art project. The professor was searched,
handcuffed and placed in the back of a police car for almost half an hour before
being released.

Police officials acknowledge that problems need to be worked out.

''We want police officers to be aware of criminal activities with nexus to
terrorism, but we don't want them stopping everyone who takes a picture of the
Golden Gate Bridge,'' said Tom Frazier, a former Baltimore police commissioner
who is executive director of the Major Cities Chiefs Association, which
represents the nation's 56 largest police departments.

In Los Angeles, Deputy Chief Michael P. Downing, head of the police
counterterrorism bureau, said the program should give law enforcement officials
more warning to help avert an attack.

''We should be able to see something coming, harden the target and deploy
resources to it,'' Chief Downing said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Lt. Rick Smith commands the Los Angeles police bomb squad,
which works with the department's counterterrorism bureau.
 Cmdr. Joan T. McNamara, left, of the Los Angeles counterterrorism bureau and
Lieutenant Smith, right, and a bomb squad robot.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MONICA
ALMEIDA/THE NEW YORK TIMES) CHART: Just Taking Pictures? Tell It to the Judge:
Out of concern about terrorism, the Los Angeles Police Department has created a
list of 65 potentially suspicious activities. Among them. (Source: Los Angeles
Police Department)(pg. A15)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); CITY LIFE
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%); ORGANIZED CRIME (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%);
BOMBINGS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%); INTERVIEWS (67%); RELIGION (64%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1085 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 1, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Plea Agreement Reached With Agent for Al Qaeda

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 631 words


During the nearly six years that Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri spent in isolation in
a Navy brig as the last enemy combatant held on United States soil, he denied
the government's charges that he was a sleeper agent for Al Qaeda, his lawyers
said. But on Thursday, in a federal courtroom in Peoria, Ill., that denial fell
apart when Mr. Marri reached a deal with the government to plead guilty to
conspiracy to provide material support to Al Qaeda.

In the 20-page plea agreement -- which substantially reduced the possible prison
sentence against him -- Mr. Marri admitted having attended terrorist training
camps from 1998 to 2001 and taking courses in the ''use of various weapons and
basic operational security tradecraft.''

He admitted meeting with Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who was at the time the
external operations chief for the Qaeda organization, and ''offered his
services.'' Mr. Mohammed, according to the agreement, told Mr. Marri ''to enter
the United States no later than Sept. 10, 2001'' and await further instructions.

Mr. Marri, a native of Qatar, and his family did arrive in the United States on
Sept. 10, and he enrolled at Bradley University in Peoria, which he had attended
on an earlier stay in the United States. While there, he admitted, he
''researched online information related to various cyanide compounds'' and
communicated in code with Qaeda operatives; investigators found an almanac with
bookmarked pages showing dams, waterways and tunnels in the United States.

Mr. Marri was initially indicted this year on two counts related to providing
material support and resources to a terrorist organization, each of which
carries a maximum 15-year sentence; the plea to a single count means that his
sentence could be cut in half, after which he could be deported to Qatar.

In a statement issued after the plea, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said,
''Without a doubt, this case is a grim reminder of the seriousness of the threat
we as a nation still face.''

Mr. Holder also took the opportunity, however, to distinguish the criminal
proceeding from the indefinite detention under which Mr. Marri, 43, had been
held without charges as an ''enemy combatant'' during the Bush administration,
when he was kept in solitary confinement in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., for
nearly six years. That detention had been challenged by the American Civil
Liberties Union.

The switch to criminal court and the agreement, Mr. Holder said, ''reflects what
we can achieve when we have faith in our criminal justice system and are
unwavering in our commitment to the values upon which the nation was founded and
the rule of law.''

Lawrence S. Lustberg, who served on Mr. Marri's criminal defense team, said that
his client pleaded guilty ''because he wanted to go home,'' and that a jury
trial would have exposed him to the  emotions of jurors and the possibility of a
30-year sentence.

Some of the time served by Mr. Marri since his arrest in December 2001 could be
subtracted from the sentence, particularly the 18 months he served in prison
after his initial arrest. Whether the years in detention will also be considered
is up to Judge Michael M. Mihm of Federal District Court, who has presided over
the case. Sentencing is scheduled for July 30.

Several rounds of plea negotiations have occurred since Mr. Marri's initial
appearance in federal court in Peoria in March. A person familiar with the
negotiations said that those negotiations had come close to agreement, but that
Mr. Holder rejected the earlier tentative agreements because they did not hold
Mr. Marri to at least a 15-year sentence.

Talks on Thursday went down to the wire, and Judge Mihm delayed the beginning of
the hearing from 1 p.m. until 3 p.m. to allow the talks to come to fruition.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); PLEA
AGREEMENTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); PRISONS (89%); SENTENCING (89%);
CRIMINAL LAW (89%); GUILTY PLEAS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); LAWYERS
(77%); INDICTMENTS (77%); RULE OF LAW (77%); CONSPIRACY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); DEPORTATION (67%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(62%); CYANIDES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); BRADLEY UNIVERSITY (55%)

PERSON: ERIC HOLDER (77%)

CITY: PEORIA, IL, USA (88%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (92%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); QATAR (70%)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1089 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 2, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Says It Killed 50 Taliban in a Clash, but Residents Say Civilians Died

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: PULO DAND, Pakistan


The Pakistani military said it had killed more than 50 Taliban fighters in tough
fighting in Buner on Friday, but families pouring out of the district said
civilians were being killed, too.

''People were asked not to leave their houses,'' said Abdul Bakht, 40, a farmer
from Ambela, who had fled here to the south. ''But the problem is they have not
fired on a single Talib yet. All they are doing is hitting the houses.''

He and other civilians caught in the operation, just in its fourth day, were
already complaining of heavy-handed tactics by the Pakistani military, which has
little training in counterinsurgency.

A military spokesman claimed steady progress in the operation but also said the
militants were putting up fierce resistance.

The civilian complaints and the Taliban resistance pointed to the difficult task
ahead for the military in driving the militants from Buner, a district just 60
miles from the capital, where hundreds of Taliban fighters advanced last week,
setting off alarm here and abroad.

Trying to revive a peace accord with the Taliban from February, government
officials restarted talks with Maulana Sufi Muhammad, the religious cleric who
helped mediate the deal.

The provincial government said it was committed to appointing Islamic judges as
part of the deal covering the Swat Valley and Buner. Maulana Muhammad, despite
his protest at the military operation, promised the militants would lay down
their weapons once Islamic law was in force.

But in what is clearly a two-pronged approach by the Pakistani authorities,
military operations also intensified.

The military spokesman, Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas, said forces had succeeded in
opening up access from the west to Buner's central town of Daggar and were close
to linking up from the south after heavy fighting at the Ambela Pass.

At least 55 militants had been killed in fighting in the previous 24 hours,
bringing the total killed so far to more than 100, he said. Two members of the
paramilitary Frontier Corps were killed and eight wounded in a house rigged with
explosives, he said.

Militants were using antiaircraft weapons mounted on cars and recoilless rifles,
and army helicopters had focused attacks on militants in cars and motorcycles on
the roads.

Yet accounts from people fleeing the region said that civilians were being
caught up in the fighting in Ambela and on the roads. Taliban militants had
strong positions in the hills and could still resist the military advance, they
said.

Villagers traveled on foot and along country roads to reach this village in the
neighboring district of Swabi on Friday, their belongings piled on small vans
with women and children, and even cows, packed together inside.

Officials from Al Khidmat Foundation, a religious humanitarian organization
assisting the families, said more than a thousand vehicles had ferried families
out in just one day.

In one house that was hit, two children died, a woman lost both legs, and a man
was so seriously wounded that the family had already dug his grave and were
waiting for him to die, Mr. Bakht, the farmer, said.

Three men, who tried to drive toward the military to ask them to stop firing on
the houses, were also killed when a helicopter fired rockets on their car, Mr.
Bakht said. A fourth man was wounded.

Two of those killed were government school examiners from the nearby Swat Valley
who were in Buner to conduct school examinations when the operation started. One
of the dead men was a friend of Mr. Bakht's.

''Instead of stopping the bombardment, they fired on the car,'' he said. ''There
is still a curfew and their bodies are still there on the road.''

A laborer, Hakim Noor, said, ''We thought if they can bring peace we are happy
with the army but now it seems they are hitting houses.'' He who left his
village Kowgah two days ago.

His uncle Jamal Noor, who escaped the village on Friday, said there was shooting
in the upper part of the village and helicopters were firing rockets at the
houses. Helicopters were also landing in the hills behind where the Taliban had
positions.

''Now they will increasingly hit the villages as now they think they are empty
and the Taliban will come down into them,'' Mr. Noor said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: MAP: The military operation in Buner is in its fourth day. Map details
Buner, Pakistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMIES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (71%); MOTOR VEHICLES (65%);
ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS (64%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (52%); HELICOPTERS (50%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1100 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gay Marriage and Our Leaders

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 752 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Gay Issues in View, Obama Is Pressed to Engage'' (White House Memo, front
page, May 7):

It is deeply troubling that President Obama -- whose parents could not wed in
many states -- supports the special exclusion of gay and lesbian couples from
equal marriage rights. Surely his parents must have spoken of the difficulties
of being treated as ''less than'' by society? How can he fail to see the
parallel between that racial wrong and this one?

In proposing to work for gay partner rights without marriage, he is advocating
what was called for people of color ''separate but equal,'' which, as we know,
was anything but equal.

I hope President Obama will soon recognize the injustice of denying gay and
lesbian couples the fundamental civil right of marriage. Religious beliefs are
no more a legitimate excuse for continuing marriage segregation than they are
for denying racial equality.

It is intolerable that a class of citizens be legally treated as second-class
citizens under federal and state laws -- discriminated against for the
fundamental right to marry, with its associated implications for social
acceptance, spousal health care, inheritance rights and a host of other legal
protections for lawfully married couples.

Ken O'Neill New York, May 7, 2009

The writer is the author of the forthcoming novel ''The Marrying Kind.''

To the Editor:

Barack Obama flatters himself that he is a ''fierce advocate of equality'' for
gay and lesbian Americans. Yet the facts don't match the rhetoric.

President Obama is opposed to gays and lesbians' enjoying the same right to
legally marry that straight Americans take for granted, even though this right
is undeniably a basic civil and human right.

He let the first 100 days of his presidency pass without lifting a finger to end
''don't ask, don't tell'' or to push Congress to pass the Employment
Nondiscrimination Act. And he plainly has played down whatever support he has
for gay rights of any kind, lest his advocacy interfere with his appeal to those
voters who oppose equal rights for their gay neighbors.

A president who, as your headline acknowledges, must be ''pressed to engage''
efforts to end discrimination and inequality against a community can hardly be
described as that community's friend, much less its ''fierce advocate.''

David B. Goroff  Wilmette, Ill., May 7, 2009

To the Editor:

Your White House Memo said President Obama, a self-described ''fierce advocate
of equality,'' has been noticeably silent on the recent affirmations of marriage
equality in Iowa and Maine. It seems once again that ''equality'' is most often
advocated by Democrats, with regard to gay issues, in a glittering but rarely
specific way.

The reality is that equality is like pregnancy: either you are, or you aren't.
There are no gradations. Anyone, especially an expert on the Constitution, who
tries to parse ''equality'' is guilty of bad faith, if not outright fear.

Does the president lack the courage of his convictions, or does he have neither?
Supporting ''the supreme law of the land'' should not be made so laborious.

Dennis Winstead Silver Spring, Md., May 7, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''Maine Governor Signs Same-Sex Marriage Bill as Opponents Plan a 'Veto' ''
(news article, May 7) and '' 'This Is a Question of Fairness' '' (editorial, May
8):

We may have quietly reached a tipping point on Wednesday, with Gov. John
Baldacci's signing of the Maine same-sex marriage bill. In recent years, we have
seen one leader after another take an equivocal stance on this issue, for the
sake of political safety.

Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger of California, and even progressive leaders like
President Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton, have all publicly erred on the
conservative side rather than voicing the full support of marriage equality that
one suspects they personally embrace.

On Wednesday, we saw a leader move in the opposite direction, from equivocation
to full support. He was clearly moved by a personal commitment to liberty, which
he stated so directly at the signing. But he must have also perceived a
political and cultural momentum that supports, or even demands, that he act in
accordance with that personal commitment.

In order for politicians to enact laws that expand freedom, they must themselves
feel the political freedom to take bold action. Governor Baldacci evidently felt
that freedom, and I expect we will soon see that many other leaders feel it,
too.

Ron Meyers  New York, May 8, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JASON LOGAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARRIAGE (93%); GAYS & LESBIANS (93%); COHABITATION (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); LGBT RIGHTS (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); DOMESTIC
PARTNERSHIPS (78%); WRITERS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100
DAYS (78%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (76%); RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (75%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (65%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (59%); RELIGION (53%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1102 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

An Imprisoned Sri Lankan Journalist

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

In ''Sri Lanka's Dirty War'' (editorial, April 30), you point out that the Sri
Lankan government has barred journalists from the war zone since last year. Sri
Lankan journalists face other challenges as well.

The Sri Lankan government has created a climate of fear, through killings,
harassment and threats, to silence journalists and other critical voices. The
journalist J. S. Tissainayagam, for example, could have told the world what is
happening in Sri Lanka now. But he has been imprisoned for more than a year now,
and is considered a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.

Last August, he was indicted under terrorism legislation for having published
two articles in a monthly magazine in 2006 criticizing the government's military
offensive against the opposition Tamil Tigers. He remains in prison while his
trial is continuing.

The Sri Lanka government must respect the right to freedom of expression. J. S.
Tissainayagam should be released immediately and the charges against him
dropped.

Jim McDonald Sri Lanka Country Specialist Amnesty International USA Chicago, May
1, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (88%); INDICTMENTS (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (68%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(67%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (66%); TERRORISM (53%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(56%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1109 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Henry T. King Jr., 89, Prosecutor at Nuremberg

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 914 words


Henry T. King Jr., one of the last Nuremberg war crimes prosecutors and an
influential voice since World War II in international efforts to bring war
criminals to justice, died Saturday at his home in Cleveland. He was 89.

The cause was cancer, said his son, Dave.

Mr. King was ''one of a handful of uniquely credible veterans in his field, one
of the last voices of Nuremberg,'' John Q. Barrett, a law professor at St.
John's University and an expert on the trials, said Monday. ''He influenced
students and lecture audiences, international diplomats and even heads of
state.''

''Nuremberg left a lifelong imprint on Henry King,'' Professor Barrett
continued, ''and through the next 60 years of his life, he spoke and wrote
constantly about the value that came out of Nuremberg.''

Mr. King, along with Whitney Harris and Benjamin Ferencz, both of whom survive,
were the last three of about 200 American prosecutors who helped bring dozens of
Nazi leaders to trial from 1945 to 1949.

Half a century later, the three joined forces to help shape the creation of the
International Criminal Court. When delegates from 131 nations met in Rome to
establish the criminal court in 1998, their original draft placed war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide under the court's jurisdiction. The
delegates did not include wars of aggression as war crimes, as opposed to those
fought in self-defense or authorized by the United Nations. The three
prosecutors traveled to Rome and lobbied to reshape the draft.

''They used their moral authority; they were persistent, and ultimately the
delegates included a reference to the crime of war of aggression in the court's
statute,'' said Michael Scharf, the director of the International Law Center at
Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.

The I.C.C. is the first permanent international criminal court in history. (The
United States has not ratified the I.C.C. treaty.)

The court is currently seeking to prosecute the president of Sudan, Omar Hassan
al-Bashir, for crimes against humanity in Darfur and is considering other cases.

For the past 25 years, Mr. King was a law professor at Case Western Reserve,
teaching courses on international law and war crimes. He was a member of the
American Bar Association's Task Force on War Crimes in the former Yugoslavia in
the 1990s, and he was a senior adviser to the Robert H. Jackson Center in
Jamestown, N.Y. The center brings together war crimes experts, promoting the
legacy of Justice Robert H. Jackson of the Supreme Court, who in 1945 was
appointed by President Harry S. Truman as chief prosecutor for the Nuremberg
trials.

''Three generations of scholars and practitioners of international criminal law
have been mentored by Mr. King,'' Professor Scharf said.

Henry Thomas King Jr. was born in Meriden, Conn., on May 27, 1919, the son of
Henry and Stella King. Besides his son, Mr. King is survived by his daughter,
Suzanne Wagner; three grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. His wife of 50
years, the former Betty May Scranton, died in 1993.

Mr. King graduated from Yale in 1941. A heart murmur kept him out of the
military in World War II. He received his law degree from Yale in 1943. Soon
after, while he was working at a New York law firm, he became bored. He traveled
to the Pentagon in 1946 and was accepted as a member of the Nuremberg
prosecution.

Mr. King was 26 when he stepped off a train in war-ravaged Nuremberg. All about
him were the rubble of bombed-out buildings and people begging for food.

''As I walked to the courthouse for the first time, I said I'm going to dedicate
my life to the prevention of this,'' he said at a conference on genocide held
last August by the Chautauqua Institution in Chautauqua, N.Y.

In 1945 and 1946, the United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union had
joined in the prosecution of 21 Nazi officials. Among them were Hermann Goring,
commander of the Luftwaffe, and Albert Speer, who as minister of war production
was in charge of all German industry. Eighteen of the 21 were convicted; on Oct.
16, 1946, 10 were hanged. Speer, the only one to express remorse, spent 20 years
in prison; he died in 1981.

Assigned in 1946 and 1947 to the second phase of the trials, Mr. King
investigated medical experiments performed on concentration camp inmates and
gathered evidence against Walther von Brauchitsch, the commander of German armed
forces. But his primary work was as assistant trial counsel in the case against
Erhard Milch, a high-ranking German officer who was  convicted in connection
with the abuse and executions of slave laborers. His life sentence was later
commuted to 15 years.

To gather evidence for the Milch case, Mr. King interviewed some of those
already convicted, including Speer. It was the start of a long relationship, one
in which Mr. King could never quite comprehend the contradictions in the
seemingly contrite Speer.

For more than 30 years, Mr. King corresponded with Speer and visited him. He
kept a photograph of Speer by his bedside. Still, he said, he was not taken in
by the war criminal.

''Speer closed his eyes to the world of humanity, and thus, a concern for human
ethics never intruded on his relentless drive as armaments minister,'' Mr. King
wrote in a 1997 memoir, ''The Two Worlds of Albert Speer.''  ''In a
technological world, the magic concoction for evil consists of blind technocrats
such as Speer led by an evil and aggressive leader such as Hitler.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: Henry T. King Jr.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Henry T. King Jr., right, with Albert Speer in Germany in
1981.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVE KING)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); WORLD WAR II (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (77%); JURISDICTION (75%); LOBBYING (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); APPOINTMENTS
(73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (62%); CANCER (57%)

ORGANIZATION: ST JOHN'S UNIVERSITY (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (55%);
UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (93%); ROME, ITALY (72%); JAMESTOWN, NY, USA (51%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (93%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (90%); NEW YORK, USA (51%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); SUDAN (92%); GERMANY (90%); ITALY (72%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1117 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Concerns in Pakistan That Taliban Are Hiding Among the Fleeing Civilians

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Thousands more people streamed out of conflict areas in northeast Pakistan on
Friday after the military lifted a curfew, adding to an exodus of nearly one
million who have fled already.

The mass migration of Pakistanis is now the largest since the country was
partitioned from India more than 60 years ago, and it added to concerns over
both security and the government's capacity to provide immediate relief to the
displaced.

Private television channels broadcast images of thousands of people flooding
from the contested districts -- Swat, Buner and Lower Dir -- as Pakistani forces
battle Taliban insurgents for control of the areas.

Many walked amid huge traffic jams. Some huddled on top of buses and on the
backs of trucks.

Amid the confusion, worries grew that Taliban fighters would use the exodus to
infiltrate still deeper into Pakistan and then carry out reprisal attacks in
refugee camps or other sites across Pakistan.

The military issued a statement saying that Taliban militants were fleeing the
area after ''shaving their beards and cutting hair.'' Long hair and beards are
signatures of their movement. Officials provided a number for Swat residents to
call to provide information about suspected militants who might have disguised
themselves.

The military claimed to have arrested a militant commander in Buner, one of the
first arrests of such a high-ranking member. The commander, who was identified
as Dawa Noor, had terrorized the local population into submission.

It also said that 55 Taliban militants had been killed in the last 24 hours
while three soldiers had been killed. Eleven other soldiers were reported
wounded.

There was no way to verify the claims because the conflict areas were closed to
journalists. It seemed clear, however, that the military campaign continued
unabated.

Pakistani air force jets and army helicopters and artillery hit militant
hide-outs in the thick forests and terraced mountainsides of the Swat Valley,
the military reported.

Pakistani troops also continued a search-and-destroy operation in the town of
Piachar, the stronghold of Maulana Fazlullah, one of the principal Taliban
leaders challenging the government's authority. But they were facing stiff
resistance. The military said it killed 13 militants there.

The government reinforced its will to establish the writ of the state, according
to a statement from the prime minister's office.

Amnesty International has reported that 700,000 civilians remain stranded amid
the fighting in Swat.

Civilians from various parts of the conflict areas told the organization in the
past two days that electricity had been cut off and that generators had stopped
working because of lack of diesel fuel, creating major problems for hospitals,
as well as for food storage. Nearly all ambulance service had ended.

''Taliban insurgents have used health facilities, schools and residential areas
to hide and launch attacks from, thus knowingly drawing a military response from
the Pakistani military,'' Amnesty International said in a statement.

A lack of facilities at the temporary refugee camps where many have gone is
fueling resentment and bitterness, and complaints in the news media, as well as
questions about how much longer the offensive will go on.

Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the army chief, gave a rare briefing to parliamentary
leaders and opposition politicians on Friday in Islamabad in an effort to ensure
support across the political spectrum for the campaign.

The briefing was classified, said Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao, a former interior
minister who was present. It lasted almost six hours and was followed by an
extensive question-and-answer session, he told the GEO television network.

General Kayani told the participants that the military was taking steps to
ensure a minimum of civilian casualties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Residents of the Swat Valley fled through Mingora, the area's
largest town, on Friday when the military briefly lifted a curfew amid the
battle against the Taliban.(PHOTOGRAPH BY NAVEED ALI/ASSOCIATED PRESS) MAP: The
migration is now Pakistan's largest since the 1940s.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (78%); ARMIES (78%);
REFUGEES (78%); AIR FORCES (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); CURFEW (78%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); JOURNALISM (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (76%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (75%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%);
MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (71%); RANKINGS (69%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); AMBULANCE & RESCUE SERVICES (62%);
HELICOPTERS (50%); DIESEL FUEL (50%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (96%); INDIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1120 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Survivors Shed Light on Dark Days of Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Looking across the courtroom where he is on trial for crimes against humanity,
the chief Khmer Rouge torturer cannot avoid seeing an artist and a mechanic who
sit watching him but mostly avoid his gaze.

One short and forceful, his feet dangling just above the floor, the other
melancholy and drooping a bit, they are rare survivors of Tuol Sleng prison,
where at least 14,000 people were sent to their deaths three decades ago.

In the weeks ahead, the two survivors will take the stand to testify against
their torturer, Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch, who commanded the prison, and
both have stories to tell about a place of horror from which almost no one
emerged alive.

Bou Meng, 68, the short one, survived because he was a painter and was singled
out from a row of shackled prisoners to produce portraits of the Khmer Rouge
chief, Pol Pot.

The other, Chum Mey, 78, was a mechanic and was spared because the torturers
needed him to repair machines, including the typewriters used to record the
confessions -- very often false -- that they extracted from prisoners like
himself.

Duch (pronounced DOIK), 66, is the first of five arrested Khmer Rouge figures to
go on trial in the United Nations-backed tribunal here. His case began in
February and is expected to last several more months.

Mr. Bou Meng and Mr. Chum Mey are living exhibits -- like a third survivor, Vann
Nath -- from the darkest core of the Khmer Rouge atrocities. They are tangible
evidence, like the skulls that have been preserved at some killing fields, or
like hundreds of portraits of their fellow prisoners that are displayed on the
walls of Tuol Sleng.

The photographs were taken as detainees were delivered to the prison, before
they were stripped and fettered and tortured and sent to a killing field.

Those ordered killed at Tuol Sleng are among 1.7 million people who died during
the Communist Khmer Rouge regime from 1975 to 1979 from starvation, disease and
overwork, as well as from torture and execution.

Duch is accused of ordering the kinds of beatings, whippings, electric shocks
and removal of toenails that Mr. Bou Meng and Mr. Chum Mey describe; indeed, he
admitted in the courtroom to ordering the beating of Mr. Chum Mey.

Both men endured torture that continued for days, and Mr. Chum Mey said, ''At
that time I wished I could die rather than survive.''

But both men did survive, and in interviews they now describe scenes that almost
none of their fellow prisoners lived to recount. ''Every night I looked out at
the moon,'' Mr. Bou Meng recalled. ''I heard people crying and sighing around
the building. I heard people calling out, 'Mother, help me! Mother, help me!' ''

It was at night that prisoners were trucked out to a killing field, and every
night, he said, he feared that his moment had come. ''But by midnight or 1 a.m.
I realized that I would live another day.''

Though many Cambodians have tried to bury their traumatic memories, Mr. Bou Meng
and Mr. Chum Mey have continued to return to the scene of their imprisonment and
torture as if their souls remained trapped there together with the souls of the
dead.

During the first few years after the fall of the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Bou Meng
returned to work in an office at Tuol Sleng, which was converted into a museum
of genocide. Now he uses it as a rest stop, spending the night there on a cot
when he visits the capital, Phnom Penh, from the countryside, where he paints
Buddhist murals in temples.

Mr. Chum Mey, retired now from his work as a mechanic, spends much of his time
wandering among the portraits, telling and retelling his story to tourists, as
if one of the victims on the walls had come to life.

An eager and passionate storyteller, he will show a visitor how he was shoved,
blindfolded, into his cell during 12 days of torture, and he will drop to the
floor inside a small brick cubicle where he was held in chains.

''As you can see, this was my condition,'' he said recently as he sat on the
hard concrete floor, holding up a metal ammunition box that was used as a
toilet. ''It upsets me to see Duch sitting in the courtroom talking with his
lawyers as if he were a guest of the court.''

Like many other Khmer Rouge victims, both men say they have no idea why they
were selected for arrest or why they were tortured to admit to unknown crimes.
Both men lost their wives and children in the Khmer Rouge years, and although
both have rebuilt their families, the past still holds them in its grip.

Mr. Bou Meng does not wander like his friend among the Tuol Sleng pictures, but
he does keep one in his wallet: a snapshot-size reproduction of the prison
portrait of his wife, Ma Yoeun, who was arrested with him but did not survive.

''Sometimes when I sit at home I look at the picture and everything seems
fresh,'' he said. ''I think of the suffering she endured, and I wonder how long
she stayed alive.''

Mr. Bou Meng has since remarried twice, but he remains shackled to his memories.
''I know I should forget her,'' he said, ''but I can't.''

She visits him, he said, in visions that are something more than dreams, looking
just as she did when he last saw her -- still 28 years old, leaving Mr. Bou Meng
to live on and grow old without her.

Sometimes she appears with the spirits of others who were killed, he said. They
stand together, a crowd of ghosts in black, and she tells him, ''Only you, Bou
Meng, can find justice for us.''

Mr. Bou Meng said he hoped that testifying against Duch and seeing him convicted
would free him from the restless ghosts and let him live what is left of his
life in peace.

''I don't want to be a victim,'' he said. ''I want to be like everybody else, a
normal person.''

But he said he knew that this might be asking too much of life.

''Maybe not completely normal,'' Mr. Bou Meng said. ''But at least 50 percent.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Bou Meng was singled out during the Khmer Rouge reign of terror
in Cambodia to produce portraits of the group's leader. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SETH
MYDANS/INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE)
 Chum Mey, a mechanic, was spared because he was needed to make repairs. The two
men are to testify against their torturer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARIKO TAKAYASU)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); VISUAL ARTISTS (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Leader's Brother Survives Ambush; U.S. Offers Details on Lethal
Airstrikes

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and ELISABETH BUMILLER; Abdul Waheed Wafa reported
from Kabul, and Elisabeth Bumiller from Washington. Eric Schmitt contributed
reporting from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


A brother of President Hamid Karzai said he narrowly escaped assassination
Monday morning by Taliban attackers lying in wait for his motorcade while it
traveled from the eastern city of Jalalabad to the capital.

Meanwhile, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said in Washington that the
United States could not succeed in Afghanistan if the American military kept
killing Afghan civilians, and the military provided its most detailed accounting
yet of the airstrikes that killed an undetermined number of Afghan civilians in
Farah Province two weeks earlier.

Mr. Karzai's younger brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, said in a telephone interview
that his convoy was on its way to Kabul, the capital, when it was ambushed at
Sorobi by attackers using rocket-propelled grenades and assault rifles.

''I was leading the convoy,'' he said, ''but all of the bullets hit the second
vehicle that my bodyguards were driving.''

He blamed the Taliban for the attack, which killed one of his bodyguards.

Ahmed Wali Karzai, a prominent politician in southern Afghanistan, leads the
provincial council of Kandahar Province. News organizations have reported on
allegations of links between him  and the drug trade in the region, including in
an article in The New York Times in October. He  strongly denied the
allegations, saying they were ''baseless.''

On April 1, five suicide bombers stormed the offices of the Kandahar provincial
council, and at least 13 people, including two provincial officials, were
killed. The president's brother  was not in his office at the time.

In Washington, Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said
the American airstrikes in Farah Province had jeopardized the United States
strategy in Afghanistan.

''We cannot succeed in Afghanistan or anywhere else -- but let's talk
specifically about Afghanistan -- by killing Afghan civilians,'' Admiral Mullen
said to an audience of scholars, national security experts and the media at the
Brookings Institution, adding,  ''We can't keep going through incidents like
this and expect the strategy to work.''

At the same time, he said, ''We can't tie our troops' hands behind their
backs.''

The airstrikes have caused an uproar in Afghanistan, and Admiral Mullen's
comments reflect deep concern in the Pentagon about the intensifying criticism
from Kabul against the American military.

Admiral Mullen, who noted that commanders in the region had in recent months
imposed more restrictive rules on airstrikes to avoid civilian casualties, said,
''We've got to be very, very focused on making sure that we proceed
deliberately, that we know who the enemy is.''

According to a senior spokesman for the military, Marines Special Operations
forces called in airstrikes in Farah Province at midafternoon on May 4, after a
battle between the Taliban fighters and the Afghan Army and police had raged for
hours.

Initially, over a period of several hours, three F-18 fighter-bombers dropped
five laser-guided and satellite-guided bombs against Taliban fighters, who were
firing at the American and Afghan forces, the spokesman, Col. Gregory Julian,
said in an e-mail message from Afghanistan late Sunday.

Villagers, however, have reported that a heavier bombardment took place after 8
p.m., when they said the fighting appeared to be over and the Taliban had left
the area.

The military has disputed this version of events, saying the Taliban fighters
continued to fire at American and Afghan troops, making additional airstrikes
necessary. These came from a B-1 bomber, which dropped a total of eight
satellite-guided bombs, some of them weighing 500 pounds and others 2,000
pounds, on a tree grove and two buildings, Colonel Julian said.

Villagers have said they sought safety from the first airstrikes in a compound
of buildings, but it was not clear whether these were the same buildings the
American aircraft later bombed.

In all, Colonel Julian said, eight targets were attacked over seven hours. He
denied reports from villagers that a mosque had been damaged in the strikes.

Afghan government officials have accepted handwritten lists of 147 dead
civilians compiled by the villagers. An independent Afghan human rights group
said it had accounts from interviews of 117 dead. American officials say that
even 100 is an exaggeration but have yet to issue their own count.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ahmed Wali Karzai, in 2007. He said that one of his bodyguards
was killed Monday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY S. SABAWOON/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); FIREARMS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (58%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (91%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR,
AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2009 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Joint Chiefs Chairman Criticizes Afghan Air Strikes

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER and ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The United States cannot succeed in Afghanistan if the American military keeps
killing Afghan civilians, Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said on Monday.

In remarks to scholars, national security experts and the media at the Brookings
Institution, Admiral Mullen said that the American air strikes that killed an
undetermined number of civilians in Afghanistan's Farah Province two weeks ago
had put the U.S. strategy in the country in jeopardy.

''We cannot succeed in Afghanistan or anywhere else, but let's talk specifically
about Afghanistan, by killing Afghan civilians,'' Admiral Mullen said, adding
that ''we can't keep going through incidents like this and expect the strategy
to work.''

At the same time, Admiral Mullen said, ''we can't tie our troops' hands behind
their backs.''

Admiral Mullen's comments on the civilian casualties from the Farah air strikes,
which have caused an uproar in Afghanistan, reflect deep concern within the
Pentagon about the intensifying criticism from Kabul against the American
military. Admiral Mullen, who noted that commanders in the region had in recent
months imposed more restrictive rules on air strikes to avoid civilian
casualties, offered no new solutions in his remarks. He only said that ''we've
got to be very, very focused on making sure that we proceed deliberately, that
we know who the enemy is.''

Earlier,  a senior spokesman for the American military provided its most
detailed accounting yet of the Farah air strikes.

By midafternoon on May 4, after a battle between Afghan police and army forces
and Taliban fighters had raged for hours, Marines Special Operations forces
called in air strikes.

Three F-18 fighter-bombers, flying in succession over several hours, dropped a
total of five laser-guided and satellite guided bombs against Taliban fighters
who were firing at the American and Afghan forces, said the official, Col.
Gregory Julian, in an email message late Sunday.

Villagers, however, have reported that an even heavier bombardment came after 8
p.m. when they said the fighting appeared to be over and the Taliban had left
the village.

The military has disputed this version of events, saying the Taliban fighters
continued to fire at American and Afghan troops, requiring additional air
strikes. These came from a B-1 bomber, which dropped three 500-pound
satellite-guided bombs on a tree grove, four 500-pound and 2,000-pound
satellite-guided bombs on one building, and one 2,000-pound satellite-guided
bomb on a second building, Colonel Julian said. Villagers have said they sought
safety from the initial air strikes in a compound of buildings, but it was not
clear whether these were the same buildings the American aircraft later bombed.
Villagers said the bombings were so powerful that people were ripped to shreds.
Survivors said they collected only pieces of bodies.

In all, Colonel Julian said, eight targets were attacked over a seven-hour
period, but he denied reports from villagers that a mosque had been damaged in
the strikes. Colonel Julian and other American military officials have said that
the Taliban deliberately fired at American and Afghan forces from the rooftops
of buildings where civilians, including women and children, had sought shelter,
to provoke a heavy American military response.

Colonel Julian said at the peak of the fighting that day, some 150 Afghan
soldiers and 60 Afghan police, along with their 30 American trainers, as well as
two Marine Special Operations teams that made up a quick-reaction force, were
battling about 300 militants, including a large number of foreign fighters.

Afghan government officials have accepted handwritten lists compiled by the
villagers of 147 dead civilians. An independent Afghan human rights group said
it had accounts from interviews of 117 dead. American officials say that even
100 is an exaggeration but have yet to issue their own count.

Last week, a senior military investigator, Brig. Gen. Raymond A. Thomas III of
the United States Army, went to Afghanistan to conduct an in-depth inquiry for
the region's overall military commander, Gen. David H. Petraeus. American
military officials said his review will likely incorporate another military
inquiry that was ordered immediately after the incident, and led by Brig. Gen.
Edward M. Reeder, who oversees allied a task force of allied Special Operations
forces in Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS
(78%); ARMIES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); LASERS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (84%); BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1133 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A 'Surgical Approach' to Policy, and Its Pitfalls

BYLINE: By PETER BAKER; Nicholas Kulish contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1008 words


As President Obama defends his national security strategy, he faces a daunting
challenge. He must convince the country that it is in safe hands despite
warnings to the contrary from the right, and at the same time persuade the
skeptical left that it is enough to amend his predecessor's approach rather than
abandon it.

Arguably on the defensive over policy for the first time since taking office,
Mr. Obama is gambling that his oratorical powers can reassure the public that
bringing terrorism suspects to prisons on American soil will not put the public
in danger.

At the same time, he must explain and win support for a nuanced set of positions
that fall somewhere between George W. Bush and the American Civil Liberties
Union.

Rather than an easily labeled program, Mr. Obama is picking seemingly disparate
elements from across the policy continuum -- banning torture and other harsh
interrogation techniques but embracing the endless detention of certain terror
suspects without trial, closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, but
retaining the military commissions held there.

''A surgical approach,''  the president called it in his address on Thursday at
the National Archives.

But surgical approaches are rarely satisfying to those on either end of the
political spectrum who tend to dominate political dialogue in Washington,
particularly when it comes to an issue as fraught with emotional resonance and
moral implications as the struggle against terrorists.

In the reductionist debate in Washington, either any sacrifice must be made to
win a pitiless war against radicals, or terrorism does not justify any
compromise with cherished American values.

''Both sides may be sincere in their views, but neither side is right,'' Mr.
Obama said. ''The American people are not absolutist, and they don't elect us to
impose a rigid ideology on our problems. They know that we need not sacrifice
our security for our values, nor sacrifice our values for our security, so long
as we approach difficult questions with honesty and care and a dose of common
sense.''

In his rebuttal speech across town, former Vice President Dick Cheney in effect
argued that absolutism in the defense of liberty was no vice.

''In the fight against terrorism there is no middle ground, and half measures
keep you half-exposed,'' Mr. Cheney said shortly after Mr. Obama's address.
''You cannot keep just some nuclear-armed terrorists out of the United States.
Triangulation is a political strategy, not a national security strategy.''

The debates over Mr. Obama's latest decisions -- to establish a legal basis for
holding detainees indefinitely without charge and to withhold photographs of
past abuse while reauthorizing military tribunals with greater due process --
have become a proxy for a broader struggle that could shape his presidency. With
the economy in dire shape, Mr. Obama would prefer to focus on domestic issues
and put the polarizing security-versus-liberty argument of the Bush years behind
the country, but it stubbornly persists.

With Mr. Cheney accusing the president of endangering the country and liberal
allies expressing outrage at what they perceive as his betrayal of progressive
principles, the White House concluded that it had no choice but to address the
matter head-on.

Mr. Obama has never lacked confidence in his ability to educate and win over
people when it comes to complex and combustible issues, as he tried to do on the
issue of race in the campaign last year or on abortion in his commencement
address on Sunday at the University of Notre Dame.

''The issue skewed off into a lot of different directions in the last couple of
weeks,'' David Axelrod, the president's senior adviser, said in an interview.

Mr. Axelrod expressed confidence that the public would grasp the new
multilayered approach articulated in the speech. ''It was a thoughtful speech
that treated the American people like adults,'' he said.

Yet even as the White House argued that Mr. Obama always recognized the
complexity of the issues before him, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. on
Thursday acknowledged some surprise at the difficulties involved. Speaking with
reporters at Camp Bondsteel in Kosovo, he described going through portfolios on
''every single detainee'' at the detention center at Guantanamo Bay.

''We knew we were inheriting a system that was not functioning,'' Mr. Biden
said. ''We knew we were inheriting a system that was causing us great difficulty
around the world.'' But he suggested that the administration's approach had been
shaped by what it learned after taking office.

''It's like opening Pandora's box here,'' Mr. Biden said. ''We don't know what's
inside the box. Now we know a lot more than we did in January.''

Both Mr. Obama and Mr. Cheney used the term ''ad hoc'' to scorn the other
party's policy toward terrorism. But the case-by-case approach of the current
White House -- officials there describe it as pragmatic -- has generated
confusion and disappointment across the political spectrum. While Mr. Obama
dismissed concerns among fellow Democrats about ''30-second commercials''
attacking them as weak on terrorism -- ''I get it,'' he said -- the reality is
that the debate could replay in harsh fashion in the midterm elections next
year.

James Jay Carafano, a national security expert at the Heritage Foundation, said
Mr. Obama risked being left with no supporters on either side for his program.

''The people on the left know there's more in common than not between the Obama
policy and the Bush policy,'' he said. ''And the people on the right know
there's a credibility problem because there's a gap between what he tells the
left and what he's doing.''

Sarah Mendelson, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies
who led a  commission study that urged the closing of Guantanamo, said the
fusion of Bush and anti-Bush policies was untenable. ''They're literally trying
to combine these paradigms,'' Ms. Mendelson said. ''And that means nobody will
be happy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); MILITARY COURTS (88%); WAR ON TERROR
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (78%); DUE
PROCESS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (75%); TORTURE (73%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DICK CHENEY (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1134 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Obama, Cheney and the Terror Fight

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1386 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Obama Would Move Some Terror Detainees to U.S.'' (front page, May 22):

President Obama is indeed treading a fine line between our national security and
the values espoused by our Constitution where it is difficult to say which one
overrides the other.

With due respect, one has to bear in mind that while framing the American
Constitution our forefathers may not have ever imagined the threat and scope of
global terrorism, which has become a reality. Nevertheless, the fear of this
should not end up in a knee-jerk reaction, which eventually resulted in policies
and laws put forth by the Bush administration that further stoked distrust and
anger against America.

President Obama is right in calling it a ''surgical approach'' in formulating
national security strategy. I would go one step further and call it a
''neurosurgeon's approach.'' I fully agree with the president that due process
of law should not be compromised, and I think that in cases where terrorism
evidence is prima facie, prolonged detention should be lawfully invoked.

Atul M. Karnik Woodside, Queens, May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

The contrast between the Obama and Bush administrations could not be greater, as
witnessed by the speeches on national security by President Obama and Dick
Cheney on Thursday.

Mr. Obama tapped the ideals that once made America the moral inspiration of the
world. Mr. Cheney drew his power from fear, suspicion of foreigners and the
false comfort offered by authoritarianism.

President Obama appealed to the better angels of our nature. Dick Cheney
appealed to the worst.

Fred LaMotte Steilacoom, Wash., May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

Former Vice President Dick Cheney's glib rejection of the ''middle ground'' in
the fight against terrorism is nothing more than a recapitulation of Barry
Goldwater's misguided 1964 notion that ''extremism in the defense of liberty is
no vice.'' The formulation is as entirely wrongheaded now as it was then, and
Americans should repudiate it just as decisively as they did nearly a
half-century ago.

Robert D. Madoff Minneapolis, May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

On 9/11, some 3,000 people were murdered. This was not just an attack on a
military installation like Pearl Harbor, but represented the basest form of
human behavior.

Every American deserved to believe post-9/11 that his government was doing
everything possible to forestall another such attack, and frankly, anything less
than an all-out interrogation of arrested terrorists would have represented
criminal dereliction of the government's fundamental responsibility to protect
its citizens.

Belated criticism of those efforts years after the fact ignores the legitimate
fears gripping the country in 2001 and the years after and represents a classic
and disgraceful ''second guess'' of American decision makers.

A. E. Harazin  Amherst, Mass., May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''The Real Path to Security'' (editorial, May 22):

The debate on torture and Guantanamo Bay poses an important question for the
United States and that is, that it is one thing to have a constitution or laws,
and entirely another matter when it comes to carrying them out in trying times
when abandoning those laws and principles would seem most expedient. For
totalitarian governments the choice is easy, but for democratic ones it is a
moment of truth.

There was a reason German soldiers preferred to be captured by American forces
during World War II, and this was because they knew how they would be treated in
United States custody as opposed to being captured by the Russians. If we were
to agree with Dick Cheney's argument, that choice easily made by the Germans
years ago would be a difficult one to make today.

The true character of a nation or person is not best measured on a pleasant day,
but rather it is made manifest on days when all precepts are tested to the core.

Nonso Umunna Baltimore, May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

The real danger with the Cheney philosophy is that, in his view, the ends
justify the means. When does it stop? If you excuse waterboarding by saying it
saves American lives, why not even more severe forms of interrogation?

It doesn't seem that we've reached that point yet, but under duress it's not
hard to imagine unless we as a nation say that torture of any kind is not
permissible in our society.

Norm Rosenblatt  San Francisco, May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

Your May 21 front-page article ''1 in 7 Detainees Rejoined Jihad, Pentagon
Finds'' cites ''terrorism experts'' asserting a 14 percent recidivism rate that
is far lower than that among American prisoners, which can be as high as 68
percent. This is fuzzy number-crunching.

More than half of American prisoners' ''recidivism'' is due to technical parole
violations: curfew violations, reporting failures, failed urine tests or for
minor offenses. The more serious the original conviction, the longer the parole
period and the more scrutiny given to the offender.

A convicted murderer arrested for a D.U.I. is likely to be sent back to prison
and hence misleadingly counted as a murderer who has ''recidivated.''

The solution to the problem of the detainees must be found in reaffirming the
constitutional principle that we cannot hold six innocent persons in order to
incapacitate one guilty person. Period.

Ronald L. Kuby New York, May 21, 2009

The writer is a criminal defense and civil rights lawyer.

To the Editor:

How comforting that the Pentagon is able to determine, without the mess and fuss
of any trials, that some released detainees have ''rejoined'' the terrorists,
meaning that they are known for certain to have been terrorists in the first
place.

That was, of course, what trials were supposed to establish. The detainees were
in fact not known ''terrorists'' but terror suspects whose actual involvement in
terrorist activity it was to be the prosecution's job to prove.

If these people cannot be tried in ordinary civilian or even military courts and
if the military, which will run the tribunals that are supposed to try them, has
already made up its mind that they're all guilty and all that remains is to fill
in the details, what's the point of trying them at all?

Just lock 'em up and throw away the key -- and the Constitution with it.

Eric B. Lipps Staten Island, May 21, 2009

To the Editor:

The debate about how ''enhanced interrogation'' undermines the judicial system
and America's position in the world misses a crucial point. If waterboarding is
O.K. for the C.I.A., how long will it be before the F.B.I. starts using it
domestically? And if the F.B.I. is using it, how long will it be before local
police start using it to extract confessions from suspects?

When that happens, what kind of society will we be living in? The people who
defend this kind of thing never talk about that.

Michael Califra New York, May 22, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''Changes Planned for Guantanamo Trials May Lead to Familiar Challenges''
(news article, May 19):

The Obama administration has embarked on a fool's errand trying to devise
military commissions that are seen as fair. Any criminal tribunal specially
designed for a select group of defendants will be inherently suspect because it
violates the Golden Rule -- giving them fewer rights than anyone else in United
States courts to challenge evidence against them or to prevent the use of
dubious confessions.

Whatever marginal benefit the administration sees in such due process shortcuts
will be vastly outweighed by thepublic relations costs. Tailor-made military
commissions, in any guise, will help the accused continue portraying themselves
as ''warriors'' rather than as ''criminals'' as they shift public attention from
the heinous crimes on trial to the fairness of the proceedings.

Regular federal courts have a long history of successfully prosecuting terrorist
crimes. To convict someone of conspiracy to commit terrorism requires proof of
only a criminal agreement between two or more people and a single step, no
matter how innocuous, to advance that plan. If the government cannot make that
modest factual showing in regular court, it should release the suspect, not
railroad him to ''justice'' in a substandard tribunal.  Kenneth Roth Executive
Director Human Rights Watch New York, May 19, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY EDEL RODRIGUEZ)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); DUE PROCESS (74%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (74%);
NEUROSCIENCE (68%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); DICK CHENEY (89%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1140 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 23, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rwandan Is Convicted Of Genocide

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN; Josh Kron contributed reporting from Kigali, Rwanda.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


A Rwandan who entered Canada more than a decade ago claiming to be a refugee was
convicted Friday in a Montreal court on seven charges related to the 1994
genocide.

The conviction was the first under a Canadian war crimes law introduced nine
years ago and followed an unusually complex two-year trial that involved
hearings in Africa and in Europe.

The Rwandan, Desire Munyaneza, 42, a Hutu and a son of a prominent businessman,
was accused of mass murders, rape and pillaging in the Butare region of the
small central African nation.

Justice Andre Denis of Quebec Superior Court found him guilty of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in a nonjury trial.

''The accused's criminal intent was demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt, as
was his culpable violence,'' he wrote in his decision, which ran more than 200
pages and was published in English and French.

''The educated son of an important bourgeois family in Butare, Desire Munyaneza
was at the forefront of the genocidal movement.''

The judge added that while he found prosecution witnesses, many testifying
anonymously and in private for their security, to be generally credible, he had
a hard time believing most of the defense witnesses.

Lawyers for Mr. Munyaneza said outside the courthouse that they would appeal the
verdict.

The bloodshed in Rwanda began in April 1994 when extremists among the majority
Hutu population organized mass killings of Tutsis and moderate Hutus. The
passage of time as well as the extent of the massacres -- which took an
estimated 800,000 lives -- has made prosecutions difficult.

Many witnesses offered harrowing accounts of Mr. Munyaneza's role in the
genocide. One witness passed out after testifying that she and several other
women had been raped repeatedly over several days by a group led by Mr.
Munyaneza.

Another witness, identified only as RCW-11, described his participation in a
daylong killing tour led by Mr. Munyaneza. It began at a mosque where Tutsis
were removed from their hiding place in a ceiling and killed.

From there, the killers moved to a Roman Catholic church where, according to
other witnesses, about 500 Tutsis had sought shelter. After initially assuring
the Tutsis that they would be taken to a safer place, the killers spent the next
five hours removing them in small numbers and killing them. The day concluded
with the killing of Tutsis hiding in an Adventist church.

RCW-11 himself was convicted in Rwanda of taking part in the genocide.

News of the conviction was received positively by many in Kigali, Rwanda's
capital.

''Maybe it's a beginning that many of them will be brought to justice,'' said
Raphael Mipali, a musician. ''The priority first for me is to bring these people
to Rwanda, because this is where genocide was committed. But if there is no way
for them to come to Rwanda, they should be brought to the book somewhere else.''

An international tribunal in Tanzania, established to supplement Rwanda's
justice system, has convicted about 30 people and acquitted 6.

The Montreal case was aided by a continuing tribunal case, in which six other
people were being tried for massacres in Butare. Mr. Munyaneza was described in
his trial as a militia leader who had worked with them.

Mr. Munyaneza arrived in Toronto in 1997 and sought refugee status, which was
ultimately denied. Late that year a complaint to the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police from a Rwandan in Canada prompted an inquiry. After investigators
traveled to Rwanda six times to gather evidence, Mr. Munyaneza was arrested in
2005.

Under the war crimes law, which allows Canada to prosecute residents for acts
they committed in other countries, Mr. Munyaneza, who has two children, faces
life in prison when he is sentenced Sept. 9.

Switzerland and Belgium have also convicted Rwandans for crimes related to the
genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); VERDICTS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); TESTIMONY (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); EVIDENCE (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (76%);
LAWYERS (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); LEGISLATION (72%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (67%); RELIGION (66%)

CITY: MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (88%); KIGALI, RWANDA (79%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (78%)

STATE: QUEBEC, CANADA (88%); ONTARIO, CANADA (78%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (98%); CANADA (92%); EUROPE (92%); AFRICA (88%); CENTRAL AFRICA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1144 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 24, 2009 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

An Antidote to Torture

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Images, the Law and War'' (Week in Review, May 17):

American democracy lies in its ability to use civil liberties and freedom of
information to inform our conscience. Certainly, we have been barraged with
photos of the victims of Nazi Germany. I believe that we and the Germans are
better off for it.

Most Americans have confessed our role with regard to slavery. It is said that
photographs speak more clearly than a thousand words. Why not make sure that we
have the needed information to own up to the damage we do to others, either
through torture, pre-emptive warfare, the denial of basic civil liberties or the
exploitation of the poor?

Our conscience as a nation depends on freedom of the press as it incorporates
photographs. How else can we make informed decisions with regard to equality,
justice and peace for all?

Information, transparency, truth-telling the best we can and civil liberties for
all are the best antidote I know.

Virginia Durr  Sweden, Me., May 18, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NEWS
BRIEFS (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); GERMANY (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1145 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 24, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Abu Ghraib We Cannot See

BYLINE: By PHILIP GOUREVITCH.

Philip Gourevitch, the editor of The Paris Review, is the author, with Errol
Morris, of ''The Ballad of Abu Ghraib.''

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1310 words


IN mid-October of 2003, Specialist Sabrina Harman of the 372nd Military Police
Company was assigned guard duty on the military intelligence cellblock at Abu
Ghraib prison outside Baghdad. That was the block where prisoners of the
American occupation forces were held pending and during interrogation. The
M.P.'s had no military training as prison guards, and they were told to do
whatever the interrogators -- a mix of military intelligence and C.I.A. officers
and civilian contractors -- asked them to do to the prisoners.

Specialist Harman and her comrades were astonished to find a number of prisoners
on the block naked and trussed to the bars in painful ''stress positions,''
their heads hooded by sandbags, or by women's panties. In civilian life,
Specialist Harman aspired to become a police crime-scene photographer, and so at
Abu Ghraib she set to work at once, snapping away with her digital camera.

What were the pictures for? ''Just to show what was going on,'' Ms. Harman said.
To say, ''Look, I have proof, you can't deny it.''  Sometimes she and her fellow
guards posed alongside their abused wards, but most of her photos from Abu
Ghraib have a purely documentary quality -- solitary prisoners, stripped and
manacled in their cells, stretched over bed frames or forced to balance on a
box. Cpl. Charles Graner, the M.P. in charge of the night shift on the
intelligence block that fall, also took photographs. And Corporal Graner, too,
spoke of his snapshots as a form of ''proof.'' He showed the pictures to his
superior officers, medics, lawyers.

Later, he told Army investigators how he had routinely beat up prisoners for
interrogators, or kept them up all night, making them crawl naked back and forth
across the floor. ''Was all this stuff wrong?'' he said. ''Yeah.'' But his point
was that it was no secret. He kept getting praised for his work.

Six months later, in April 2004, when the Harman and Graner photographs were
leaked to the press, they shocked the world's conscience. They also performed a
great public service. They told us something about ourselves that we might have
suspected but did not fully know -- that the Bush administration had decided to
fight terror with terror, and torture with torture.

We did not fully know this before the photographs came out, because our leaders
hid it from us, and when it was revealed they denied it. ''We do not torture,''
Mr. Bush kept saying, even as a stream of official documents leaked to the press
contradicted him.

Had a journalist taken the photos, there would have been prizes. Instead, the
photographs were used by the administration and the military to frame the
soldiers who took and appeared in them as rogues acting out of their own
individual perversity. In this way, the expose became the cover-up: the soldiers
who revealed our corruption to us were made scapegoats and thrown in prison.

Five years later, America is again caught up in a debate about the release of
photographs that show our soldiers using Bush administration ''interrogation
techniques'' at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere.

Barack Obama, whose first act as president was to re-criminalize torture,
initially favored making the pictures public. Then Mr. Obama changed his mind.
His critics (civil libertarians, human rights advocates and press commentators)
are saying that this makes him no different from his predecessor.

They are mistaken. Just as it was a public service to release the Abu Ghraib
photographs five years ago, Mr. Obama is right today to say we don't need more
of them.

The president claims that a new round of images of prisoner abuse flashing
around the globe would enflame America's enemies and endanger our troops in
Afghanistan and Iraq. There's no doubt about it: the policies that the
photographs depict have already done terrible damage to America's cause.

But there's another critical consideration. Releasing additional photographs
would not be telling us anything that we don't already know. We don't need to
see a picture to know that American interrogators used waterboarding -- a crime
our military has prosecuted as torture for more than a century -- when we can
see former Vice President Dick Cheney taking credit for having people
waterboarded.

Mr. Obama is not suppressing information when he opposes the release of more
photographs. After all, he just made public a series of Bush administration
torture policy memos that authorize the very methods for inflicting pain and
suffering that the Abu Ghraib photographs represent. In fact, it is because of
Mr. Obama's leadership in bringing these dark practices to light that the press
and the public -- having for too long been passive to the point of complicity on
the issue -- are now agitating for more sensational imagery. Who are we trying
to fool, if not ourselves, if we pretend that we need more photos to know what
has been going on?

Crime-scene photographs, for all their power to reveal, can also serve as a
distraction, even a deterrent, from precise understanding of the events they
depict. Photographs cannot show us a chain of command, or Washington decision
making. Photographs cannot tell stories. They can only provide evidence of
stories, and evidence is mute; it demands investigation and interpretation.

I spent more than a year living with the photographs from Abu Ghraib while
writing a book about the soldiers who took them and appeared in them. I saw many
more pictures than were ever published in the press, including, I believe, many
-- if not most -- of the photos that the president would now prefer that you
don't see.

Yet in order to tell the story of the pictures most effectively, I decided not
to include any of them in the book. I had more than two million words of
interviews to work with, and as many words again of government paperwork, and in
this way I could show that most of the worst things that happened at Abu Ghraib
were never photographed. What those soldier-photographers revealed to us with
their cameras was just a hint of what they have to tell us if only we would
listen.

Some of the most disturbing photographs from Abu Ghraib are not photographs of
torture. Rather, they are photographs that show our soldiers trying -- without
the proper training or equipment -- to do their jobs. One of the most gruesome
images shows an empty cell, sticky with blood. It is an image of pure gore, like
a snapshot of an abattoir floor, and if one comes upon it in a sequence of
torture photographs it seems self-evidently a picture of unspeakable aftermath.

But the soldiers who served at Abu Ghraib can speak, and the story they tell of
that picture is one of professional military conduct. One night an Iraqi guard
at the prison smuggled a loaded pistol to a prisoner. An informant tipped off
the guards. When the M.P.'s went to recover the gun, the prisoner began
shooting, and the soldiers shot him in the legs. The blood in the photo is the
prisoner's, and nobody else was hurt. Meanwhile, prisoners were regularly beaten
bloody in the showers during interrogation, and there are no photographs of
that.

Today, with all that we know about the Bush administration's torture policy, the
discussion about the release of more photos is a sideshow. Yet, in his eagerness
to move on, Mr. Obama himself sometimes seems to forget what the memos he has
released tell us about the pictures he is holding back.

Several times, in the past week, he has revived the old ''bad apples'' theory
that blames a few low-ranking ''individuals'' for doing what our highest leaders
asked of them. Photographs can't show us that the real bad apples were at the
top of the civilian chain of command in Washington, but that is what we need to
know -- or, rather, since we've known it and gone along with it for a long time,
that is what we need to come to terms with now.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); ARMIES
(78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (73%); DIGITAL
CAMERAS (68%); VISUAL ARTISTS (68%); JOURNALISM (65%); MILITARY TRAINING (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1152 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why Dissidents, Freed From Prison, Often Choose the Path of Most Resistance

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Mona el-Naggar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MEMO FROM CAIRO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


When political dissidents who challenge authoritarian leaders are locked away in
prison, when they are tortured and their families threatened, the goal is to
break their resolve, to crush their spirit, to silence them.

So how come so many get right back to it when they are finally freed? What
compels them to fight on at the risk of great personal sacrifice?

Last week, Fathi al-Jahmi died a prisoner of Libya. He was a father, a husband,
an older brother, a sharp critic of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. In 2004, after 18
months in prison, he was set free. But he was supposed to remain silent, to go
home and vanish from public view. His family begged him to comply. He refused.

''He suffered so much, the torture, he really felt he had no choice,'' said his
younger brother, Mohamed Eljahmi, in a telephone interview from his home in the
United States.

All across the Middle East, indeed the world, authoritarian governments use the
power of punishment to try to intimidate and silence.

The practice may succeed as a deterrent, spreading fear among those who have not
yet experienced the chill of a jail cell, the debasement of a strip search, the
pain of electric shock.

But for those who have already faced the worst, the threats often have the
reverse effect. In Iran, the state once jailed Emad Baghi for his work against
the death penalty and in support of prisoners' rights. In Syria, Michel Kilo was
locked up after calling on President Bashar al-Assad to build citizenship and
rule of law. In Egypt, Saad Eddin Ibrahim was imprisoned because of his work in
support of democracy.

As Mr. Jahmi did, they each chose to continue to speak up when they were
released.

''If I abandon my cause, then I will let them accomplish their goal,'' Mr. Kilo
said in a telephone interview after being released this month after three years
in prison.

''No, I have not been broken,'' he said, his voice still frail and weak.

Ayman Nour, a former presidential candidate and sharp critic of President Hosni
Mubarak, served four years in Egypt's Tora Prison after being convicted of
charges widely regarded as politically inspired. But the night of his release in
February, he appeared on Egypt's most popular television talk show and resumed
his attacks on the government.

Are these dissidents extraordinary? Are they crazy, perhaps, or egomaniacal, as
some critics have said? Or are they all too human, fighting to maintain a sense
of personal worth that the state has tried to strip away?

There are, of course, many reasons different people in different cultures choose
the path of most resistance. But the most compelling, the activists themselves
say, particularly in a Middle Eastern culture that honors martyrdom, is that
prison becomes a defining and hardening experience, cementing their convictions
and removing any temptation to compromise their beliefs.

Curiously, Middle Eastern leaders make the same mistake that they often warn the
West about: humiliating their people, many of whom then find personal meaning
and dignity in fighting back. ''What's interesting is the role the regimes play
in keeping the likes of Kilo or Fathi permanently committed to their conflict
with the government,'' said Sarah Leah Whitson, director of Human Rights Watch's
Middle East and North Africa division.

Very often, freedom comes with so many limitations, Ms. Whitson said, that the
dissidents feel more productive behind bars. Mr. Nour, for example, recently
told a visiting class of journalism students from Northeastern University that
he wanted to go back to prison, because he had greater impact there than on the
outside. He told the students he had not been allowed to practice law, to work
in politics, or even to open a bank account.

Speaking from his home in Damascus, Mr. Kilo said: ''There is no doubt that when
it comes to political power we are weak, but from our intellectual point of view
we are not wrong, we are not defeated. I have not been defeated.  But can any
policeman come and take me and put me in prison right now?  Sure he can.''

It is certainly not just the way of dissidents in the Middle East. The Nobel
laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has had her freedom restricted for more than a
decade for her opposition to Myanmar's military junta.

In Albania, Fatos Lubonja was 24 when the police knocked on his door. At the
time, Albania was a Stalinist police state. The police found his hidden
writings, antigovernment ideas he had not yet even published. Mr. Lubonja was
sentenced to five years in prison.

By the time the Communist government fell, Mr. Lubonja had spent a total of 17
years as a prisoner. When the new government set him free in 1991, he had
options: to cash in on his life as a dissident of the old government, or to
speak up against a new one that he said was itself authoritarian.

He said he had no choice.

''It is a matter not only of dignity, it is the sense of your life,'' he said in
a telephone interview from Italy. ''It's your choice of life, and if you give up
you will lose your sense of your life.''

''Tarnishing Egypt's image'' was the reason Mr. Ibrahim was sentenced to six
years in prison in 2002. He was freed by an appeals court after 10 months. He
suffered from nerve damage and had trouble walking. Mr. Ibrahim went right back
at it, criticizing Mr. Mubarak. While he was out of Egypt attending a conference
two years ago, he was charged again  -- and warned not to return, or else face
prison. He has lived in self-imposed exile since. On Monday a court overturned a
two-year sentence he had been given, and there is talk he may now return.

''It is almost like, shall we say, like a slide, you get into this feeling of
mission and you become obsessed with it,'' Mr. Ibrahim said in a telephone
interview from the United States, just before the verdict was issued.

He recalled a difficult moment a year into his exile, when his two grandsons
visited him in Istanbul. ''One of them said, 'Grandpa, why don't you stop,
apologize to President Mubarak and come back to Egypt?' ''

''I had never discussed politics with these children,'' Mr. Ibrahim said the
other day. ''I said, 'Apologize to Mubarak?' I said, 'Why apologize?'

''They said, 'We want you back.'

''I said, 'When he apologizes to the Egyptian people, I will apologize back,' ''
Mr. Ibrahim recalled.

He said he had no choice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ayman Nour: Prison to TV.
 Many political prisoners in Egypt are kept at Tora Prison. For many opponents
of authoritarian regimes, jail hardens their resolve. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAWN
BALDWIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); FAMILY (89%);
INTERVIEWS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); RULE
OF LAW (72%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (71%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%); TELEVISION
TALK SHOWS (50%)

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (58%); HOSNI MUBARAK (50%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (75%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (94%); LIBYA (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); SYRIA
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1153 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Women's Volleyball Wins

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Sports Desk; SPORTS BRIEFING COLLEGES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 126 words


Quinnipiac reinstated its women's volleyball team and dropped men's indoor track
in response to last week's injunction issued in a gender equity lawsuit against
the university. United States District Judge Stefan Underhill prevented the
university from carrying out plans to eliminate the volleyball program, a move
announced in March as part of budget cuts that also saw the elimination of men's
outdoor track and golf.

The American Civil Liberties Union of Connecticut brought the lawsuit on behalf
of the volleyball team and its coach, who argued that Quinnipiac was not in
compliance with the Title IX federal law mandating equal opportunities for
female athletes. The university declined to comment on the reason for
eliminating the indoor track team.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENDER EQUALITY (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
INJUNCTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); JUDGES (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (87%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (85%); ATHLETES (73%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (73%); TRACK & FIELD (65%); BUDGET CUTS (54%); BUDGETS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1160 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Afghan Forces Kill 29 Taliban Insurgents, Coalition Says

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and ALAN COWELL; Abdul Waheed Wafa reported from
Kabul, Afghanistan, and Alan Cowell from Paris. Adam B. Ellick contributed
reporting from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 576 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


American and Afghan forces backed by airstrikes engaged in a ''fierce
firefight'' with Taliban insurgents in a remote and mountainous region of
eastern Afghanistan on Thursday, killing at least 29 militants in an effort to
capture one of their leaders, according to a joint military statement.

But a Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, gave a vastly different account of
the battle, saying that the militants had killed 15 members of the coalition
forces and captured four Afghan police officers. The spokesman said no Taliban
fighters had been killed.

American military officials said the leader in question, known as Mullah
Sangeen, is a ''fairly significant'' commander of the Haqqani network, a radical
group headed by the Taliban commander Maulavi Jalaluddin Haqqani that is
believed to be behind some of the largest attacks in recent years. Unconfirmed
reports surfaced in 2007 and in 2008 that Mullah Sangeen was killed, but both
proved untrue.

The battle was part of a widening effort by the Obama administration to crush
Taliban and Qaeda insurgents in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The intensifying
conflict has led to Afghan claims that civilian casualties caused by American
airstrikes are undermining public support for the war.

The joint statement on Thursday said that ''no noncombatants were injured during
this operation'' and said that the 29 dead were all militants. They included six
insurgents who blew themselves up with suicide vests without causing coalition
fatalities, the statement said.

In the battle, coalition forces advanced under a hail of fire from militants on
higher ground, the statement said.

The firefight took place about 100 miles southwest of the eastern city of Khost
along the border with Pakistan. Afghan and American forces had been directed by
intelligence reports to a remote militant encampment used as a staging area for
attacks in Afghanistan's Paktika Province. When the forces arrived, they came
under fire, the statement said.

The military accused the commander Mullah Sangeen of helping senior leaders of
Al Qaeda and ''hundreds of foreign fighters'' infiltrate Afghanistan from
Pakistan.

Hamidullah Zhuak, a spokesman for the provincial governor of Paktika, said
officials had counted the bodies of 34 insurgents, most of them from Arab
countries and Pakistan. The battle took place far from populated areas, reducing
the risk of civilian casualties, he said. The Taliban spokesman denied that any
non-Afghan fighters had been involved in the battle.

In a separate episode on Thursday, Afghan Army troops killed 35 militants and
wounded 13 others in the Deh Chopan district of Zabul Province, according to
American military officials. The Afghan force, backed by American troops, was
conducting a reconnaissance patrol when it responded to fire from militants.

The issue of civilian casualties caused by the United States in Afghanistan has
been heightened in the wake of the bombing of the western province of Farah.
Afghan officials said 140 civilians were killed in American airstrikes during a
battle with the Taliban there on May 4. The American military has said 20 or 30
civilians may have died, along with 60 to 65 Taliban fighters.

The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, which carried out its own
investigation, said this week that American forces had used ''disproportionate''
force in the attack, which it said might have killed up to 97 civilians, most of
them children.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (95%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
BOMBINGS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); RELIGION (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (65%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (63%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KHOST, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1163 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka: Nod From U.N. Panel

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 90 words


The Sri Lankan government said Thursday that a vote at the United Nations Human
Rights Council had vindicated its prosecution of the war against rebel Tamils.
Members of the council had wanted an inquiry into the government's conduct
during the war, but the council ended up passing a resolution praising the
military's defeat of the Tamil Tigers. The  military said Thursday that it had
positively matched the DNA of the bodies of the Tamil Tiger founder Vellupillai
Prabhakaran, above, and his son Charles Anthony, both killed last week.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (83%); DNA (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1166 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 1, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Value in Showing the Photos of Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 250 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Abu Ghraib We Cannot See'' (Op-Ed, May 24):

Philip Gourevitch writes that the suppressed prisoner abuse photos wouldn't tell
us anything we don't already know. He is wrong. Recently released legal memos
elucidate the Bush administration's torture policies, but as long as the photos
are being suppressed, the public will not know the full horror of the policies'
consequences.

The claim that photos won't shed light on official responsibility for the abuse
is also wrong. The infamous Abu Ghraib photograph of Pvt. Lynddie England
dragging a naked prisoner by a leash displays methods that Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld authorized for use at Guantanamo Bay. The still-withheld
photos would likely expose other links between official policies and the abuse
conducted on the ground.

Finally, Mr. Gourevitch is wrong to assume that the photos would be released
without necessary context. We have asked the Obama administration to release not
only the photos but also the associated investigative files.

The files would allow the public to understand the context in which the photos
were taken and also to assess the adequacy of the government's investigations
into the abuse.

Amrit Singh New York, May 25, 2009

The writer is an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer on the Freedom of
Information Act lawsuit in which the release of the photos is sought, and a
co-author of ''Administration of Torture: A Documentary Record From Washington
to Abu Ghraib and Beyond.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); LITIGATION (65%); FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (54%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1171 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 2, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Winners on the Horizon in Somalia's Long Battle With Chaos

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


Somalia is once again a raging battle zone, with jihadists pouring in from
overseas, preparing for a final push to topple the transitional government.

The government is begging for help, saying that more peacekeepers, more money
and more guns could turn the tide against the Islamist radicals.

But the reality may be uglier than either side is willing to admit: Somalia has
become the war that nobody can win, at least not right now.

None of the factions -- the moderate Islamist government, the radical Shabab
militants, the Sufi clerics who control some parts of central Somalia, the clan
militias who control others, the autonomous government of Somaliland in the
northwest and the semiautonomous government of Puntland in the northeast -- seem
powerful enough, organized enough or popular enough to overpower the other
contenders and end the violence that has killed thousands over the past two
years.

Somalia analysts say the main event, the government versus the Shabab, will drag
on for months, fueled by outside support on both sides. The United Nations and
Western countries see the transitional government, however feeble, as their best
bulwark against piracy and Islamist extremism in Somalia, and are pumping in
hundreds of millions of dollars for the government's security. At the same time,
the Shabab are kept afloat by an influx of weapons and fighters, much of it
reported to be flowing through neighboring Eritrea.

The Shabab, more than anyone else, have succeeded in internationalizing
Somalia's conflict and using their jihadist dreams to draw in foreign fighters
from around  the globe, including the United States. The Shabab, whose name
means youth in Arabic, are a mostly under-40 militia who espouse the strict
Wahhabi version of Islam and are guided, according to American diplomats, by
another, better-known Wahhabi group: Al Qaeda.

Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, the top United Nations envoy for Somalia, said that there
were now several hundred foreign jihadists fighting for the Shabab. He noted
that they were ''more motivated, better organized and better trained'' than
typical Somali street fighters, who tend to be teenagers paid a few dollars a
day to charge blindly into battle with rusty Kalashnikov rifles. These young
combatants know as much about military tactics as they do about school, which is
not a lot. Class has essentially been out for the past 18 years, since Somalia's
central government collapsed.

But the Shabab have limitations, too. In the past few weeks, the Shabab and
their allies all but seized Somalia's capital, Mogadishu, and sealed the escape
routes out of the city. In the end, though, they were unable to overrun those
very last, but strategically vital, areas the government still controls, like
the port, the airport and the hilltop presidential palace.

The new Shabab overseas recruits have imported to Somalia the tricks of Al
Qaeda's trade, like remote-controlled explosives and suicide bombs. But as Iraq
and Sri Lanka have shown, insurgents need more than suicide bombs to take over a
country. They need  overwhelming force, or a persuasive ideology and governing
strategy, all of which the Shabab currently lack. The only role that seems fit
for them right now is that of spoiler.

''The Shabab can't govern,'' said Hassan Gabre, a retired engineer in Mogadishu.
He said the Shabab were simply part of Somalia's industry of violence, trying to
defend ''the anarchy regime.''

Shabab clerics are quick to put their austere version of Islam into effect in
the territory they seize, recently amputating the hand of a convicted thief and
then dangling the lifeless, bloody results in front of a shocked crowd in
Kismayo, a port town in southern Somalia. But this may be just a gruesome side
show.

Mr. Ould-Abdallah spoke of a ''hidden agenda'' and suggested that the real
reason the Shabab and their allies were in control of Kismayo was a confluence
of sinister business interests like gun-running, human smuggling and the
underground charcoal trade.

''There's an economic dimension here,'' he said.

It was not always like this. The Shabab were a crucial part of a functioning
mini-government in 2006, when an alliance of Islamic courts briefly controlled
much of south-central Somalia. The Shabab's controversial religious policies
were tempered then by moderate Islamists, who delivered services like
neighborhood clean-ups and community policing, and as a result the whole Islamic
movement won grass-roots support. In the end, the experiment lasted only six
months, until Ethiopian troops, backed by American military forces, invaded and
drove the Islamists underground.

That intervention failed. The Islamists returned  as a fearsome guerrilla force
and the Ethiopians pulled out this January, setting Somalia more or less back to
where it had been in 2006, with 17,000 people killed in the process (according
to Somali human rights groups). Moderate Islamist leaders then took over the
transitional government, nominally protected by 4,300 African Union
peacekeepers.

But no one is especially well liked in Mogadishu these days, not even the
peacekeepers, who may have the most dangerous peacekeeping mission of all. Many
Somalis turned against them after a deadly episode in February when a roadside
blast hit an African Union truck and the peacekeepers responded by firing wildly
into a crowded street. According to Somali officials, the peacekeepers killed 39
civilians, though the African Union said that the true figure was much lower and
that the people had died in a cross-fire. Radical Islamists are now calling the
African troops ''bacteria.''

All this could be an opportunity for the transitional government. After all, the
new president, Sheik Sharif Sheik Ahmed, rose to popularity as a neighborhood
problem solver, best known for helping free kidnapped children.

But Sheik Sharif's government seems hobbled by the same tired, intractable clan
divisions and lack of skills that torpedoed the 14 previous transitional
governments. There have been glimmers of hope, such as the government passing a
national budget for the first time in years and using legitimate tax money from
Mogadishu's port to pay its soldiers. But the bigger picture is grim. In the
past few weeks, it proved very difficult for the government even to organize its
various militias to jointly defend the few blocks it still controls.

The pattern is clear, and may not be broken anytime soon: A weak government
means more violence, means weaker government, which means still more violence,
and so on.

''With all the fighting that's going on, this government can't attract the best
Somalis,'' said Mohamed Osman Aden, a Somali diplomat in Kenya. ''The good
Somalis are not going to come when it's so violent. Would you?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A woman sat recently with her 7-year-old son, who had been
wounded by a stray bullet, in a medical tent set up by Ugandan forces in
Mogadishu, Somalia.
 Through a car window, an intersection in a Mogadishu area noted for violence.
The moderate government controls only a small part of the city.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
ROBERTO SCHMIDT/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); MARITIME PIRACY (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%);
RELIGION (70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); ADOLESCENTS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (89%); NAIROBI, KENYA (65%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (99%); KENYA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ERITREA (79%); UGANDA
(79%); SOMALILAND (54%)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1173 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cleared of Terrorism Charges, but Then a Target for Deportation

BYLINE: By DAMIEN CAVE; Lynn Waddell contributed reporting from Tampa, Fla.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1537 words

DATELINE: MOORE HAVEN, Fla.


Youssef Samir Megahed toyed with a piece of lint on the other side of the
bulletproof glass and described his case as simply ''weird.''

In April, a federal jury acquitted him on charges of transporting explosives
during a road trip with a friend who had packed model rocket propellants in the
trunk. But three days later, in  a Wal-Mart parking lot in Tampa, Mr. Megahed
was arrested again in connection with the case, this time by immigration
authorities.

The new charge is that he ''is engaged in or is likely to engage in'' terrorist
activities, a violation of his legal residency in the United States.

''They just label you a terrorist and that's it,'' said Mr. Megahed, 23, who
moved to Florida from Egypt with his family 11 years ago and is being held here
at an immigration detention center.

Mr. Megahed is at least the third Florida defendant in three years to be brought
up on immigration charges after prosecutors failed to win terrorism convictions
in federal court. If convicted of the new charges and deported, he would join
thousands of other Muslim and Arab men sent home since Sept. 11, 2001, as part
of an extensive law enforcement strategy that relies on the immigration courts
to remove potential threats.

Some national security experts say the country is safer without such men, and
immigration officials declare the deportations both legal and fair. But with
President Obama scheduled to speak in Cairo on Thursday about repairing
relations with the Muslim world, Mr. Megahed is being presented by critics of
the immigration strategy here and abroad as a test case of the president's
pledge to break with some of the Bush administration's most unpopular policies.

Egyptian news outlets and blogs have taken up Mr. Megahed's cause. Several
federal jurors who acquitted him have also made the rare move of publicizing
their outrage at their verdict's being second-guessed, while Arab-American
groups, civil rights organizations and churches have lobbied the Obama
administration for his release.

''We are sending the wrong message to American Muslims and the Muslim world,''
said Ramzy Kilic, executive director of the Tampa chapter of the Council on
American-Islamic Relations, an advocacy group for Muslims. ''If Obama really
wants to make a new way forward with mutual respect, he has to start here at
home.''

Immigration courts have not been central to the prosecution of cases involving
terrorism. But in such cases, they share prosecutorial advantages similar to
those found in the controversial military tribunals for suspects accused of
being foreign fighters.

In immigration courts, for example, hearings can be closed to the public, the
burden of proof is lower than in federal court, and a wider scope of evidence,
including hearsay, can be used. Michael Wishnie, a law professor at Yale
University, said using immigration courts in these cases  amounted to
''second-class justice'' because ''the defendant's rights are reduced.''

In Mr. Megahed's case, officials with Immigration and Customs Enforcement have
emphasized that his deportation hearing is a civil, not a criminal, proceeding,
possibly with new evidence, and does not amount to ''double jeopardy'' -- the
prohibition on trying defendants more than once for the same crime.

''This is nothing new,'' said Bill West, chief of national security for
immigration enforcement until he retired in 2003. ''The concept goes back to Al
Capone -- get the bad guys any way you can, on any violation you can.''

Still, the main question in the immigration case is essentially the same as it
was in the federal trial: Is Mr. Megahed a danger to society, or, as his lawyer
argues, is he only ''guilty of having stupid friends''?

Mr. Megahed's legal problems began two years ago on a road trip with Ahmed
Mohamed, who, like Mr. Megahed, was Egyptian, Muslim and an engineering student
at the University of South Florida. Mr. Megahed said he had known Mr. Mohamed
for only a few months before traveling with him in the summer of 2007.

''It was for fun,'' Mr. Megahed said in an interview here. ''To see the
Southeast of the United States.''

They took turns driving north until they reached Goose Creek, S.C., where the
police pulled them over for going 60 miles an hour in a 45-m.p.h. zone. One of
two deputies involved said he had become suspicious when the men quickly put
away a laptop; a recording of the traffic stop captured the officer saying, ''I
think they're part of the Taliban.''

The officers searched the trunk and found ''several pipe bombs;'' more
specifically, four pieces of PVC tubing, about 2 to 2.5 inches long and
three-quarters of an inch in diameter, which contained sugar, potassium nitrate
and cat litter.

Mr. Mohamed told the police they were homemade fireworks -- similar recipes can
be found online. The authorities charged them with possession of an explosive
device, carrying a prison term of up to 15 years. A judge set bail at $500,000
for Mr. Mohamed and $300,000 for Mr. Megahed.

''That is when the bad dreams began,'' Mr. Megahed's father, Samir, an engineer,
said in an interview with his wife, Ahlem, at their upscale two-story town house
in Tampa. Declaring ''I love America,'' he said he had brought his family to the
state because the University of South Florida had accepted his two sons.

He described Youssef, the younger, as an outgoing joker who had lost a front
tooth rough-housing as a boy.

Mr. Megahed, in a visitation booth at the detention center, described himself as
clueless. He said he had not known the plastic tubes were in the trunk (his
fingerprints were not found on them) and had never even heard the term ''pipe
bomb'' until the police said it.

He also said he had not known they were seven miles from a naval base when they
were pulled over, or that Mr. Mohamed's laptop had a video on it showing a
rocket attack somewhere in the Middle East.

''I thought it was going to be O.K.,'' Mr. Megahed said. ''I hadn't done
anything wrong.''

After their arrest, federal investigators found a YouTube video that Mr. Mohamed
had made showing how to turn a toy into a detonator. In December, Mr. Mohamed
pleaded guilty in a separate case to providing material support to terrorists
and was sentenced to 15 years in prison; as part of the plea agreement, the
charges from the traffic stop were dropped.

Mr. Megahed was not involved with the video. His trial began three months later
and lasted three weeks. Gary Meringer, the jury foreman, said jurors were
initially suspicious about the circumstantial evidence in the case -- the
fireworks in the trunk; the video on the laptop; a gas can in the car; that they
had tried to buy a gun, while their bags lacked toothpaste or bathing suits.

An initial survey of jurors, Mr. Meringer said, produced six guilty votes, four
undecided, and two not guilty. But as the jury examined each detail
individually, he said, holes emerged. For example, the prosecutor's expert could
not get a simulated version of the alleged explosives to give off much more than
heat and smoke.

It was also unclear whether Mr. Megahed had watched the video on the laptop, or
if he had viewed a handful of Web sites -- on AK-47s among other things -- that
were found in the browsing history on a family computer at the Megaheds' home.

By the third day of deliberations, the jury had arrived at unanimous verdicts of
not guilty of transporting explosive materials and of possessing a destructive
device.

Mr. Megahed's sister cried in the courtroom. He celebrated at the beach. Then
immigration authorities arrested Mr. Megahed after a shopping trip with his
father. Mr. Meringer, 57, the foreman, who is a corporate lawyer, was shocked
when he heard of the immigration charge. ''It literally took the air right out
of my chest,'' he said. ''I felt the government had completely wasted the time
of the legal system, the judge, the jury, the bailiffs, all of those people.''

He contacted the other jurors, and three joined him in signing a statement
opposing Mr. Megahed's detention. ''We want a fair shake,'' Mr. Meringer said.
''A fair shake for Youssef would be that he could finish college, become a
citizen and go on his merry way.''

Mr. Megahed's hearing is scheduled for Aug. 17. By then, he will have spent
nearly a year behind bars, including nine months before his trial.

His lawyer, Charles Kuck, said immigration officials had suggested they would
rely in part on evidence from the family computer, which Mr. Megahed's brother,
Yahia, said had been used by numerous friends and relatives.

In the criminal trial, the judge excluded eight video clips on the computer that
show rocket attacks in an unidentified Middle Eastern location; a ninth clip
shows an improvised explosive device that hits an American tank.

While Mr. Megahed waits,  his parents visit him every five days, as often as is
allowed. His father said he worried that his son had become depressed. ''Every
time he tells me to bring clothes for him in case they let him out,'' he said.

But in the interview, Mr. Megahed seemed determined to appear stoic. He said he
had turned to an Arabic proverb for solace: ''The longer you live, the more you
will see.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Youssef Megahed, 23, found not guilty of explosives charges in
April, was arrested by immigration authorities three days later. (pg.A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); TERRORISM (91%); DEPORTATION (91%); ACQUITTAL (90%);
JURY TRIALS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); RELIGION (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%);
DISCOUNT & CLUB STORES (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); ARAB AMERICANS (75%);
BURDENS OF PROOF (74%); HEARSAY (72%); ARRESTS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%);
IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); MILITARY COURTS (67%); EXECUTIVES (64%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (61%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (86%)

CITY: TAMPA, FL, USA (93%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EGYPT (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1179 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Across the Mideast, Praise and Criticism for Obama

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Reporting was contributed by Isabel Kershner from
Jerusalem; Robert F. Worth from Beirut, Lebanon; Mona el-Naggar from Cairo;
Taghreed El-Khodary from Gaza; Hwaida Saad from Beirut; Muhammad al-Milfy from
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Nazila Fathi from Tehran; Omar al-Mani from Damascus,
Syria; Iraqi employees of The New York Times from Karbala and Mosul; and Sharon
Otterman from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


On one level, President Obama's speech succeeded in reaching out to Muslims
across the Middle East, winning widespread praise for his respectful approach,
his quotations from the Koran and his forthright references to highly fraught
political conflicts.

But Mr. Obama's calibrated remarks also asked listeners in a region shaken by
hatred to take two steps that have long been anathema: forgetting the past and
understanding an opposing view. For a president who proclaimed a goal of asking
people to listen to uncomfortable truths, it was clear that parts of his speech
resonated deeply with his intended audience and others fell on deaf ears, in
Israel as well as the Muslim world.

Again and again, Muslim listeners said they were struck by how skillfully Mr.
Obama appropriated religious, cultural and historical references in ways other
American presidents had not. He included four quotations from the Koran and used
Arabic greetings. He took note of longstanding historical grievances like the
stain of colonialism, American support for the Iranian coup of 1953 and the
displacement of the Palestinian people. His speech was also embraced for what it
did not do: use the word terrorism, broadly seen here as shorthand for an attack
on Islam.

''He spoke really like an enlightened leader from the region, more than like a
foreigner,'' said Mustafa Hamarneh, the former director of the Center for
Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan. ''It was very unlike the
neocolonial and condescending approach of the previous administration.''

Mr. Obama structured his speech almost like a Friday Prayer, blending a
political, social and religious message. In style and substance, some regional
analysts said, it sought to undermine the message of radical terrorists like
Osama bin Laden.

''Al Qaeda benefited from the previous rhetoric about the clash of civilizations
in mobilizing and recruiting individuals as part of fighting a crusade,'' said
Mohammad Abu Rumman, research editor at Al Ghad, a  newspaper in Amman, Jordan.
''The speech is positive and allows us to move from the religious-civilization
title of the struggle to a political-realistic title.''

Perhaps inevitably, Mr. Obama angered some on both sides. Many Arabs and
Israelis alike furiously rejected what they saw as his attempt to present their
suffering as morally equivalent. They picked at the content of the speech almost
like a biblical text.

''How dare Obama compare Arab refugee suffering to the six million Jews murdered
in the Holocaust?'' asked Aryeh Eldad, a lawmaker from the rightist National
Union Party in Israel.

Ahmed Youssef, the deputy foreign minister in the Hamas government in Gaza,
said, ''He points to the right of Israel to exist, but what about the refugees
and their right of return?''

And in Jordan, Rohile Gharaibeh, deputy secretary general for the Islamic Action
Front, the political party of the Muslim Brotherhood, rejected any reference to
the Holocaust. ''The Holocaust was not the doing of the Muslims, it was the
Europeans, and it should not come at the cost of the Palestinian people or the
Arabs and Muslims,'' he said.

The speech included a list of topics that have soured relations with Muslims. As
each topic was addressed, from religious tolerance and women's rights to nuclear
weapons and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he was greeted with warm applause or
icy stares, depending on the listener.

In Iraq, after six years of occupation, missed opportunities and failed
promises, there was a heavy dose of skepticism.

In cafes and restaurants, televisions were turned to sports or movies or blared
music videos. When a man at a restaurant in Mosul tried to change the channel to
the speech, diners shouted at him, ''What a stupid speech!'' In the Shorooq
restaurant in Karbala, a small crowd heckled Mr. Obama as he spoke about Israel.
''The most important thing is to accomplish things, not just say them,'' said
Alaa Sahib Abdullah, a 30-year-old lawyer.

In Iran, some praised the explicit reference to the 1953 coup that topped a
popular Iranian prime minister.

''The coup has become a symbol of nationalism for Iranians, and the fact that
Mr. Obama acknowledged the United States had intervened sends a positive message
to all groups,'' said Alireza Rajaee, a political analyst in Tehran. ''Now those
who favor better ties with the United States have no fear to publicly call for
it because they can say that the United States has admitted to its historic
mistake.''

While many listeners generally agreed with Mr. Obama's comments about violence
and extremism, some said they disliked his characterization of the wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq, which they described as bloody catastrophes.

''What is astonishing is that he condemned violence, but he didn't say a word
about what the United States did in Iraq,'' said Khaled Saghieh, the executive
editor of Al Akhbar, a Lebanese daily newspaper that leans toward Hezbollah.
''If you want to call for a new beginning, you should at least apologize for
tens of thousands of victims in Iraq.''

Political opponents of the region's autocratic governments also expressed
disappointment. ''What touched on democracy and human rights in the speech was
far less than what we wanted,'' said Ayman Nour, Egypt's most prominent
political dissident, who was imprisoned after challenging President Hosni
Mubarak in the last election.

On the flashpoint of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Mr. Obama did little to
impress his Muslim audience -- and barely enough to calm the anxieties of some
Israelis. He angered Arabs when he equated shooting rockets into Israel with
violence, a practice many here say is legitimate resistance against occupation.

From the Arab perspective, he did not offer any new proposals or suggest a time
line for moving toward a Palestinian state. From the Israeli perspective, he
criticized expansion of settlements and forcefully endorsed creation of an
independent Palestinian state, which Israel's current government has refused to
endorse.

''As a legal specialist, he should know people are under occupation and cannot
recognize the state while they are under occupation, only afterwards,'' said Mr.
Youssef of Hamas. ''Why put pressure on Arabs and Muslims to recognize Israel
while it is not recognizing our existence?''

But Israelis and Palestinians also stepped back from their own concerns and said
they understood the broader significance of the speech. Even Mr. Youssef hailed
the speech as historic.

Israel said in a statement that it hoped the speech ''will indeed lead to a new
period of reconciliation between the Arab and Muslim world and Israel.''

Politicians and analysts on both sides also highlighted statements they
interpreted as shoring up their own causes.

Israelis were satisfied that Mr. Obama referred to America's bond with Israel as
''unbreakable'' and defined Israel as a ''Jewish homeland''; they also
appreciated his unequivocal rejection of Palestinian resistance through violence
and his condemnation of Holocaust denial.

On the issue of Jerusalem, one of the most delicate and intractable in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Mr. Obama avoided political confrontation,
sticking instead to a theme of religious harmony. He did not call for the city,
now under full Israeli control, to be divided into two capitals, Israeli and
Palestinian.

''If anything, there was a hint for the unity of the city,'' said Yehuda Ben
Meir of the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv. ''The speech
should certainly be acceptable to Israelis.''

Despite palpable longing for the president to change policies and not just tone,
some seemed to understand he was trying to move the debate by balance and
indirection.

''If I were in his shoes, what would I do?'' said Mansoor al-Jamri, editor of Al
Waast, a daily newspaper in Bahrain. ''My closest friends are dictators, and the
best strategic ally I have is viewed as a strategic enemy for the Muslim world.
If he delivers on what he said, and it is a compromise, many people will
ultimately be happy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Iraqis at the Samir Amis coffee shop in Baghdad were able to
keep tabs on President Obama's speech in Cairo on Thursday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES
SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); RELIGION (91%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); HAMAS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); REFUGEES
(77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (70%); HOLOCAUST (60%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); AMMAN, JORDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: MIDDLE EAST (94%); ISRAEL (94%); JORDAN (93%); EGYPT (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1184 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 7, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

9 Hostage Officers Killed at Peruvian Oil Facility

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


Nine police officers were killed Saturday as security forces regained control of
a petroleum facility from indigenous protesters in a remote jungle region,
raising the death toll related to protests by indigenous activists since Friday
above 30, Peruvian government officials here said.

Prime Minister Yehude Simon said the officers were killed in the events
surrounding a push to retake a pumping station belonging to Petroperu, the
national oil company, in the northern Bagua Province, where indigenous
protesters had kidnapped 38 police officers. Twenty-two of the abducted officers
were freed, but seven were still missing, officials said.

The killings came amid reports by indigenous groups that security forces killed
as many as 25 protesters Friday in clashes at a different location in Bagua,
where Indians had blocked a highway. Mr. Simon confirmed that at least 9 Indians
had been killed and 155 wounded, and that a total of 22 police officers had been
killed, intensifying the most acute crisis faced by President Alan Garcia since
he took office in 2006.

The bloodshed comes after two months of slow-burning protests, which spread from
rain forests in Peru's north to the country's south, and have focused on
interrupting petroleum production and transportation. In an increasingly
well-coordinated movement, the lowland Indians are demanding that Mr. Garcia
withdraw decrees that ease the way for companies to carry out major energy and
logging projects in the Peruvian Amazon.

After the operation at the Petroperu facility, officials said they were planning
to re-establish the supply of oil to remote provinces that had been hit with
fuel shortages and blackouts. Still, it was unclear how successful they would be
when protesters were still blocking routes on important highways and rivers.

Officials also said Saturday that they were seeking to enforce an arrest warrant
on charges of sedition for Alberto Pizango, a Shawi Indian and the leader of
Aidesep, an umbrella organization of indigenous groups that had organized many
of the protests. But Mr. Pizango apparently went into hiding and was replaced by
another leader, Champion Nonimgo.

''Our protests will go on until our demands are met,'' Mr. Nonimgo said.

A maneuver here in Congress sparked the clashes between protesters and the
police, after lawmakers blocked an effort Thursday to allow debate on one of Mr.
Garcia's most polemical decrees, which would open as much as 60 percent of
Peru's jungles to oil exploration and other extractive investments.

Ollanta Humala, a nationalist political leader and a former lieutenant colonel
in Peru's army who was defeated by Mr. Garcia in the most recent presidential
elections, has sided with the protesters, lambasting the use of use of force
against the Indians and raising his profile ahead of the next elections in 2011.

Meanwhile, the climbing body count in the rain forest, along with unconfirmed
reports that the number of Indians killed could be higher, threatens to deplete
the legitimacy of Mr. Garcia's government. Mr. Garcia, 60, is still hounded by
claims of human rights violations from his first term as president in the 1980s,
when soldiers suppressed a prison rebellion in 1986, killing more than 100
inmates suspected of being Maoist guerrillas.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Relatives of a slain police officer attended a mourning service
on Saturday in Lima, Peru.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MARIANA BAZO/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); CRUDE OIL
& NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (89%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (89%); RAIN FORESTS (87%);
OIL & GAS OUTPUT (78%); OIL & GAS SHORTAGES (78%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (78%);
ELECTIONS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); OIL EXPLORATION
(73%); OIL & GAS EXPLORATION (73%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ARRESTS (73%);
FORESTS & WOODLANDS (71%); POWER FAILURES (71%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (66%)

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%)

COUNTRY: PERU (99%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1186 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Measuring Success in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 553 words


Lt. Gen. Stanley McChrystal, President Obama's choice to be the next military
commander in Afghanistan, has defined America's essential goals there in a way
that represents an overdue change in military strategy. He told senators last
week that ''the measure of effectiveness will not be the number of enemy killed.
It will be the number of Afghans shielded from violence.''

If General McChrystal can carry it off, he will have a far better chance of
turning around a war America has not been winning --  but must.

It isn't just Taliban violence that Afghans need shielding from. Errant American
fire has taken an unacceptably high toll, especially from the airstrikes that
American commanders came to rely on because they lacked sufficient ground
troops. One particularly deadly episode last month killed dozens of civilians
(the Pentagon says 20 to 30; the Afghan government says 140).

Last week,  The Times reported on the initial conclusions of a Pentagon
investigation, citing significant errors by military personnel that contributed
to the high civilian death toll. These included ignoring a rule against bombing
high-density residential areas in the absence of imminent threat and failing to
reconfirm a target after a bombing delay.

Such mistakes are costly, not just in civilian lives but in broader support for
the presence of American troops and the military campaign against the Taliban.

Afghanistan's people have few illusions about the Taliban. They have felt the
lash of its medieval punishments, witnessed its brutal attacks on women's rights
and girls' education and noted its cynical and sinister ties with major drug
traffickers. But they have little enthusiasm for a war in which foreign troops
and Taliban fanatics shoot at each other with seeming indifference to the
civilians caught in the cross-fire. Last year, some 2,000 Afghan civilians were
killed, according to the United Nations and private aid agencies.

Reducing that toll will require tighter and more strictly enforced rules of
engagement. That applies not just to airstrikes but to the search and detention
operations that General McChrystal wants to expand this year with the help of
21,000 additional troops that President Obama ordered sent to Afghanistan.
Ground operations are less likely to go astray than airstrikes. But as happened
far too many times in Iraq, they can sweep up innocent civilians and turn local
people against the American presence.

General McChrystal's most important job will be to change the way ordinary
Afghans view the fight against the Taliban and its Al Qaeda allies.
Counterinsurgency operations need support (and intelligence tips) from the local
population to succeed.

Protecting Afghan civilians, and expanding the secure space in which they can
safely go about their lives and livelihoods must now become the central purpose
of American military operations in Afghanistan. And Washington must step up the
pace and quality of training so that expanded Afghan military and police forces
can take over that mission as soon as possible.

President Obama's new strategy for Afghanistan incorporates this more realistic
approach. General McChrystal's redefinition of American effectiveness reflects
it. The right words are being said in Washington. Now they must be applied in
Afghanistan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (92%); BOMBINGS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); TERRORISM (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (70%); AL-QAEDA (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(67%); WOMEN (64%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (64%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (89%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1192 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 11, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Security Guard Is Killed in Shooting At Holocaust Museum in Washington

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT; Brian Knowlton and Theo Emery contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


An 88-year-old white supremacist with a rifle walked into the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum, one of the capital's most visited sites, on Wednesday
afternoon and began shooting, fatally wounding a security guard and sending
tourists scrambling before he himself was shot, the authorities said.

The gunman was identified by law enforcement officials as James W. von Brunn,
who embraces various conspiracy theories involving Jews, blacks and other
minority groups and at one point waged a personal war with the federal
government.

The gunman and the security guard were both taken to nearby George Washington
University Hospital, with Mr. von Brunn handcuffed to a gurney, witnesses said.
The guard, Stephen T. Johns, died a short time later. Museum officials said he
had worked there for six years; The Associated Press reported his age as 39.

Mayor Adrian M. Fenty said Mr. von Brunn was in critical condition. Chief Cathy
L. Lanier of the Washington police said the gunman walked into the museum's main
entrance shortly before 1 p.m. and began shooting without warning. At least one
security guard was returning fire; a total of five or six shots are believed to
have been fired.

Officials and others who track conspiracy theorists have long been familiar with
Mr. von Brunn, whose latest address is believed to be in Eastern Maryland, in
part because he maintains a Web site. (Wednesday night, only an archived version
of the site was available.) He has claimed variously to be a member of Mensa,
the high-I.Q. society; to have played varsity football at a Midwestern college,
where he earned a degree in journalism; to have been a PT boat commander in
World War II; and to be a painter and an author.

Mr. von Brunn has also claimed to have been victimized by a court system run by
Jews and blacks.

Before Wednesday, he was best known to law enforcement officials for having
walked into the Washington headquarters of the Federal Reserve System on Dec. 7,
1981, with a bag slung over the shoulder of his trench coat. A guard chased him
to the second floor, where the Fed's board was meeting, and found a revolver, a
hunting knife and a sawed-off shotgun in the bag.

Mr. von Brunn, who lived in Lebanon, N.H., at the time, told the police he
wanted to take board members hostage to focus news media attention on their
responsibility for high interest rates and the nation's economic difficulties.
He was convicted in 1983 and served several years in prison on attempted
kidnapping, burglary, assault and weapons charges.

The Southern Poverty Law Center, a civil rights organization based in Alabama,
said Wednesday that Mr. von Brunn is a racist and anti-Semite with ''a long
history of associations with prominent neo-Nazis and Holocaust deniers.''

Rabbis Marvin Hier, founder and dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, and Abraham
Cooper, an associate dean, said in a statement that the attack at the museum
showed ''that the cancer of hatred, bigotry and anti-Semitism is alive and well
in America.''

''It is deeply disturbing that one of America's most powerful symbols of the
memory of the Holocaust was selected as the site of the attack just days after
President Obama accompanied Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel to the Buchenwald
death camp,'' they said.

Opened in 1993, the museum is situated near the Mall and the Potomac River.
Since its dedication, it has had nearly 30 million visitors, including more than
8 million schoolchildren and 85 heads of state, the museum says on its Web site.

Like all public buildings in the capital, the museum has heavy security, with
visitors required to pass through metal detectors. But someone determined to
enter a building with a firearm can sometimes do so. In July 1998, a gunman
killed two police officers and wounded a tourist in the Capitol.

Museum officials issued a statement expressing shock and grief over Wednesday's
attack and said the museum would be closed Thursday in honor of Mr. Johns.

On Wednesday evening, President Obama issued a statement saying, in part, ''This
outrageous act reminds us that we must remain vigilant against anti-Semitism and
prejudice in all its forms.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Visitors to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum were
kept away after the shooting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GERALD HERBERT/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
James W. von Brunn, the suspect, was in critical condition. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
TALBOT COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE, VIA THE STAR DEMOCRAT)
Museum officials said it would be closed Thursday in honor of the slain guard.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 At least one security guard was said to have returned fire. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
CHARLES DHARAPAK/ASSOCIATED PRESS) MAP: The museum is one of Washington's
most-visited sites.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (91%); SHOOTINGS (91%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (91%); GUNSHOT
WOUNDS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(89%); HOMICIDE (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS
(78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
SCHOOL SPORTS (75%); JOURNALISM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
RELIGION (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (67%); CENTRAL BANKS
(66%); INTELLIGENCE & COGNITION (64%); WRITERS (63%); BURGLARY (63%); JAIL
SENTENCING (62%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (60%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS
(50%); INTEREST RATES (50%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%)

COMPANY: SOUTHERN POVERTY LAW CENTER (60%); GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
HOSPITAL (57%)

ORGANIZATION: GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY (57%); AMERICAN MENSA (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (60%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (60%)

STATE: NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (79%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1205 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 16, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 609 words


International

IN PAKISTAN'S WAR ON TALIBAN, GREATEST TEST STILL AWAITS

Pakistan's campaign to contain a growing insurgency must still clear its highest
hurdle: South Waziristan. The western mountains are the Pakistani Taliban's
prime sanctuary and home to their elusive leader, Baitullah Mehsud. PAGE A6

RUSSIA VETOES U.N. MISSION

Russia and the West were at an impasse once again over Georgia's breakaway
territories. Russia vetoed the extension of United Nations monitoring in
Abkhazia. PAGE A6

HONEST CAFES IN INDONESIA

Indonesia's latest effort in its anticorruption drive: cashier-free honesty
cafes. A Samarinda Journal. PAGE A8

WORLD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS

The majority of countries -- 85 percent -- lack laws to stem the growing problem
of traffic deaths and injuries, according to the World Health Organization's
first global report on road safety. PAGE A7

BRITISH INQUIRY INTO IRAQ WAR

The British government will go forward with an inquiry into its role in the Iraq
war. The hearings will be held behind closed doors. PAGE A9

3 HOSTAGES SLAIN IN YEMEN

A German intelligence official confirmed the deaths of three young women who
were among nine foreigners abducted in Yemen last week. The fates of the other
six hostages are still unknown. PAGE A11

National

MONITOR SEEKS MORE STEPS BY THE LOS ANGELES POLICE

The Los Angeles Police Department must still do more to eliminate racial
disparities in police searches and the use of force, a court-appointed monitor
testified. PAGE A12

MUSIC AND ART LESSONS LAG

Music and art instruction in eighth-grade classrooms has been ''mediocre'' over
the last decade, according to a survey by the Department of Education. PAGE A12

A BLOW TO MUSLIM CHARITIES

A report by the American Civil Liberties Union concluded that the war on terror
had hurt Muslim charities and interfered with their donors' religious freedom.
PAGE A14

New York

MOTHER'S WAR ON JUNK FOOD PUTS A SCHOOL ON EDGE

An Upper West Side elementary school has felt the wrath of one parent, a
healthful-eating advocate with a gift for e-mail invective. Big City by Susan
Dominus. PAGE A15

Obituaries

JAMES F. CALVERT, 88

Vice Adm. James F. Calvert, the commander of the first nuclear-powered submarine
to surface at the North Pole, later became the 46th superintendent of the United
States Naval Academy. PAGE A19

Philip D. Curtin, 87, Historian A19

Business

AN INSIDER WANTS TO SHOW HE IS ABLE TO REMAKE G.M.

Fritz Henderson, the new chief executive of General Motors, is determined to
prove that his 25 years with G.M. is not a liability.  PAGE B1

A RUSH TO BRITISH PROPERTY

Investors are returning to the battered British commercial property market and
snapping up offices and shopping centers. PAGE B1

Broad Sell-Off in U.S. Stocks B1

Sports

FEAR OF BOGEY IS A CONSTANT FOR PROS AND ROOKIES ALIKE

Even the best professionals are so keen to avoid bogeys that they make putts for
birdie discernibly less often than identical putts for par, according to a new
study. PAGE B10

DOUBTS ON FUTURE OF LAKERS

The Lakers just claimed their fourth championship since 2000, but they still
have concerns about their future. PAGE B11

Arts

THE ECONOMICS OF TITLES, OR CREATING BEST SELLERS

Imitating popular book titles is pervasive in the publishing industry. For
example, ''Freakonomics'' begot ''Obamanomics,'' ''Slackonomics,''
''Invent-onomics 101,'' ''Scroogenomics,'' and ''womenomics.'' PAGE C1

When Ballerinas Write C1

Science Times

GLIMPSES OF LIFE'S ORIGINS

Four advances have renewed confidence that an account of life's origins on Earth
will emerge. PAGE D1

Op-ed

DAVID BROOKS PAGE A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); IRAQ WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%);
NAVIES (78%); HOUSING MARKET (77%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (76%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(74%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (74%); HISTORY (73%); TERRORISM (73%); EXECUTIVES
(72%); REAL ESTATE (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HOSTAGE TAKING
(71%); POLICE FORCES (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (70%);
FREEDOM OF RELIGION (69%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (69%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (68%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); EXECUTIVE MOVES (64%); RELIGION (62%);
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY (61%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (61%); REAL ESTATE
INVESTING (61%); NAVAL VESSELS (60%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (60%); CORRUPTION
(55%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (54%); RETAILERS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (56%)

PERSON: FREDERICK HENDERSON (71%); BAITULLAH MEHSUD (58%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); GEORGIA (93%); YEMEN (92%); IRAQ (92%); INDONESIA
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1206 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 17, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Gaza, Carter Urges Hamas to Meet Terms for West's Acceptance

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1049 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Former President Jimmy Carter said Tuesday that he urged Hamas's leaders during
a high-profile meeting here to take steps necessary to become accepted by the
leading Western nations.

Mr. Carter is the most prominent American figure to have met with the Hamas
government that took over Gaza two years ago, after the Palestinian Authority's
forces were routed in a brief but bloody factional war. Hamas welcomed Mr.
Carter's visit as a significant step in its quest for international legitimacy.

Ismail Haniya, the leader of the Hamas government in Gaza, and Mr. Carter held a
joint news conference at which an American flag was displayed alongside a
Palestinian national flag behind the speakers. There were no green Hamas flags
in sight.

It was Mr. Haniya's most public appearance since Israel ended its devastating
three-week military campaign against Hamas in Gaza in January, an offensive that
Israel said was intended to halt rocket fire by Gaza militants against southern
Israel.

Striking a conciliatory tone, Mr. Haniya said Hamas would favor the creation of
a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders and with full sovereignty, adding,
''We are pushing for the realization of this Palestinian national dream.''

Mr. Haniya also said that Mr. Carter's visit to Gaza was particularly important
after two years of economic ''siege'' and after the ''Israeli aggression.'' He
noted that it followed the change in the American administration and President
Obama's address in Cairo, in which Mr. Haniya said he had heard a ''different
language.''

Israel and Hamas declared separate, informal cease-fires that halted  last
winter's war, but Israel continues to impose a punishing economic blockade that
allows in only basic provisions for the 1.5 million residents of the isolated
coastal strip.

Israel, the United States and the European Union classify Hamas as a terrorist
organization. They have set three conditions for dealing with Hamas, saying it
must renounce all violence, recognize Israel's right to exist and accept all
previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements. Hamas has so far refused to comply.

Hamas leaders have said they will never recognize Israel, and will offer only a
long-term truce, not a full-fledged peace treaty, in return for a Palestinian
state.

Mr. Carter, 84, emphasized that he was in Gaza as a private citizen, not as a
representative of his government. But he said he would write a report on his
visit to the region for the Obama administration on his return.

In a three-hour meeting with Hamas government officials and senior
representatives of the group, Mr. Carter told them to find a mechanism that
would allow Hamas to meet the conditions set by international players, according
to Ahmed Yousef, the Hamas deputy foreign minister, who attended the meeting.

In a brief interview before the meeting, Mr. Carter said that in order to break
the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate, ''first of all Hamas has to be accepted by
the international community as a legitimate player in the future, and that is
what I am trying to do today.''

Mr. Carter also called for Palestinian unity and elections, and for an end to
the economic blockade of Gaza.

Earlier, touring the site of the American International School, a private
institution in Gaza that was bombed by the Israelis during the war, Mr. Carter
said, ''I have to hold back tears when I see the deliberate destruction that has
been wreaked against your people.'' He added that he felt partly responsible
because the school had been ''deliberately destroyed by bombs from F-16s made in
my country.''

Israel said that rockets had been launched from the vicinity of the school.

Speaking at a graduation ceremony for Gazan children who had completed a human
rights curriculum at the headquarters of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency, which aids Palestinian refugees, Mr. Carter denounced the economic
embargo.

''Tragically, the international community largely ignores the cries for help,
while the citizens of Gaza are  treated more like animals than human beings,''
he said.

Under international pressure, the new Israeli government says it is reviewing
its policy and considering allowing more goods into Gaza, but has not yet made
any decisions.

Mr. Carter, who also met leaders in Syria; the West Bank, controlled by the
Palestinian Authority; and Israel during his regional tour over several days,
handed the Hamas leaders in Gaza a letter from the family of Cpl. Gilad Shalit,
an Israeli soldier who was seized and taken into Gaza in June 2006. Mr. Carter
asked his hosts to pass the letter on to the soldier, presumed to be alive.

Mr. Haniya said Hamas was hoping to negotiate an ''honorable deal'' in the form
of a prisoner exchange.

An Israeli government official declined to comment on whether Mr. Carter could
play a mediating role in such negotiations, saying the government  did not speak
publicly about the Shalit affair.

Mr. Carter, who brokered the 1979 peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, has
fallen out of favor with many Israelis, who see him as hostile to their
interests -- especially since the publication of his book ''Palestine Peace Not
Apartheid'' in 2006.

But during this visit he met with the Israeli president, Shimon Peres, and with
the speaker and members of Parliament. He also visited a Jewish settlement in
the Gush Etzion settlement bloc in the West Bank.

In a related development on Tuesday, two Israeli  groups that advocate for
Palestinians, HaMoked and Gisha, revealed a new Israeli procedure that makes it
impossible for Gaza residents to move to the West Bank in all but the most
exceptional of cases. For example, the groups said, under the policy,
chronically ill patients, orphans and elderly invalids will not be able to
receive care from their closest relatives living in the West Bank if they have
any relatives in Gaza capable of caring for them.

In a paper presented to Israel's Supreme Court in reply to several petitions
against the policy, the Israeli Ministry of Defense contended that it was
necessary given the current security and political situation in Gaza.

The advocacy groups said the policy served to further isolate Gaza while
increasing the geographic and political separation between Gaza and the West
Bank.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jimmy Carter in Gaza on Tuesday at the ruins of the American
International School, hit during an Israeli airstrike in January. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
KHALIL HAMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A6)
 Ismail Haniya, the Hamas leader in Gaza, at a news conference with Jimmy
Carter. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHMUD HAMS/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES) (pg.A7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORISM (78%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (62%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(60%); PRESS CONFERENCES (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (94%); BARACK OBAMA (89%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (78%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(95%); EGYPT (78%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (67%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1209 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 18, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Eavesdropping Continues

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 638 words


Once again, the country is learning about how the federal government has been
exceeding its legal authority and violating Americans' most basic rights in the
name of fighting terrorism.

In a disturbing article in The Times on Wednesday, James Risen and Eric
Lichtblau said that Congressional investigations suggest that the National
Security Agency continues to routinely collect Americans' telephone calls and
e-mail messages -- perhaps by the millions.

These sweeps seem unconnected to specific terrorism investigations, and the
communications are entirely domestic. The law does not allow fishing trips
through Americans' communications and only permits the government to read
e-mails or listen to phone calls in which one party is ''reasonably believed''
to be outside the United States.

The government offered its usual response: Oops. A spokesman for the
intelligence community said any ''overcollection'' was inadvertent and ''when
such errors are identified,'' they are quickly corrected.

That excuse wore thin long ago. We heard it when the F.B.I. was caught abusing
its power to issue ''national security letters'' to short-circuit constitutional
protections. We heard it in April, when the Obama administration first
acknowledged that the N.S.A. was exceeding even the expanded authority it was
given last year to monitor international calls and e-mail traffic.

Representative Rush Holt of New Jersey, who leads the House panel that oversees
intelligence agencies' operations, was right when he said that ''some actions
are so flagrant that they can't be accidental.''

The Times article reported that since 2005, intelligence analysts have used a
database called Pinwale, which systematically archives both foreign and domestic
e-mail messages by the millions -- without regard for whether they are domestic
or international or have anything to do with an actual investigation.

Mr. Holt is doing the right thing by pressing for an inquiry. But lawmakers
should be clear about how this happened: last year, 293 members of the House and
69 senators voted for a dangerous and mostly unnecessary expansion of the 1978
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which protected Americans from
unwarranted government spying for 30 years.

President George W. Bush started violating that law shortly after 9/11 when he
authorized the N.S.A. to conduct domestic wiretapping without first getting the
required warrant. When that program was exposed by The Times in late 2004, the
Bush team began pressuring Congress to give retroactive legal cover to the
eavesdropping operation and to the telecommunications companies that
participated in it.

That finally happened in the heat of the 2008 campaign. Congress expanded FISA
and gave the companies blanket immunity less than a day after the bill was
introduced. We doubt if many lawmakers read the legislation. President Obama,
who was still a senator at the time, voted for it, even though he had been
passionately denouncing illegal wiretapping for months.

Many critics of the legislation, including this page, said that the powers given
to the government to eavesdrop were too broad, that the limits placed on them
were too vague and that the remedies for error or deliberate violations were too
weak.

We do not believe that Mr. Obama is deliberately violating Americans' rights as
Mr. Bush did, and it is to his credit that the government acknowledged part of
the problem in April. But this nation's civil liberties are not predicated on
trusting individuals to wield their powers honorably. They are founded on laws.

The 2008 expansion of FISA is a deeply flawed law. Congress needs to repeal it
and re-examine, carefully this time, what powers the government really needs to
eavesdrop on Americans and what limits and safeguards need to be placed on those
powers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); LEGISLATION
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); WIRETAPPING (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (76%); IMMUNITY (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (70%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (69%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (77%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); RUSH D HOLT (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1222 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Thai Rebels Recruiting In Schools, Study Says

BYLINE: By THOMAS FULLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


Insurgents in southern Thailand are using a network of Islamic schools to
recruit fighters, but their movement does not appear to be linked to Al Qaeda or
other foreign Islamist groups, according to a study due to be released Monday.

Since an increase in violence five years ago, analysts have sought to pinpoint
the primary motivations of an insurgency that has left more than 3,400 people
dead in towns and villages only several hours away from Thailand's most popular
beach resorts.

The 20-page study, by the International Crisis Group, describes a homegrown
movement of Malay Muslim fighters seeking independence from Thailand and built
around longstanding resentment toward the Thai Buddhist majority. Thai officials
have in the past attributed the violence to the drug trade and other criminal
activities.

A group known as the National Revolutionary Front-Coordinate was the main force
in recruiting an estimated 1,800 to 3,000 fighters drawn from more than 100,000
students in southern Thailand's Islamic school system, the report says.

''The classroom is the point of first contact,'' the report says. ''Recruiters
invite those who seem promising devout Muslims of good character who are moved
by a history of oppression, mistreatment and the idea of armed jihad to join
extracurricular indoctrination programs in mosques or disguised as football
training.''

The Crisis Group said the report was based on 16 months of interviews with
religious teachers and students  -- all of whom are unnamed -- involved in
underground activities.

Violence in southern Thailand has been overshadowed by the  political crisis in
the country, but the southern insurgency remains one of the region's most deadly
and intractable ethnic conflicts.

Until recent weeks a two-year crackdown by the Thai military appeared to be
reducing violence in the area. But tensions flared  this month when a group of
masked gunmen opened fire on a crowd of worshipers outside a mosque, killing 10
people and seriously wounding 12. Since the start of this month, 36 people have
been killed and more than 100 have been wounded in the region.

The victims of the attacks  are often Buddhists,  notably teachers and
government officials, but more than half of those killed in the past five years
were  Muslims, many labeled by the insurgents as collaborators or spies for the
Thai government.

The insurgents use many of the same methods in their recruitment -- oath-taking,
indoctrination and military training -- as other jihadist groups. But the
difference in southern Thailand, the report says, is that recruiters ''appeal to
Malay nationalism and the oppression of Malay Muslims by Buddhist Thai rulers''
rather than invoking a universal Islamic state or a global jihad.

A pamphlet found at an Islamic school during a raid by security forces in 2005
offered a window into the teachings.

''Our land is crying and calling and waiting for independence and fraternity,''
the pamphlet said. ''We have been treated as second-class citizens or like
children of slaves.''

The insurgents are helped in their recruitment by reports of torture by the
military, disappearances and extrajudicial killings. A Muslim lawyers group
counted 74 reports of torture of detainees between June 2007 and April 2008.

The recruitment is secretive, and even in schools where insurgents are active,
''not all school administrators, teachers and students may be aware of what is
happening, let alone consent to it,'' the report says.

The government has tried to offer an alternative to the traditional
community-based Islamic schools, where instruction is often only in the Malay
language, but has met  deadly resistance. Over the past five years, 115 public
school teachers and education officials have been killed and 200 schools burned
in what Human Rights Watch called a ''sickening trend.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); EXTRA CURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (74%); SHOOTINGS (72%); MILITARY TRAINING
(70%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (67%); SPORTS INSTRUCTION (65%); RESORTS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP (57%)

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (94%); MALAYSIA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1226 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 24, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indiana: Lawsuit Over Prison Worship

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING MIDWEST; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 93 words


Two Muslim inmates held in a special unit at the federal prison in Terre Haute
say they are not allowed to pray in groups as often as their religion commands
and have asked a federal judge to ease worship limits imposed by the Bureau of
Prisons. The prison houses several high-security inmates, including the American
Taliban soldier John Walker Lindh. The lawsuit filed by the American Civil
Liberties Union of Indiana challenges limits on Islamic worship in the prison's
restrictive Communications Management Unit, where about 30 of the 40 inmates are
Muslim.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); RELIGION (91%); CORRECTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TALIBAN (88%); JUDGES (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (84%)

ORGANIZATION: BUREAU OF PRISONS (58%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

CITY: TERRE HAUTE, IN, USA (72%)

STATE: INDIANA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1234 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 28, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Power Plays: Repression 101

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


-- When the rallying cry on the streets of Tehran turned from ''Death to
America!'' to the stranger-sounding ''Death to the Dictator!'' there was a great
temptation to conclude that the days of the mullahs were numbered.

Maybe they are and maybe not; as President Obama said on Tuesday, ''we don't
know yet how this thing is going to play out.'' But inside Mr. Obama's National
Security Council, and around the world, versions of the same question were being
asked: Will the resort to raw repression work? Or will it eventually backfire,
only widening the huge political breach that the election laid bare?

The history of repression to save regimes -- or at least their leaders -- is
long. And every case is different: Some regimes are brittle in the face of
popular pressure while others are supple in adapting to it; some can use
nationalism as their trump card, while for others, it is an Achilles' heel. And
if some regimes are simple tyrannies, the structure of Iran's political system
is especially complex and opaque.

Still, a common thread is clear: It is the security services on which the
regime's fate ultimately hinges. If they decide their best interests lie with
the powers that they have protected, and that have protected them, they will
stick it out. If they decide they are more likely to prosper under new
leadership, power can collapse at the speed of a show trial.

There are a lot of gradations along that scale.

Twenty years ago this month, many inside and outside of China who witnessed
Tiananmen Square confidently predicted the beginning of the end for the
Communist Party. They were wrong. Two decades later the party itself has changed
radically enough -- tossing aside its revolutionary ideology and replacing it
with a social compact built on stupendous annual economic growth -- that it
remains secure, with its grip on power as solid as ever.

How has it done that? Over the past two decades, the Chinese Communist Party has
allowed some local elections, tolerated some protests over pollution or
corruption (as long as they did not cut deeply at the powers of the national
leadership), and allowed greater freedom to travel abroad and surf the Internet
(with some strict limits). And the educated, rising classes accepted the
unwritten rules: You can enjoy your rising expectations, but don't challenge the
party's authority.

Meanwhile, the military has reaped spoils; not only is it being modernized, but
today its financial enterprises are a large part of China's rising economy.

It is an example that the Iranians have, presumably, watched carefully, if only
in this sense: their Revolutionary Guard, too, has grown in standing and
financial clout in recent years.

Reach back a bit further in history, though, to the Solidarity uprisings in
Poland in the early 1980s, and the lesson is different. There, at first,
repression also worked. The security forces, part of the Warsaw Pact, were
called on to enforce martial law and remained loyal to a government firmly in
the Soviet Union's orbit. But over a decade's time the regime's hold on power --
and on the soldiers' loyalties -- eroded as union workers, intellectuals, a pope
and eventually even the security forces lost all confidence in a government that
they viewed as illegitimate.

Part of the reason the regime proved vulnerable was that Poles themselves saw it
as a foreign implant. So when the Soviet Union began to fall apart, the security
forces recognized that their own patron was heading for the rocks. They made a
strategic (some might say survival) decision to back whatever government the
people chose.

That was the beginning of a swift end. But the model doesn't really fit Iran.
The mullahs may be many things -- fundamentalist, intolerant, even vote fixers
-- but their trump card is that they are Iranian to core, and that their own
revolution 30 years ago ejected an autocrat whose chief supporter abroad was the
United States.

The examples do not stop there: Burma's brutal junta, which rewards a loyal, if
corrupt, military even as the general economy withers, has resisted a democracy
movement's protests for three decades; North Korea's all-powerful military has
never let protests fester at all, even as it pursues nuclear weaponry while the
population goes hungry. On the other hand, in Indonesia and Nicaragua, the first
cracks in dictatorships quickly shattered myths of impregnable control.

Nicaragua's case, in the 1970s, was a lesson in the price of losing core
supporters. The Somoza dynasty had weathered rebellions before, but made a
crucial mistake when it squandered foreign aid sent to help the shattered
economy rebuild after a 1972 earthquake. That, combined with its brutality,
alienated important middle-class leaders, who made common cause with the leftist
Sandinistas as the United States slashed military aid. By 1979, the rebels had
beaten the army.

Experts say that case may offer little parallel to Iran, whose economy is
insulated whenever oil prices rise and whose populist president can appeal to
the masses even when the elite grumble about the cost of Western sanctions.

South Korea's experience was different still, but also limited as a parallel to
Iran. Its generals, who had run an authoritarian government during the cold war,
were persuaded that they would not lose all their power in a democracy; that
became the key to establishing one in the late 1980s.

''It's too early to draw any conclusions about which model fits in Iran,'' said
Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was born in Warsaw and had the thankless task, as Jimmy
Carter's national security adviser, of trying to establish relations with the
leaders of Iran's revolution in 1979. ''But in this case, I have to say I'm
pessimistic in the short term, and optimistic in the long term.''

That pretty well captures the mood of Mr. Obama's advisers. In background
conversations last week, several cautioned that it was not clear what the
Iranians had in mind. ''The students in Tiananmen wanted real democracy, the
Poles wanted regime change, but the Iranians might be looking for something in
between,'' one of Mr. Obama's top advisers said. ''But the more the supreme
leader cracks down, the more radicalized the opposition may become.''

Robert Litwak, the author of ''Regime Change,'' a study of how modern regimes
have fallen, said last week: ''The truth here is that a soft landing for Iranian
society is not a soft landing for the leadership.'' So far, he observed last
week, ''the Iranians are not as sufficiently united against the regime as the
Poles were in the late '80s.'' Moreover, the Polish regime was more fragile:
Because it was considered a Soviet tool, the opposition could play to
nationalist emotions.

Not so in Iran. The clerics may be repressive hardliners, but they are
authentically Iranian. And so far, the Revolutionary Guard seems completely on
the side of the supreme leader and President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

That will be hard to shake. Mr. Ahmadinejad's rise to power was in part because
of Guard support, and he has since rewarded it handsomely. The Revolutionary
Guard runs Iran's nuclear program; if the opposition gains power, the Guard has
to wonder what it might negotiate away. And outside agencies estimate that Iran
could become able to assemble a nuclear weapon between 2010 and 2015.

As one of Mr. Obama's aides said the other day, ''for the leadership, that
suggests the next five years are no time to be messing with the formula.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: TO THE STREETS: A man protesting Iran's election results tries
to shield himself from tear gas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALI SAFARI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
-- GETTY IMAGES) (pg.WK1)
 HALT: Myanmar, 2007. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (pg.WK4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
POLITICS (89%); ELECTIONS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(74%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); US PRESIDENTS (71%);
EMERGING MARKETS (68%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (61%); CORRUPTION (60%); RELIGION (57%);
INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (71%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); CHINA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAN
(88%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1241 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 2, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Impunity No More

BYLINE: By LUIS MORENO-OCAMPO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 992 words


THE HAGUE -- In 1998, more than 100 states adopted the Rome Statute to end
impunity for those crimes that we had thought, over and over, would never happen
again, only to see them occur, again and again: genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

The states accepted their shared duty to punish massive atrocities and created a
new actor, a judicial actor, on the international scene: a permanent
International Criminal Court, which would step in when national courts failed to
act.

An independent, permanent court with a global reach was the object of strong
debate in Rome and, for some states, a motive to oppose the court.

The drafters of the Rome Statute were not naive idealists. They were the
ultimate realists. In their lifetimes, they had watched the Khmer Rouge kill
millions, they had let Srebrenica happen and they had let Rwanda happen. They
had failed the ''never again'' promises of their fathers.

During their careers as political leaders, diplomats and negotiators, they had
tried every solution: They shook hands with devils, sent them off to golden
exiles, tried to appease them with promises of immunity, power and wealth. Each
time they gambled on impunity and each time they lost.

They learned the need to adjust tactics to a lasting solution. By integrating in
one justice system states and an independent international court, the drafters
provided incentives for states to prosecute the worst crimes themselves. If the
states didn't do it, the I.C.C. would.

Less than four years after its adoption in Rome, more than 60 states ratified
the statute and it entered into force. In 2003, 18 judges representing the five
continents were appointed, and I was given responsibility to be the prosecutor.
Together, we had to transform the idea of ending impunity into a reality.

During our first year, we found that the gravest crimes under our jurisdiction
were committed in Uganda and Congo. The presidents of these countries decided to
refer those situations to the court. One year later, in March 2005, Britain and
France spearheaded the U.N. Security Council decision to refer Darfur to the
court.

No one could have predicted the speed of this integration between the
international system of peace and security and the new permanent system of
international justice.

Central African Republic and the Ivory Coast also asked for an intervention by
the court. Georgia, a party to the Rome Statute, but also Russia, a non-party,
sent the court more than 3,000 communications regarding allegations of war
crimes committed in Georgia. This year, the Palestinian National Authority
accepted the jurisdiction of the court. A month ago the Arab League sent the
court its first-ever fact-finding report on crimes committed in Gaza.

Supported by dozens of states -- parties and nonparties -- we are investigating
those most responsible for the most serious crimes and collecting evidence in
ongoing conflicts. As a result, the court has issued 13 arrest warrants and one
summons.

The days of fearing a frivolous court are over. But there are new challenges
created by a serious, operational institution. Arrest has become the biggest
test. Some individuals sought by the court are enjoying the protection of their
own militias, such as Jean Bosco Ntaganda in Congo. Others, like President Omar
Hassan al-Bashir and Ahmad Harun of Sudan, are officials of governments eager to
shield them from justice.

They are still committing massive crimes. But their destiny is to face justice.
The court is not going away. But the victims do not have the luxury of time. In
Congo, in Darfur, rapes -- rapes of women, rapes of girls -- are destroying
entire communities, entire generations, now.

There is hope. Congo executed arrest warrants against three militia leaders for
enlisting child soldiers and making sexual slavery a weapon of war. Belgium has
executed on its territory an arrest warrant against Jean-Pierre Bemba for his
massive campaign of rape and pillage in the Central African Republic. The first
trial is under way and a second and third are starting soon.

Decisions of the I.C.C. are felt well beyond the courtroom. The monitoring of
allegations of crimes that my office is conducting in Afghanistan, Colombia,
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Palestine and Georgia can promote national justice efforts.
Colombia is prosecuting hundreds of paramilitaries and guerrillas. In Kenya, our
existence triggered discussions on accountability for crimes committed during
the last elections. Impunity is no longer an option.

Armies around the world, even from non-signatory countries, are adjusting their
standards and rules of engagement to the Rome Statute. This is the way to
prevent crimes. The law makes the difference between a soldier or a terrorist, a
policeman or a criminal.

Ratifications keep growing. This week, Chile becomes the 109th state party. But
universal ratification is required to apply one standard all over the world.
Today the court has no jurisdiction to investigate alleged crimes committed in
Iraq, Lebanon, Sri Lanka, Burma or Somalia.

The states of 1998 supported the idea of the court. The states of 2009 are
beginning to show the leadership required to implement the concept. They are
aware that the court has a strong constituency: a new generation of global
citizens in the making. Thousands of teenagers and 20-somethings from different
countries, gathered in a group called ''Invisible Children,'' are calling for
the execution of the I.C.C. arrest warrant for Joseph Kony, the leader of the
Lord Resistance Army, a man who abducted thousands of children in the last 23
years, turning boys into killing machines and girls into his so-called
''wives.''

Step by step, the Rome Statute is in motion, moving ahead. Even critics of the
court are talking about ending impunity. Sometimes the process is painful and
sometimes it is controversial, but it is changing international relations
forever.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); GENOCIDE
(79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); JURISDICTION (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%)

CITY: ROME, GA, USA (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); NETHERLANDS (90%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%); RWANDA
(79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); UGANDA (79%); ISRAEL (79%); UNITED
KINGDOM (75%); FRANCE (72%)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1256 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 8, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan: Genocide Charge Sought Against President

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 78 words


The International Criminal Court prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said Tuesday that
he had lodged an appeal to have President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan charged
with genocide in the Darfur conflict. The court has indicted Mr. Bashir on seven
counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder, rape and
torture, but ruled that it had insufficient grounds for a charge of genocide.
Mr. Bashir has dismissed the allegations as part of a Western conspiracy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); APPEALS (88%); CONSPIRACY (88%);
INDICTMENTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (86%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (86%); TORTURE (83%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1259 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 9, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tribunal Says Bosnian Serb's Trial Must Proceed

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 346 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Radovan Karadzic's persistent efforts to claim immunity from war crimes
prosecution have run into an important obstacle:  a 30-page ruling issued
Wednesday in which the judges dealing with his case said that his trial must go
ahead.

They said that whatever promise or deal Mr. Karadzic believed he had been
offered by an American envoy years ago would not be binding before the
International Criminal  Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.

The decision is expected to clear the way for the trial of Mr. Karadzic, the
former Bosnian Serb leader, who was arrested in July 2008 after spending years
in hiding. At the court, he faces charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, and his indictment accuses him of bearing responsibility for
atrocities during the 1992-1995 Bosnian war, including the bloody three-year
siege of the city of Sarajevo and the killing of 8,000 prisoners in Srebrenica.

Since his arrival in The Hague, Mr. Karadzic and his legal team have fired off a
hail of motions, a number of them dealing with his claim that Richard C.
Holbrooke, the American diplomat who helped negotiate peace in the Balkans,
assured him in 1996 that he would not be pursued by The Hague's prosecutors if
he left politics. Mr. Karadzic claims to have a number of witnesses to the
agreement.

Two former American officials  have said that Mr. Holbrooke did make such a
promise orally, which was passed on to Mr. Karadzic through intermediaries. Mr.
Holbrooke, now the Obama administration's special envoy to Pakistan and
Afghanistan, has repeatedly denied  any such deal and has been backed up by
another American official.

The judges specifically discarded Mr. Karadzic's claim that Mr. Holbrooke had
been acting with the backing of the United Nations Security Council.  On the
contrary, they said, the Council, which created the tribunal in The Hague,
passed a number of resolutions after 1996 demanding Mr. Karadzic's arrest.

Lawyers for Mr. Karadzic said he was likely to appeal. The court has said it
expects the trial to start in September.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%);
LAWYERS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); APPEALS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (79%); BARACK OBAMA (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1270 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 14, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

WHAT'S ON TODAY

BYLINE: By NIDA NAJAR

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 623 words


10 P.M. (13), 11 P.M. (49) THE RECKONING: THE BATTLE FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT This documentary, part of  the ''P.O.V.'' series on PBS, focuses
on the independent International Criminal Court,  the first permanent tribunal
to seek justice for victims of genocide, war crimes and other atrocities. The
filmmakers follow the chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, as he and his team
try to prosecute cases in Colombia, Uganda and Sudan (where the president, Omar
al-Bashir, was charged with crimes against humanity), without the help of police
or other enforcement agents. That's just one obstacle the prosecutors face.
Though dozens of  nations supported the court's creation, in 2002, many others,
including Sudan, do not recognize its authority. Above, examining a skull in
eastern Congo.

7 A.M. (NBC) TODAY Guests include Martha Stewart; Janet Evanovich, the author of
''Finger Lickin' Fifteen''; and the actor David Arquette.  Topics to be
discussed include workplace bullying, germs in the kitchen and summer skirts.

9 A.M. (ABC) LIVE WITH REGIS AND KELLY The actor Dylan McDermott discusses his
new series, ''Dark Blue.''

8 P.M. (MSG), 10 P.M. (FUSE) STEELY DAN: RENT PARTY'09 This half-hour
documentary takes a look at the Steely Dan band members Walter Becker and Donald
Fagen as they prepare for their current summer tour. It features rehearsal
footage as well as a discussion with Mr. Becker and Mr. Fagen about their coming
concerts at the Beacon Theater in New York, the Chicago Theater and the Wang
Theater in Boston.

8 P.M. (ABC) THE SUPERSTARS In the first round of this competition series
pairing celebrities with athletes, the supermodel Joanna Krupa denounced her
teammate, the Buffalo Bills wide receiver Terrell Owens, after they were
eliminated. Now the five remaining teams must complete a golf course relay race,
then try their hands at a less grueling activity: bowling.

8 P.M. (ABC FAMILY) 10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU  Bianca (Meaghan Martin)
organizes a cheerleading fund-raiser while her sister, Kat (Lindsey Shaw),
receives unwanted attention in this series based on the 1999 film that was
itself inspired by Shakespeare's ''Taming of the Shrew.''

8 P.M. (ENCORE) ERIN BROCKOVICHJulia Roberts won an Academy Award for her turn
in Steven Soderbergh's 2000 film, based on a true story. Erin Brockovich (Ms.
Roberts, above), a struggling legal assistant and single mother, pursues a case
involving the contamination of a small town's water supply. Reviewing the film
for The New York Times, A. O. Scott wrote that in its first half-hour, ''as the
movie tracks its heroine's growing desperation, 'Erin Brockovich' is a minor
tour de force,'' before turning to conventional melodrama.

9 P.M. (MY NETWORK TV) JAIL This reality series, which follows suspects from
their arrests  to their first taste of life behind bars, wraps up its second
season.

9 P.M. (ABC FAMILY) THE PRINCESS BRIDERob Reiner's fairy-tale comedy from 1987
about a hero in black, the girl of his dreams and an awful prince. The movie is
''full of fanciful characters, madcap adventures and a lot of other things
surely not to every taste,'' Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. ''But
'The Princess Bride' has sweetness and sincerity on its side, and when it comes
to fairy tales, those are major assets.'' With Cary Elwes; Mandy Patinkin,
above; and Robin Wright Penn.

10 P.M. (BRAVO) MIAMI SOCIAL The premiere of a reality series about the
professional and personal lives of young Miami residents.

10:30 P.M. (BET) WELCOME TO DREAMLAND The hip-hop producers Drumma Boy (T. I.'s
''Paper Trail'') and Jazze Pha (Ciara's ''Goodies'') team up to sign the next
big thing. In this season finale a winner is chosen. NIDA NAJAR

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MOVIE REVIEWS (89%); FILM (89%);
ACTORS & ACTRESSES (89%); CELEBRITIES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MOVIE
INDUSTRY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
PUBLIC TELEVISION (77%); TELEVISION TALK SHOWS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); GENOCIDE (73%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (73%); BULLYING (72%);
WRITERS (72%); VISUAL ARTISTS (71%); FUNDRAISING (69%); ATHLETES (67%); MUSIC
GROUPS & ARTISTS (64%); GOLF (62%); AMERICAN FOOTBALL (62%); SPORTS (62%);
SINGLE PARENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%)

PERSON: OMAR AL-BASHIR (56%); MARTHA STEWART (52%); REGIS PHILBIN (50%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (53%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (53%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); UGANDA (79%); COLOMBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1279 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 18, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Leader Of Liberia Cites C.I.A. In Jailbreak

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Charles Taylor's career from rebel leader to Liberian president, diamond dealer
and despotic warlord, still holds many mysteries. But this week in a court in
The Hague, where he is on trial for war crimes and crimes against humanity, he
seemed eager to lift the veil on one of them.

Part of the lore surrounding Mr. Taylor is that he broke out of jail in
Plymouth, Mass., while awaiting extradition on charges of embezzling $900,000 in
Liberia. He told his judges that he did not escape on his own; rather, he said,
he was helped by the Central Intelligence Agency.

The plan, he said, was for him to join a Liberian military leader, Thomas
Quiwonkpa, who was plotting a coup against President Samuel Doe. Mr. Taylor said
he was ''100 percent positive'' that the C.I.A. was providing weapons for the
plot.

The escape has little bearing on the charges against him at the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, which is focused on allegations of atrocities committed from
1996 to 2002 by the militias he controlled in Sierra Leone. But the judges have
allowed Mr. Taylor's lawyer to lead him through the turmoil of his life and West
Africa's.

This week, hearings have covered Mr. Taylor's time as a student activist in the
Boston area, his return to Liberia and stint in the government. By September
1985, he had spent 15 months in the Plymouth County Correctional Facility
awaiting extradition to Liberia.

One day, Mr. Taylor said, Harry Nyguan, a Liberian, visited ''and he briefs me
on what is being put together'' by the C.I.A. Mr. Nyguan told him, he said, of
the C.I.A.'s role in the Quiwonkpa plot, the training of rebels and the plan to
invade Liberia.

Mr. Taylor said he pressed Mr. Nyguan to get him released.

Soon afterward, he said, a guard, a supervisor, came to tell him he might be
freed, but asked if he would be able to leave the United States quickly. ''He
verified my passport,'' Mr. Taylor said.

''One evening about 10, he came and opened my cell, it was during lockdown
time,'' Mr. Taylor went on. ''Then he escorted me from the maximum security side
through several gates to the minimum security side.''

Two other men were waiting. ''We got to the windows,'' he said. ''These guys
took a sheet. We tied it on the bars. We came down and got over the fence.'' A
car with two men was waiting outside, he went on. ''They had instructions to
take me as far as New York, where I wanted to go.''

His car, he said, was ''a kind of secure car, a kind of government car,'' he
said. The drivers insisted he stay inside, rather than join his wife's car, to
avoid being stopped by state troopers, he continued. ''I did not pay any
money,'' he said. ''I did not know the guys who picked me up.''

News reports followed, saying that ''I had broken out of jail,'' Mr. Taylor
said. ''I am calling it my release.'' He said he made his way to Washington,
then to Atlanta and to Texas, where he drove unhindered across the border with
Mexico, using his Liberian passport with his name. From Mexico City, he said he
flew to Belgium and from there to West Africa.

By the time he reached Ghana, he said, the coup attempt by Mr. Quiwonkpa had
failed. ''He was cut into pieces and his flesh was eaten by the military at the
time,'' Mr. Taylor said. The tradition of eating enemy flesh in Liberia has been
mentioned by other trial witnesses.

A C.I.A. spokesman, Paul Gimiglia, said that the idea that the agency would help
Mr. Taylor break out of jail was ''completely absurd.''

David Crane, the former prosecutor who indicted Mr. Taylor in 2003, said he was
fascinated by the account.

''There is the official version that he escaped, but there was always that rumor
that he was helped by the C.I.A.,'' he said by telephone. ''We were never able
to confirm it.''

Mr. Crane, a former United States military intelligence official who now teaches
law at Syracuse University, continued: ''He actually now mouthed those words, I
almost gasped. Fascinating possibilities are opening up.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); EXTRADITION (91%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); COUPS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); PRISONS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (72%); EMBEZZLEMENT (56%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (99%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); WESTERN AFRICA
(79%); AFRICA (77%); NETHERLANDS (73%)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1288 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 21, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

United Arab Emirates: Judge Closes Terrorism Case To Public

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 77 words


The judge overseeing the case of an American  detained on terrorism-related
charges closed a hearing to the public on Monday, giving no reason for the
decision. The first session in the case, against Naji Hamdan, was open to
observers. Lawyers  with the American Civil Liberties Union, which accuses the
United States of pushing the case through the emirati courts for lack of enough
evidence to convict him at home, called the closing a ''travesty of justice.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); JUDGES (90%); EVIDENCE (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); LAWYERS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1290 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Judge Challenges Evidence on a Detainee

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1055 words


The Obama administration has until Friday to decide whether to continue to
defend the six-year imprisonment of an Afghan at the prison at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, who was a teenager when he came into American hands.

The decision was prompted by Judge Ellen Segal Huvelle of Federal District
Court, who last week criticized the government's case against the detainee as
''an outrage'' that was ''riddled with holes.'' Judge Huvelle's comments, made
at a hearing in district court in Washington, were not reported at the time.

The detainee, Mohammed Jawad, has drawn international attention because of
questions about his treatment as one of the youngest prisoners at Guantanamo.

Judge Huvelle expressed fury at the government for ''dragging this out for no
good reason'' after ''your case fell apart,'' according to a transcript of the
hearing.

The federal court case is becoming a test of how the Obama administration
responds to the skepticism from several federal judges who are reviewing
evidence against some of the remaining 229 detainees at Guantanamo as part of
habeas corpus cases.

The case against Mr. Jawad has long been one of the most publicly troubled at
Guantanamo. His exact age is unknown, but a military judge ruled last fall that,
while still a teenager, Mr. Jawad was tortured by Afghan officials before he was
turned over to American forces in 2002 and was later abused at the detention
camp at Guantanamo Bay.

Also last fall, the military prosecutor in a war crimes case against Mr. Jawad
on charges of attempted murder drew wide notice by saying publicly that the
evidence was weak and that he had grave questions about the fairness of the
military commission system for prosecuting detainees.

Now, Judge Huvelle has given the government until the end of the week to tell
the court whether it would produce any witnesses and suggested that she might
rule that Mr. Jawad should be returned to Afghanistan.

''You'd better go consult real quick with the powers that be, because this is a
case that's been screaming at everybody for years,'' Judge Huvelle said.

American officials say Mr. Jawad threw a hand grenade that seriously wounded two
American servicemen and their Afghan translator in an attack in Kabul in 2002.
But their claims have been undermined by the judicial findings that almost all
of the evidence against Mr. Jawad was the confessions he made as a result of
torture.

Judge Huvelle is handling the habeas corpus case challenging Mr. Jawad's
imprisonment. Of about 200 habeas cases in the federal court in Washington,
judges have so far ruled that five Guantanamo detainees are properly held and
that 26 are not.

Jonathan Hafetz, Mr. Jawad's lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union, said
Judge Huvelle's comments were an indication that judges were growing uneasy
about many of the government's claims.

''It reflects the pent-up frustration among judges who have seen first hand the
government's lack of evidence,'' Mr. Hafetz said.

Dean Boyd, a spokesman for the Justice Department, did not respond to that
assertion. But he said, ''We are not going to release anyone if it would
endanger our national security.''

At the hearing last week, when Justice Department lawyers asked for more time to
confer within the government, Judge Huvelle noted that Mr. Jawad had been held
for years despite questions about his guilt. The Afghan government claims he may
have been as young as 12 when he was first detained.

Military records show that Mr. Jawad  was subjected to a sleep deprivation
program in which he was moved from cell to cell 112 times in a 13-day period and
that he was isolated, beaten and kicked by guards at Guantanamo. He attempted
suicide in Guantanamo in 2003.

Judge Huvelle's anger was prompted  by a battle over whether the government
planned to use Mr. Jawad's confessions as evidence in defending his detention.
Until last Wednesday, Justice Department lawyers had been relying heavily on
those statements.

Mr. Jawad's lawyers had repeatedly noted that in the separate military
commission case, the military judge, Col. Stephen R. Henley, ruled that those
statements could not be used because they had been the product of torture. Judge
Henley wrote last year that Afghan officials had threatened to kill Mr. Jawad
and his family if he did not confess to the grenade attack.

Judge Henley also ruled that confessions Mr. Jawad had given  hours later to
American interrogators in Afghanistan also could not be used against him because
they were the product of what he called torture by the Afghan officials.

Still, since this spring, Justice Department lawyers continued to cite the
confessions as evidence in the case before Judge Huvelle. Last week, they
abruptly said they would not oppose a request by Mr. Jawad's lawyers that Judge
Huvelle, too, bar the use of those confessions.

In his comments Wednesday, Mr. Boyd, the Justice Department spokesman, said the
Obama administration made ''a dramatic break with the policies of the past'' by
deciding not to rely on statements obtained through torture, including in Mr.
Jawad's case. He did not comment on why the department had based its case on
those statements for months.

Last week, Judge Huvelle demanded to know what the administration claimed as
evidence against Mr. Jawad, saying that 90 percent of the case had been based on
his confessions. ''There is no evidence otherwise,'' she said.

Mr. Jawad's military lawyer, Maj. David J. R. Frakt of the Air Force Reserve,
said that as many as three adults had also  confessed to the grenade attack but
that they were not in custody.

Judge Huvelle noted that the military prosecutor who publicly raised questions
about the case said he had failed to find other persuasive evidence.

The prosecutor, Lt. Col. Darrel Vandeveld, an Army Reserve officer, was
transferred after his public comments and is no longer on active duty.

In an interview, Colonel Vandeveld said he doubted that the government could
find any credible witness who would claim to have seen Mr. Jawad throw the hand
grenade.

He added that his concerns about any case against Mr. Jawad were not based on
technicalities but on an opinion he had developed working to convict Mr. Jawad.

''The evidence suggests to me,'' Colonel Vandeveld said, ''that he is not
guilty.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); HABEAS CORPUS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); MILITARY
COURTS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LITIGATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WAR CRIMES (74%); LAWYERS (73%); MILITARY OFFENSES (70%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (65%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (65%); MURDER (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1291 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 23, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

When to Step In to Stop War Crimes Causes Fissures

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MEMO FROM THE UNITED NATIONS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


On the face of it, a commitment by all United Nations member states to reach an
understanding on how the world body should intervene to stop genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing would not seem like a major
stretch.

But the debate scheduled in the General Assembly for Thursday over the concept,
known as ''the responsibility to protect,'' is producing rancor before it even
begins. So much, in fact, that instead of figuring out how to enforce the
doctrine, the General Assembly could end up debating the policy's validity all
over again, even though about 150 world leaders already endorsed it in 2005.

Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general, tried to set the tone with a speech on
Tuesday. Citing his visits to the memorials for 800,000 dead in Rwanda, Mr. Ban
said the United Nations had the unique ability to save lives by intervening to
stop mass civilian deaths.

''It is high time to turn the promise of the responsibility to protect into
practice,'' Mr. Ban said, warning against those seeking to reopen the entire
debate. ''Resist those who try to change the subject or turn our common effort
to curb the worst atrocities in human history into a struggle over ideology,
geography or economics,'' Mr. Ban added. ''What do they offer to the victims of
mass violence? Rancor instead of substance, rhetoric instead of policy, despair
instead of hope.''

Mr. Ban may not have singled anyone out, but it seemed a not-so-subtle reference
to the Rev. Miguel D'Escoto Brockmann, the Nicaraguan president of the General
Assembly and a Catholic priest, who issued a position paper last week that
created an uproar.

His ''Concept Note'' suggested that responsibility to protect was redecorated
colonialism, and that the true means to eliminate genocide and similar scourges
included world financial reform, Security Council reform and drawing a lesson
from Jesus.

''Jesus' emphasis on redistribution of wealth to the poor and on nonviolence
reinforces the right perspective on responsibility to protect,'' his note said.

Father D'Escoto scheduled a panel discussion before the General Assembly debate
featuring speakers like Noam Chomsky, the American academic whose critique of
''humanitarian imperialism'' discussed the doctrine. Much of the opposition to
the doctrine on Thursday is expected to come from traditional opponents of
American foreign policy like Cuba, Venezuela and Iran.

While Father D'Escoto has supporters, many delegations reacted with the usual
combination of outrage and derision that Father D'Escoto, a former Sandinista
foreign minister, has a habit of provoking. The ambassador of one Latin American
state said it was shocking that a priest was putting ideological and political
visions ahead of human suffering. Peter Maurer, the Swiss ambassador, put it
more bluntly, saying, ''A priest should know that certain things are better kept
to your heart.''

Father D'Escoto's spokesman, Enrique Yeves, said the president was being
unfairly criticized. ''The only thing he is doing is calling for a debate on
this issue, which is very pertinent,'' Mr. Yeves said.

Even without the General Assembly president, the topic -- shortened in United
Nations-speak  to  ''R2P'' -- was  a hard-fought one. Many developing countries
harbor suspicions that the doctrine is merely a Trojan horse for foreign
meddling in their domestic affairs. Attempts to slap the label on various crises
only deepened those suspicions. As prime minister of Britain, Tony Blair briefly
used it as retroactive justification for invading Iraq. France tried to deploy
it as the prescription for forcibly delivering aid to Cyclone Nargis victims in
Myanmar in 2008. Russia cited it as its tanks rolled into South Ossetia last
summer.

Edward C. Luck, whom Mr. Ban appointed his special adviser on the topic but the
General Assembly refused to pay, wrote a report this year that divided the
concept into three pillars: that all states must protect their populations from
atrocities; that the United Nations and other institutions can help countries
failing in this duty; and that the international community must react in a
series of steps when a large number of civilians are at risk, with military
intervention the final response. The fight swirls around that last point, when
military intervention might be justified and whether that can be codified into
law. ''The problem with all of this is the one-dimensional perception that R2P
is only about military coercion,'' said Gareth Evans, a former Australian
foreign minister.

Delegates from African organizations have come to argue that R2P is not just a
Western tool. Other proponents hope the debate will inch the discussion toward
practical steps on how R2P can be made operational. But some worry that the more
it is debated, the less consensus will emerge.

The Bush administration disliked the doctrine on the ground that it might tie
American hands in foreign policy decisions, but President Obama basically
supports it.

Susan Rice, the American ambassador to the United Nations, often speaks about
how the failure to intercede in Rwanda while she was a top Clinton
administration official in Africa is a low point in American foreign policy and
her personal career. In a speech last month in Vienna, Ms. Rice acknowledged
that the doctrine had been abused in conflicts like Iraq, but argued for the
responsibility ''to respond to the worst outrages.''

''We know there will be more perpetrators,'' she said. ''We know there will be
more victims. But we must work to ensure that there will also be more justice
and fewer and fewer bystanders.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Rwandan children pleaded with soldiers from Zaire, now Congo, to
let them follow their mothers into that country during the 1994 conflict that
led to 800,000 deaths.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JEAN-MARC BOUJU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (86%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (75%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (75%); BANKING & FINANCE (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (79%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); NICARAGUA (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1296 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Guantanamo Forever?

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 277 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Panel Misses a Deadline in Reviewing Guantanamo''  (news article, July 21):
Citing unnamed Obama administration officials, you report that the
administration is considering proposals for the ''indefinite detention'' without
charge or trial of Guantanamo detainees ''who the government determines are a
significant security threat but cannot be tried because of the lack of usable
evidence.''

Despite its repetition by the administration, often without challenge by the
media, the premise that Guantanamo holds a substantial number of people who are
too dangerous to release but cannot be prosecuted is groundless.

Federal prosecutors have an imposing array of weapons against suspected
terrorists, including laws criminalizing ''material support'' for terrorism. In
recent years, defendants have been convicted of material support for attending
terrorist training camps, attempting to provide medical aid to injured fighters
and even supplying funds for the humanitarian activities of designated terrorist
groups. A detainee who cannot be prosecuted under such sweeping laws is unlikely
to pose a ''significant security threat.''

Moreover, if the government's evidence is not ''usable'' in court because of the
brutal methods employed to obtain it, then surely it is not ''usable'' or
reliable enough to justify long-term imprisonment without charge or trial.

Our existing courts have proved time and again that they are well equipped to
handle terrorism cases without compromising our fundamental values.

Ben Wizner  New York, July 21, 2009

The writer is a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union's National
Security Project.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (69%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1297 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 26, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Losers Hang On

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: Jalozai Camp, Pakistan


After spending a week traveling the frontline of the ''war on terrorism''  --
from the aircraft carrier U.S.S. Ronald Reagan in the seas off Iran, to northern
Iraq, to Afghanistan and into northwest Pakistan  --  I can comfortably report
the following: The bad guys are losing.

Yes, the dominos you see falling in the Muslim world today are the extremist
Islamist groups and governments. They have failed to persuade people by either
their arguments or their performances in power that their puritanical versions
of Islam are the answer. Having lost the argument, though, the radicals still
hang on thanks to gun barrels and oil barrels  --  and they can for a while.

Because, while the radicals have failed miserably, our allies  -- the
pro-Americans, the Muslim modernists, the Arab moderates  --  have not really
filled the void with reform and good government of their own. They are winning
by default. More on that later.

For now, though, it is obvious that everywhere they have won or seized power,
the Islamists  --  in Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iraq, Algeria, Lebanon or
Gaza  --  have overplayed their hands, dragged their societies into useless wars
or engaged in nihilistic violence that today is producing a broad backlash from
mainstream Muslims.

Think of this: In the late-1970s, two leaders made historic trips  --  President
Anwar Sadat flew from Egypt to Israel and Ayatollah Khomeini flew from Paris to
Tehran. For the last 30 years, politics in the Middle East and the Muslim world
has, in many ways, been a struggle between their competing visions.

Sadat argued that the future should bury the past and that Arabs and Muslims
should build their future based on peace with Israel, integration with the West
and embracing modernity. Khomeini argued that the past should bury the future
and that Persians and Muslims should build their future on hostility to Israel,
isolation from the West and subordinating modernity to a puritanical Islam.

In 2009, the struggle between those two trends tipped toward the Sadatists. The
fact that Iran's ruling theocrats had to steal their election to stay in power
and forcibly suppress dissent by millions of Iranians  --  according to the
Committee to Protect Journalists, Iran has surpassed China as the world's
leading jailer of journalists, with 41 now behind bars  --  is the most visible
sign of this. The Taliban's burning down of secular schools that compete with
its mosques, and its peddling of heroin to raise cash, are also not exactly
signs of intellectual triumph.

The same day that President Obama spoke to the Muslim world from Cairo
University, Osama bin Laden released a long statement on Islamic Web sites and
on Al Jazeera. As the Egyptian Middle East expert Mamoun Fandy noted: ''Obama
beat Osama hands down. Ask anyone about the content of Obama's speech and they
will tell you. Ask them what Osama said and most people will say, 'Did he give a
speech?' ''

In Iraq's elections last January, nationalist and moderate Muslim parties
defeated the sectarian, radical religious parties, while in Lebanon, a
pro-Western coalition defeated one led by Hezbollah.

Here in Pakistan, the backlash against the Taliban has been building among the
rising middle class. It started in March when a mobile-phone video of a teenage
girl being held down and beaten outside her home by a Taliban commander in
Pakistan's Swat Valley  spread virally across this country. In May, the
Pakistani Army began an offensive against Taliban militants who had taken
control of key towns in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), and appeared to
be moving toward the capital, Islamabad.

I followed Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, when he
visited a vast, choking-hot and dust-covered refugee tent camp in Jalozai, where
some 116,000 refugees have fled the NWFP, as the Pakistani Army moved into their
hometowns to smash the Taliban in a popular operation.

''People are totally against them, but the Taliban don't care,'' a Pakistani
teacher, Abdul Jalil, 41, told me while taking a break from teaching the Urdu
alphabet to young boys in a sweltering tent. ''They are very cruel. They chopped
people's heads off.''

To the extent that the radical Islamists have any energy today, it comes not
from the power of their ideas or examples of good governance, but by stoking
sectarian feuds. In Afghanistan, the Taliban play on Pashtun nationalist
grievances, and in Iraq, the Sunni jihadists draw energy from killing Shiites.

The only way to really dry up their support, though, is for the Arab and Muslim
modernists to actually implement better ideas by producing less corrupt and more
consensual governance, with better schools, more economic opportunities and a
vision of Islam that is perceived as authentic yet embracing of modernity. That
is where ''our'' allies in Egypt, Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan have
so consistently failed. Until that happens, the Islamist radicals will be
bankrupt, but not out of business.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
RELIGION (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); AL-QAEDA
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); TRENDS (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICS (69%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (60%);
HEROIN (50%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (78%); BARACK OBAMA (68%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (76%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%);
IRAQ (93%); EGYPT (93%); ISRAEL (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);
LEBANON (79%); IRAN (73%)

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1302 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 29, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gerald Gardner, 83, Dies; Bolstered Sex Bias Suit

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 585 words


Gerald H. F. Gardner, who provided the statistical underpinnings for the
landmark Supreme Court case that resulted in the prohibition of sex
discrimination in newspaper want ads, died Saturday in Pittsburgh. He was 83.

The cause was leukemia, said his wife, Jo Ann Evansgardner.

Dr. Gardner, a geophysicist by profession and a mathematician by training but a
social activist by temperament,  taught at several universities, including the
Carnegie Institute of Technology (now known as Carnegie-Mellon University), Rice
University and the University of Houston. He  worked for more than two decades
for the Gulf Research and Development Company, a subsidiary of Gulf Oil,
contributing to significant advances in applied seismology, or  methods for
finding oil and natural gas deposits.

But Dr. Gardner, a shy man who was uncomfortable in a lecture hall, was most
formidable behind the scenes as a social activist, especially on behalf of
women's rights. He and his wife were among the earliest members of First
Pittsburgh NOW, itself an early chapter of the National Organization for Women,
which was founded in 1966.

In 1969, First Pittsburgh, led by Wilma Scott Heide, who would become president
of the national organization a few years later, filed a complaint with the
Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations against The Pittsburgh Press, then the
leading local daily. The complaint contended that the division by sex of the
paper's employment ads -- ''Male Help Wanted'' and ''Female Help Wanted'' --
amounted to discrimination against women.

''What Gerry did was calculate the statistical chance that a woman could get a
job in one of the male categories,'' said Eleanor Smeal, the president of the
Feminist Majority and a former president of NOW. ''He calculated pay
differentials. The disparities just flabbergasted him. He contributed the hard
intellectual theory based on the math, and he made it understandable, powerfully
so.''

When the commission upheld the complaint, The Pittsburgh Press took the
commission to court, saying that the ruling violated the First Amendment's
guarantee of freedom of the press. The case went  to the Supreme Court, whose
ruling, in 1973, effectively forbade newspapers to carry sex-designated
advertising columns for most job opportunities.

''Gerry was a total feminist,'' Ms. Smeal said.

Gerald Henry Frazier Gardner was born on March 2, 1926, in Tullamore, in central
Ireland. He studied mathematics and theoretical physics at Trinity College in
Dublin and was recruited by the Carnegie Institute of Technology. He received an
M.S. in applied mathematics from Carnegie Tech and a doctorate in mathematical
physics from Princeton.

Dr. Gardner was an officer of First Pittsburgh NOW. In addition to pursuing the
want-ads case, he contributed  to other legal efforts, including a lawsuit
brought in the mid-1970s by NOW and the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People that resulted in the hiring of more women and blacks by the
Pittsburgh Police Department.

Ms. Evansgardner, his wife, who holds a Ph.D. in experimental psychology
created her name as a hyphenless hybrid of her husband's and her own. They
married in 1950; she is his only immediate survivor.

Ms. Evansgardner said her husband, most of all, was fired up by principle.

''He was an activist atheist,'' she said. ''A proselytizing atheist. I hope you
can print that because it was important to him. He thought that not saying you
were an atheist hurt the cause of reality.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gerald H. F. Gardner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (90%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
(90%); EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
PHYSICS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (89%); WOMEN (89%); MATHEMATICS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (88%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (76%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (72%);
LEUKEMIA (72%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (71%); NATURAL GAS (70%); WAGES &
SALARIES (65%)

ORGANIZATION: RICE UNIVERSITY (57%); UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON (57%); NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (55%)

CITY: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (94%); DUBLIN, IRELAND (79%); HOUSTON, TX, USA (77%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%); TEXAS, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRELAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1303 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 30, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Military Is Not the Police

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 531 words


It was disturbing to learn the other day just how close the last administration
came to violating laws barring the military from engaging in law enforcement
when President George W. Bush considered sending troops into a Buffalo suburb in
2002 to arrest terrorism suspects. Unfortunately, this is not necessarily a
problem of the past. More needs to be done to ensure that the military is not
illegally deployed in this country.

The Posse Comitatus Act of 1878 generally prohibits the military from law
enforcement activities within the United States. If armed officers are going to
knock on Americans' doors, or arrest them in the streets, they should answer to
civilian authorities.

Despite this bedrock principle, The Times's Mark Mazzetti and David Johnston
reported last week, top Bush administration officials, including (no surprise)
Vice President Dick Cheney, argued that the president had the authority to use
the military to round up a suspected terrorist cell known as the Lackawanna Six.

Mr. Cheney and others cited a legal memorandum co-written by John C. Yoo (author
of the infamous torture memo), which made the baseless claim that the military
can go after accused Al Qaeda terrorists on United States soil because it would
be a matter of national security, not law enforcement.

The Lackawanna Six controversy is history, but there are troubling signs the
military may be injecting itself today into law enforcement. The American Civil
Liberties Union has been sounding the alarm about the proliferation of ''fusion
centers,'' in which federal, state and local law enforcement cooperate on
anti-terrorism work. According to the A.C.L.U., the lines have blurred, and the
centers have involved military personnel in domestic law enforcement. Congress
should investigate.

Janet Napolitano, the homeland security secretary, said Wednesday that fusion
centers were not intended to have a military presence, and that she was not
aware of ones that did. She promised greater transparency about what role, if
any, the active military was playing.

Civil libertarians are also raising questions about a program known as the
Chemical, Biological, Radiological/Nuclear and High-Yield Explosives Consequence
Management Response Force. The Army says its aim is to have active-duty troops
ready to back up local law enforcement in catastrophic situations, like an
attack with a nuclear weapon. That could be legal, but the workings of these
units are murky. Again, Congress should ensure that the military is not moving
into prohibited areas.

Some of the military's line-crossing seems ad hoc. Earlier this year, when a man
in a small town in Alabama went on a shooting spree, Army troops reportedly went
out on the streets to participate in the law enforcement effort. It is still
unclear precisely what role they played. It is important that the military be
thoroughly trained on what the law does and does not permit.

After the lack of respect for posse comitatus at the highest ranks of the
previous administration, the Obama White House and Congress must ensure that the
lines between military and law enforcement have been restored, clearly, and that
they are respected.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARMIES
(89%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); ARRESTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); WRITERS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

PERSON: JANET NAPOLITANO (79%); DICK CHENEY (73%)

CITY: BUFFALO, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%); ALABAMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1310 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Insecurity and Fears of Fraud Cast Pall Over Afghan Election

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Richard A. Oppel Jr. contributed reporting from Kabul,
and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Little more than three weeks before the presidential election, problems that
include insecurity and fears of fraud are raising concerns about the credibility
of the race, which President Obama has called the most important event in
Afghanistan this year.

With Taliban insurgents active in half the country, many Afghans remain doubtful
that the Aug. 20 election will take place at all. The Taliban issued a statement
last week calling for a boycott, a threat that could deter voters in much of the
south, where the insurgency is strongest.

Election officials insist that the election will go ahead. But they concede that
the insecurity will prevent as many as 600 polling centers, or roughly 10
percent, from opening. Western officials acknowledge that the election will be
imperfect, but say they are aiming for enough credibility to satisfy both
Afghans and international monitors.

Even that goal will be hard to meet. Though increasingly unpopular here and
abroad, President Hamid Karzaiis still the front-runner in a field of about 40
candidates, and only one, Abdullah Abdullah, a former foreign minister for Mr.
Karzai, has emerged as a serious challenger. Many Afghans are convinced that
foreign powers will choose the winner and fix the result.

But no matter who prevails, the multitude of problems and what is expected to be
a low turnout in conflict areas are likely to reduce the next president's
mandate.

Western officials and Afghans alike worry that the election could be so flawed
that many Afghans might reject the balloting and its results, with potentially
dangerous consequences.

If they cannot vote because of insecurity in the south, Pashtuns, the country's
largest ethnic group and the one most closely associated with the Taliban, could
become even more alienated from the government and the foreign forces backing
it, political analysts say.

They also warn of Iranian-style protests and instability if the population in
the north, which largely supports a change of government, feels its vote has
been manipulated.

''We are worried about voter registration fraud, and we are worried about voters
who will be unable to reach polling places because of insecurity,'' Richard C.
Holbrooke, the American special envoy, said during a visit last week. ''And we
are worried about the accuracy of the vote count, and we are worried about the
ability of women to vote.''

Philippe Morillon, the outspoken retired French general who leads the European
Union election observer mission to Afghanistan, said his top priority was to
prevent fraud. ''It is you who will choose your president, and we are there
simply to guarantee that your choice is not betrayed,'' Mr. Morillon told Afghan
journalists at a news briefing in Kabul.

In an effort to speed the results and reduce the opportunity for rigging,
ballots will be counted at individual polling stations. Afghan officials have
said there will be a preliminary result within 48 hours, followed by a two-week
period for complaints and confirmation procedures.

But Western officials say it could take longer to declare a winner, anticipating
challenges from around the country's 34 provinces, where votes will also be cast
for provincial councils.

''It could be like 34 Minnesota Senate races,'' one Western official said,
referring to the disputed race between Al Franken and Norm Coleman, which took
nearly eight months to resolve in Mr. Franken's favor.

Other officials warn that public frustration with the war, corruption and
lagging reconstruction and development is so high that many people may shun the
polls.

In the south, election officials said they were expecting a turnout below 30
percent, said Abdul Qader Nurzai, head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission office in Kandahar.

''The people are not that interested in the elections,'' said Abdul Hadi, the
election commissioner in the adjoining province of Helmand, where thousands of
Marines have been deployed to regain towns from the Taliban in time for the
elections.

''They voted before, and they did not see any result from that,'' Mr. Hadi said.
''And they don't want to put their lives in jeopardy for one vote.'' An
estimated 70 percent of Afghan voters turned out for the country's first
presidential election, in October 2004.

In Helmand, in southern Afghanistan, the election will take place only in safe
zones in the main towns, Mr. Hadi said. One third of districts are under Taliban
control and will not be able to take part, he said. In some districts, like
Kajaki, the Taliban have besieged administrative centers and will not allow
civilians in to vote, he said.

In the eastern Paktika Province, which borders Pakistan's lawless tribal areas,
more than 20 percent of the voting centers will have to be moved or abandoned
because of security, officials said.

Afghan election officials in the capital, Kabul, insist that voters will turn
out. About 4.5 million people registered for new voting cards this year, far
exceeding expectations, said Azizullah Ludin, the election commission chief.

Yet irregularities are widespread. As many as 3 million duplicate voter
registration cards may be circulating among the 17 million issued, according to
one election observer, who asked not to be named because of the delicacy of the
subject.

Twenty percent of the new cards went to under-age boys and another 20 percent
were duplicates, an Afghan election observer organization, the Free and Fair
Election Foundation of Afghanistan, found in the centers it was able to monitor.

For security and cultural reasons, women's registration has been low. Yet the
number of registered women exceeded the number of registered men in some areas,
indicating more irregularities. Male family members were able to obtain voting
cards for women simply by providing a list of women's names, the Afghan election
monitors reported  in May.

This election is unlike Afghanistan's first presidential contest five years ago
in that most balloting and monitoring is being run by Afghans, with only a small
number of international advisers and observers, most prominently the 120-member
mission from the European Union.

So far, the Taliban have generally refrained from specific attacks on the
election process or on voters, and have even agreed to allow voting to take
place in some areas.

Yet violence has increased, and in some places the Taliban are ordering
communities not to take part. In a rambling statement issued Thursday through a
spokesman, the Taliban leadership urged people to boycott and fighters to
sabotage the process.

''We are requesting all mujahedeen to do their best to sabotage the malicious
election process anywhere in Afghanistan,'' it said. ''They should carry out
operations on enemy bases, and ban people from going to vote one day before the
election.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Supporters of Abdullah Abdullah, a presidential challenger in
Afghanistan, welcomed him at a Kabul stadium on Monday.(A1)
Supporters of Abdullah Abdullah, the only serious challenger in the presidential
race, gathered in Kabul on Monday to greet him with songs and balloons.
 Top, President Hamid Karzai in Kabul. Above, a security detail for Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai, another candidate, in Jalalabad.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)(A9) MAP: In Helmand, the election will take place only in safe
zones.(A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ELECTION FRAUD (89%); CRIME PREVENTION
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (78%); POLITICS (78%); ELECTION
MONITORING (78%); BALLOTS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); EUROPEAN UNION (67%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (64%); ETHNICITY (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (78%); HAMAD KARZAI (77%); RICHARD HOLBROOKE (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1315 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 5, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan: Deadly Rioting Was Planned, Group Says

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 135 words


An independent human rights commission said Tuesday that rioting that killed
eight Christians last week was not spontaneous but was planned by the attackers,
some of whom belong to a militant group linked to Al Qaeda. The police were
questioning more than 200 people about the attacks, in which hundreds of Muslims
burned down a Christian neighborhood in Gojra.

The Punjab Province law minister, Rana Sanaullah, said that those arrested
included members of the banned Sunni group Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan and its
offshoot, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, which is linked to Al Qaeda. The commission said
many attackers came from a neighboring district, Jhang, a militant stronghold.
The commission said announcements made from mosques the day before the attack
called on Muslims to ''make mincemeat of the Christians.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); RIOTS (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); CHRISTIANS
& CHRISTIANITY (90%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (91%); LASHKAR E JHANGVI (57%); SIPAH E SAHABA PAKISTAN
(57%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1330 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 13, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bomb Wounds 2 Journalists In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By SANGAR RAHIMI and ALAN COWELL; Sangar Rahimi reported from Kabul, and
Alan Cowell from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


With violence building across Afghanistan before elections next week, The
Associated Press reported Wednesday that two of its journalists embedded with
the United States military in the south had been wounded in a roadside bombing.

In the relatively peaceful north, Taliban insurgents stormed a district
headquarters and a police checkpoint just outside an administrative center in
Kunduz Province late Tuesday, killing three police officers and wounding three
others, security officials said Wednesday. It was the second attack on an
administrative center in two days.

The A.P. said a photographer, Emilio Morenatti, and an A.P. Television News
videographer, Andi Jatmiko, were traveling with the American military north of
the town of Spinbaldak when their vehicle was struck by the bomb on Tuesday. The
attack also wounded two American soldiers, The A.P. said. All four were taken to
a military hospital in Kandahar, in southern Afghanistan.

Mr. Jatmiko, from Indonesia, suffered leg injuries and two broken ribs. Mr.
Morenatti, a Spaniard, was badly wounded in the leg and underwent an operation
that resulted in the loss of his foot, The A.P. said. They were later taken to a
medical center in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

Casualties among reporters have been relatively unusual in recent months in
Afghanistan, but scores of journalists are arriving in the country to cover the
elections. Eighteen journalists were killed in Afghanistan from Jan. 1, 1992, to
July 8, 2009, making it the 11th most dangerous country in the world for media
workers, compared with 139 killed in Iraq, 60 in Algeria and 50 in Russia,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.

Sarah de Jong, the deputy director of the International News Safety Institute, a
nonprofit organization promoting the safety of reporters, said Afghan
journalists had generally been more exposed than foreign reporters to injuries
and fatalities in Afghanistan. But, she added, ''the conflict is rising, and
therefore one should assume the risk will increase for journalists.''

In a telephone interview from the group's headquarters in Brussels, Ms. de Jong
said kidnapping also remained an ''extremely high risk'' for journalists working
there. As security has deteriorated in Afghanistan, kidnappers have singled out
affluent Afghans as well as foreign contractors, aid workers, church members and
journalists.

In June, David Rohde, a reporter for The New York Times, and an Afghan reporter
who had been kidnapped by the Taliban escaped after more than seven months of
captivity in the Afghan and Pakistani mountains. In 2008, Mellissa Fung, a
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reporter, was held in a dank hole for nearly a
month, then released.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Emilio Morenatti, an Associated Press photographer who was
wounded in Afghanistan.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ODED BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOUNDS & INJURIES (92%); JOURNALISM (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WRITERS
(90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(89%); TALIBAN (89%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (75%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BONE FRACTURES (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (70%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (68%); RELIGION
(50%)

COMPANY: CANADIAN BROADCASTING CORP (61%)

INDUSTRY: SIC4832 RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS (61%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (74%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (92%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); IRAQ (79%); CANADA (79%); INDONESIA (79%); ALGERIA
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1337 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 15, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Lifts Longtime Ban on Political Activities in Restive Tribal Areas

BYLINE: By SALMAN MASOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


President Asif Ali Zardari announced Friday that he was lifting a longtime ban
on political activities in the restive tribal regions in the northwest, hoping
to reduce the influence of the Taliban and Islamic militancy in the areas.

The seven semiautonomous tribal regions have never been fully incorporated into
the country's legal and political system. They are instead still governed by a
set of 100-year-old rules, known as Frontier Crimes Regulations, dating from the
British empire.

Rights groups have long denounced the rules as draconian and Pakistan's
political parties have urged the government to do away with them, calling them a
dark legacy of British colonial rule.

''Today, I am announcing the permission of political activities in the F.A.T.A.
to bring them into the main political stream,'' Mr. Zardari said in a live
broadcast, referring to the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, as the region
is formally known.

Mr. Zardari chose a symbolic moment to make the announcement: the eve of the
national holiday marking Pakistan's 62nd year of independence from the British
Empire.

But analysts here said the announcement also seemed timed to coincide with a
visit by Richard C. Holbrooke, the Obama administration's special envoy for the
region, who is scheduled to arrive in Islamabad on Saturday.

The ban on political activities and parties had created a vacuum that was
increasingly exploited by militants and religious extremists, allowing the
Taliban and Al Qaeda to tighten their hold on the region as they mounted attacks
on tribal elders and the area's political overseers appointed by the central
government, analysts and political workers here have said.

''Now, political parties can organize themselves in the tribal areas and
political process can start,'' said Sheik Mansoor Ahmed, an official of the
governing Pakistan Peoples Party. ''It was a longstanding demand.''

Farhatullah Khan Babar, the spokesman for Mr. Zardari, said that under the
Constitution, the president was empowered to make regulations for the tribal
areas, giving him the authority to lift the ban.

The reform package now envisages broad and fundamental changes in the
colonial-era regulations, which had given the officials administering the areas,
called political agents, unbridled power and authority.

Under the reforms, arbitrary arrest of men, women and children would be
curtailed; a special judicial commission similar to a high court would be set
up; and the finances of the political agents would be audited.

Still, the announcement was not welcomed uniformly.

Mr. Zardari's coalition partners sharply distanced themselves from it.

''We were not consulted,'' said Muhammad Zahid Khan, a senator belonging to the
Awami National Party, A.N.P., a nationalist party that leads the government in
the North-West Frontier Province.

''Whatever good or bad comes out of this decision, we do not own it,'' he said.

Rights groups and analysts expressed concern over the lack of accord between the
Pakistan Peoples Party and its coalition partners.

''The lack of agreement between the coalition partners would mean that the
changes would become controversial and the whole process would not remain
smooth,'' said Ibn-e-Abdu Rahman, a director of Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan, a private group.

''So far, as permission for political activities is concerned, it is a very
healthy development,'' he said. ''It is an advance and would enable the people
to gradually come out of the stagnant tribal relations.''

But he warned that there were still some vested interest groups in the tribal
regions ''that do not want complete democratization of the areas.''

Ahmed Rashid, a journalist based in Lahore and the best-selling author of the
book ''Taliban,'' said he felt that the changes were introduced now under
pressure by the United States and Britain.

''It is a good move,'' Mr. Rashid said, ''but I wish it had been done a year
ago.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); POLITICS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); APPOINTMENTS (79%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); AL-QAEDA
(77%); RELIGION (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); TERRORISM (69%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (61%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%);
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (52%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: ASIF ALI ZARDARI (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); RICHARD HOLBROOKE (55%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1343 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 20, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contest Grows Tighter For Afghan Presidency

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Stephen Farrell and Abdul Waheed Wafa contributed
reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Afghanistan's presidential race is proving tighter than expected as polls opened
in an election that has become a critical benchmark of the nation's progress for
the Afghan government and the Obama administration.

The major question, diplomats and analysts said, is whether President Hamid
Karzai will succeed in winning over 50 percent of the vote in the first round
Thursday, securing a victory, or be pushed into a second, more unpredictable
round of voting.

A vast field of 34 opponents and a last-minute surge by his main challenger,
Abdullah Abdullah, as well as Taliban intimidation in the volatile south, which
is Mr. Karzai's base, threatened to chip away at the president's support. It was
also possible, however, that the Taliban would not follow through on their
threats.

On Thursday morning in Kandahar, a city in the south, a few small rockets landed
just before polls opened, according to Reuters, and security officials said four
people were injured.

Afghan, American and other allied officials are hoping a successful vote will
show movement toward stability. The Obama administration has sent thousands more
American troops here this year to help secure the nation before the election.

The Afghan government announced Wednesday that it had managed to secure enough
districts to allow voting to go ahead in roughly 6,600 polling centers -- more
than in the previous election in 2004.

But the extent of the areas affected by insecurity, especially in southern
Afghanistan, had become clearer as the election drew near. The election
commission said it still had to deliver election materials to four districts
around the country and would have to use helicopters because the roads were too
unsafe.

Unlike the last election, in 2004, Afghans will do most poll monitoring
themselves on Thursday. Election monitors said they would be able to cover more
than 60 percent of districts.

Yet Ahmad Nader Nadery, head of the largest independent Afghan monitor mission,
the Free and Fair Election Foundation of Afghanistan, acknowledged concerns that
there would be no monitors in some of the most insecure districts where
intimidation and fraud were most likely to occur. Instead, candidates'
representatives will be the only check on fraud in those areas.

Mr. Karzai had appeared on state television and called on people to vote despite
Taliban threats, saying the security forces would ensure their safety. The
announcement drew criticism from the election commission for breaking a campaign
blackout during the last 48 hours before the vote, but it was an indication of
how concerned the government is about low turnout.

Mr. Karzai made another appeal Thursday as he showed up to vote, The Associated
Press reported. ''I request from the Afghan people to come out and vote so
through their vote Afghanistan will be more secure, more peaceful,'' he said.

Two months ago, Mr. Karzai seemed to dominate the field as the only apparent
choice for Afghans, even though his popularity slipped with criticism of
deteriorating security, corruption and a lack of jobs.

But Mr. Abdullah, a former foreign minister and eye doctor who is running for
the main opposition movement, the United Front, has since managed to tap a
widespread hunger for change, especially in the north.

Live televised debates, which also included a former finance minister, Ashraf
Ghani, and a former minister of planning, Ramazan Bashardost, were heard and
watched by millions, engaging Afghans in the election process even as the
Taliban escalated threats and attacks.

In a late development, local Taliban leaders agreed to allow people in Wardak
Province, just south of Kabul, to vote unmolested, a government minister said.
He asked not to be named because of the political nature of the information. The
minister said he believed that the Taliban would allow the vote to go ahead in
the south, despite their threats.

Yet he also expressed concern that one devastating suicide bombing could deter
voters across the country.

At three polling stations in west Kabul early Thursday, turnout was lower than
in the 2004 presidential election.

At one, Mitra Hemat, 24, an election worker, said the turnout was significantly
down. ''There are very few people. People are afraid, I can tell.''

It is unclear whether the numbers were as low across the city, or whether voters
were waiting to judge the streets were safe before coming out later in the day.

Allies of Mr. Karzai said they thought he could still win in the first round,
with over 50 percent of ballots.

Despite gains by his opponents, Mr. Karzai fought back hard in the last two
weeks, making selective campaign stops and securing the return of a former Uzbek
warlord, Abdul Rashid Dostum, from exile. The Uzbek leader has been widely
criticized for past human rights abuses, and opponents and Western diplomats
have condemned the president's association with him as an example of the
unsavory alliances Mr. Karzai has made to try to secure his re-election.

Mr. Dostum may prove critical, however, in plugging a hole in Mr. Karzai's
support by bringing the ethnic Uzbek vote in the north to his side. Even Mr.
Abdullah's supporters conceded that Mr. Dostum's return was a blow, one insider
said.

On Wednesday three Taliban gunmen seized control of a bank in Kabul and engaged
the police in a two-hour gun battle. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the
attack after the three gunmen had been killed by the police.

Election officials reported that six  election workers had been killed Tuesday
in roadside bombings.

''We have mixed feelings,'' said Mr. Nadery, director of the Afghan election
monitoring organization.

''On the one hand, there is this excitement and the feeling that we are moving
on. The 2004 presidential election was an event and now we are turning it into a
process. It is not full democracy but it is bringing us to a different way of
politics that is not through violence,'' he said.

''But of course we have the increased level of intimidation,'' he added. ''This
transition is costly and that worries us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Afghan police officers dragged a body down the stairs of a bank
on Wednesday after an attack in which three gunmen were killed.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
RAFIQ MAQBOOL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg. A5)
The streets were largely empty in downtown Kabul, Afghanistan, on Wednesday, the
day before a presidential election. Security was heavy, with some areas closed
off to the public and many shops closed. On state television, President Hamid
Karzai called on Afghans to vote despite Taliban threats, saying the security
forces would ensure their safety.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)(pg. A12) CHARTS: Threats and Violence Set the Stage for the Vote: The
second presidential election in Afghanistan is threatened by violence from the
Taliban, which generally allowed voting in the first presidential election, won
by Hamid Karzai, in 2004. The Afghan government is worried that violence and low
turnout will undermine the election's credibility.(Sources: Independent Election
Commission of Afghanistan
U.S. National Counterterrorism Center)
 (CHART BY ALICIA PARLAPIANO AND ARCHIE TSE/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VOTERS & VOTING (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (89%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTION MONITORING (89%); TALIBAN (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(53%); HELICOPTERS (50%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (90%); BARACK OBAMA (90%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1344 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 20, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Faults Freezing Of Assets In Terror Case

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In a ruling that threw into doubt one of the government's main counterterrorism
tools, a federal judge said the Treasury Department acted unconstitutionally
three years ago when it froze the assets of an Ohio charity suspected of aiding
terrorists.

The ruling challenged a key tactic used by the government under an emergency
executive order signed by President George W. Bush two weeks after the Sept. 11
attacks. If upheld, the ruling could severely undercut the government's
authority and ultimately require it to get a warrant and submit to court review
in moving against charities.

In the last eight years, the Treasury Department has used its broadened
authority to freeze tens of millions of dollars in assets held by eight
charities within the United States and hundreds of other groups and individuals
outside this country, all without warrants and court approval.

The ruling was issued late Tuesday by James G. Carr, the chief federal judge in
northern Ohio. Judge Carr set a hearing in September to determine how to correct
what he said were constitutional flaws in the government's case.

Justice Department lawyers were reviewing the opinion. The Treasury Department
did not comment directly but said in a statement that it ''will continue to
employ all authorities at our disposal to track and disrupt the deadly flow of
money to terrorist groups.''

At issue was a decision in 2006 by the Office of Foreign Asset Control, or OFAC,
in the Treasury Department to freeze about $1 million in assets of KindHearts, a
Columbus charity that was part of a terrorism investigation.

The Treasury Department had said that KindHearts provided financial support for
Hamas, described by the United States as a Palestinian militant group, and
coordinated with its leaders in the West Bank and in Lebanon in support of
terrorist activities.

To date, the group has not been named a ''specially designated global
terrorist.'' But Judge Carr said the government ''has effectively shut
KindHearts down'' by freezing its assets and criminalizing its contacts.

For two years, KindHearts could not even use its own money to pay lawyers. One
lawyer resigned as a result, and the group had to rely on the American Civil
Liberties Union. Judge Carr said OFAC was ''arbitrary and capricious'' in
considering whether the group could pay its lawyers.

Judge Carr, named to the bench in 1994 by President Bill Clinton, found that the
Treasury Department had also violated the charity's rights to due process and to
challenge evidence.

He rejected the Justice Department's contention that the Fourth Amendment, which
protects against unreasonable searches and seizures, did not apply to groups
suspected of foreign terrorist ties because of the president's separate national
security authority.

Citing British seizures and searches without warrants  in colonial America,
Judge Carr called the Fourth Amendment ''a bulwark against the abuses and
excesses of unchecked government authority.''

He said that ''nothing in our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence or constitutional
tradition supports complete elimination'' of the need for the government to
establish probable cause, allow judicial review and use court warrants in such
cases.

Judge Carr also said that the limited information that the Treasury Department
provided to the charity about why its assets were frozen came only after ''long,
unexplained and inexplicable delay'' and repeated requests from the group's
lawyers.

Lynne Bernabei, a Washington lawyer who represented KindHearts, said of the
ruling: ''The government has been taking action unilaterally and basically
destroying these charities on the flimsiest of evidence. We see this as the
beginning of the effort to rein in executive authority.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); JUDGES (91%); CHARITIES
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
US PRESIDENTS (89%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (78%); HAMAS (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (76%); DUE PROCESS
(75%); APPROVALS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BILL CLINTON (57%)

CITY: COLUMBUS, OH, USA (79%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); LEBANON
(78%)

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1351 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 22, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

AFGHAN ELECTION POSES NEW TESTS FOR WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER and CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Obama administration officials hoped the Afghan election would demonstrate that
eight years after the American invasion, the country was stable enough to
justify an expanded commitment of money and troops from an increasingly
skeptical American public.

Instead, the election did more to underscore the challenges Afghanistan faces,
particularly if the election goes to a runoff, as seems increasingly likely,
between President Hamid Karzai and his main challenger, Abdullah Abdullah.

Both men claimed to be winning as ballots were counted Friday, though officials
said preliminary results would not be announced until Tuesday, and final results
at least two weeks later.

In the meantime, complaints of fraud and specific episodes of ballot stuffing
mounted, and they may assume increasing importance.

Western officials here expressed relief that many Afghans defied Taliban threats
of reprisals and came out to vote. But they were clearly concerned on Friday
that a second round of voting could extend the paralysis of a government that
already barely functions and deepen ethnic tensions, in the worst case, to the
point of a north-south civil war.

In addition, a runoff would leave up in the air many of the Obama
administration's Afghanistan policy initiatives -- like fighting corruption and
improving distribution of aid -- for at least another two months, American
officials said.

The new uncertainties come on top of the stiff military challenges facing the
Obama administration as it sends thousands more troops to southern Afghanistan,
where Taliban attacks and very low turnout on election day made clear the
insurgents' influence.

The southern province of Kandahar alone was hit by 122 Taliban rockets on
election day, mainly aimed at the towns, according to one Western official. In a
broad southern region -- provinces like Kandahar, Helmand, Oruzgan and Zabul --
turnout was as low as 5 percent to 10 percent, the official said, effectively
disenfranchising the region viewed as the most crucial in the American-led
military campaign.

Privately, American officials set out a number of possible ways that the
election aftermath could affect their operations. During a meeting on Thursday,
Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, the leader of American and NATO combat operations
here, discussed how the military would have to adapt to each.

Particularly worrisome was the specter of a divisive ethnic presidential runoff
between Mr. Karzai, whose power base is in the Pashtun south, and Mr. Abdullah,
whose main support resides in the Tajik and Uzbek north, officials said.

Mr. Karzai himself has in the past raised the specter of ethnic violence,
telling officials that if there was a runoff it could lead to a civil war,
Western officials said.

''Ethnic violence is always a factor in this country,'' one senior
administration official said. ''But,'' she added, ''it is not inevitable.''

''Everybody is jumping on that bandwagon looking at a Tajik leader and a Pashtun
leader,'' she said, referring to Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Karzai. ''But this country
has been through civil war, and at a time when it seemed that somebody in one of
the campaigns had suggested there would be ethnic violence, it was Afghans who
were the first out there saying, 'We're not going back to the 1990s.' ''

For all of their worry about the problems that a runoff could bring,
administration officials have also made clear they are not enamored of the
Karzai government, and the president's re-election would not be risk-free,
either.

Mr. Obama, during his first news conference as president, criticized the Karzai
government as ''detached.'' And administration officials have complained of Mr.
Karzai's failure to crack down on corruption and the drug trafficking fueling
the insurgency. Western officials have also criticized Mr. Karzai's alliances
with unsavory figures to try to secure re-election.

Should Mr. Karzai win, either outright or in a second round, Obama
administration officials could find themselves with a president who has engaged
in so much deal-making that he may well be even more beholden to warlords than
before.

With potential shoals in just about every direction, American officials were
taking pains to present a neutral public front.

''Our only interest was the result, fairly, accurately reflecting the will of
the Afghan people,'' Mr. Obama told reporters at the White House.

Richard C. Holbrooke, Mr. Obama's special envoy to the region, who was in Kabul,
described the administration as ''agnostic,'' although American officials took
issue with statements Friday from Mr. Karzai's camp that the president had won
the vote already.

''We've seen these reports,'' Mr. Holbrooke said. He added that only the Afghan
election commission was is in a position to announce official results.

But he was braced for tensions. ''We always knew it would be a disputed
election,'' he said. ''I would not be surprised if you see candidates claiming
victory and fraud in the next few days. For the United States and the
international community, we're going to respect the process.''

Mr. Holbrooke met privately on Friday with the leading candidates, he said:
''We're in a period where the outcome is unclear so everyone is kind of upbeat
and spinning positively. Everyone said that they would respect the process. This
is not dissimilar to an American election. I keep comparing it to Minnesota,
because when an outcome is uncertain, people have different views of it. We
don't have a candidate and we don't have a favorite outcome.''

Western diplomats said that if there was a runoff, it would be widely seen as a
blow to Mr. Karzai and a boost for Mr. Abdullah. The election had more than 30
candidates, and the presumption was that many of those who did not vote for Mr.
Karzai could now coalesce around Mr. Abdullah.

Mr. Abdullah's campaign team said it had made official complaints about fraud in
six provinces.

Election observers were varied in their early opinions, with some saying the low
turnout was an indication of just how bad the situation is in southern
Afghanistan, and others saying that just holding an election was a success.

''This was one of the most violent days witnessed in Afghanistan in the last
eight years,'' Rachel Reid, a researcher for Human Rights Watch in Afghanistan,
said in a statement sent by e-mail.

But Western and Afghan officials avoided such bleak assessments, emphasizing the
Taliban's failure to thwart the vote, the first democratic elections ever staged
by the government of Afghanistan. (Previous elections since 2001 were managed by
the United Nations.)

''Before 2001, Afghan leaders were shooting each other out in the countryside
and shouting at each other over the radio,'' said Barnett Rubin, a senior
adviser to Mr. Holbrooke. ''Now they're in Kabul, sometimes shouting at each
other around the table, but working together to solve problems, and nobody wants
to go back to the past.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Afghan election workers carried ballot boxes to a truck from a
mosque in Herat that had served as a polling place on Thursday. Voter turnout
was low in many parts of southern Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BEHROUZ
MEHRI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VOTERS & VOTING (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); CORRUPTION (70%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); HAMAD KARZAI (78%); STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (59%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); TAJIKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1352 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 22, 2009 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Two Claim to Lead Afghan Race for President

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Abdul Waheed Wafa, Ruhullah Khapalwak and Sangar
Rahimi contributed reporting from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


President Hamid Karzai and his closest rival, Abdullah Abdullah, both claimed to
be winning the presidential election as ballots were counted Friday. But Western
officials here said it looked increasingly likely that the two would face a
runoff.

The possibility of a second round of voting, even as the candidates leveled
accusations of fraud at each other, raised the prospect of an extended period of
uncertainly for the war-torn country. The credibility of the vote on Thursday
was further tarnished by new reports showing that violence in the south was
greater -- and turnout lower -- than even already grim accounts on election day
had suggested.

The election commission called on both Mr. Karzai and Mr. Abdullah not to
speculate about the results and to wait for the official count. Preliminary
results were not expected until Tuesday, and final results at least two weeks
after that.

Complaints of fraud and specific incidents of ballot stuffing continued to grow
in the meantime and may assume increasing importance in a close race.

The extent of the violence and intimidation by Taliban insurgents not only
called in question whether significant parts of the country had been heard in
the vote but also the progress of the fight against the insurgency.

In the southern provinces like Kandahar, Helmand, Uruzgan and Zabul, turnout was
as low as 5 to 10 percent, according to one Western official. That is less than
half of what it was in those regions in the nation's first presidential election
five years ago.

Earlier claims by the government of deals with the Taliban to allow elections to
go ahead did not materialize. Instead election day provided a bleak snapshot of
the extent of the insurgents' influence in large parts of the country.

The southern province of Kandahar alone was hit by 122 Taliban rockets on
election day, mainly aimed at the towns, according to the Western official.
Twenty rockets hit the city of Kandahar and 4 people were killed and 12 wounded,
hospital officials said.

There are also reports from eastern Afghanistan that on the outskirts of
Jalalabad, insurgents cut off the ink-stained fingers of several people in
punishment for voting.

Turnout was moderate to high in the northern and central provinces and in the
eastern province of Nangarhar and western city of Herat, both large population
centers, but the overall turnout is expected to be about 40 percent, again lower
than both the previous presidential election in 2004 and parliamentary elections
2005. At least some of the drop could be attributed to disillusionment with the
struggling democratic government.

Mr. Karzai will be most affected by the low turnout in the south, which is his
base of support. On the other hand, the big turnout in the north and west showed
that his alliance with the Uzbek strongman Abdul Rashid Dostum paid off and
brought the Uzbek vote in for him, diplomats said.

Mr. Karzai's staff insisted that his results were good, including in parts of
the north, and that he was still on track to win the election outright. A
candidate needs more than 50 percent to win in the first round.

''Based on initial information from media and our observers from areas where
ballots were counted already, it shows that President Karzai is ahead of other
candidates,'' said his campaign spokesman, Waheed Omar.

Mr. Abdullah, a former foreign minister and an eye doctor who has trailed Mr.
Karzai in the polls, has been aiming to prevent a first-round win at all costs.
But his campaign team suggested Friday that his results were good enough for him
to win outright as well.

''So far, the initial counts that we have from different provinces show that Dr.
Abdullah is clearly ahead of President Karzai,'' said his spokesman, Sayed Aqa
Fazil Sancharaki. ''If we go like this until the end of ballot counting, Dr.
Abdullah will be the winner in the first round.''

An informal count by The New York Times of results posted at 12 polling centers
around Kabul revealed that nowhere did Mr. Karzai win more than 50 percent of
the vote.

Numbers varied greatly depending on the area and type of population, but out of
17,891 votes cast, the two candidates appeared to be neck and neck, with Mr.
Karzai averaging 38 percent across the 12 polling centers and Mr. Abdullah 39
percent.

In his home city of Kandahar, in a count of four polling centers, Mr. Karzai was
leading with 87 percent over Mr. Abdullah's 6 percent. But turnout there was
decidedly low.

Mr. Abdullah's campaign team said it had made official complaints about fraud in
six provinces, all of them ethnic Pashtun provinces that would be expected to
favor Mr. Karzai.

Election observers were varied in their early opinions, with some saying the low
turnout was an indication of just how bad the situation is in southern
Afghanistan, and others saying that just holding an election was a success.

''This was one of the most violent days witnessed in Afghanistan in the last
eight years,'' Rachel Reid, a researcher for Human Rights Watch in Afghanistan,
said in an e-mailed statement. ''Early impressions of turnout suggest that
violence and intimidation succeeded in keeping voters away from polling stations
in a huge swath of the country, which adds up to a successful day for the
Taliban,'' she said.

The International Republican Institute said that despite problems, including
lower turnout than previous elections, and concerns about fraud and multiple
voting, the process so far had been ''credible.''

The deputy director of the Afghan Election Commission, Daoud Ali Najafi,
acknowledged the low turnout, in particular in Helmand, where thousands of
British and American troops had mounted operations in recent weeks, but he
estimated that the countrywide turnout would be roughly 50 percent, the same as
for parliamentary elections in 2005, and that would make the election credible.

Democracy International expressed concern that withholding preliminary results
until Tuesday would heighten uncertainty in the political environment and raise
tensions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (91%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TALIBAN
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (79%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%);
ELECTION AUTHORITIES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); HOSPITALS (50%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (89%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); HERAT, AFGHANISTAN
(79%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1357 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 23, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Observers of Afghanistan's Election Note Intimidation of Women and Fraud

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Reports of fraud and intimidation in Afghanistan's presidential election
continued to mount Saturday, with anecdotal but widespread accounts of
ballot-box stuffing, a lack of impartiality among election workers and voters
casting ballots for others.

A particular concern was the notably low turnout of women, who election observer
organizations said were disproportionately affected by the violence and
intimidation.

Election officials said that all the reports needed to be investigated, and that
it was too early to draw broad conclusions about the overall validity of the
vote.

The reports by election observers came as officials were still counting ballots
from Afghanistan's second nationwide election in the nearly eight years since an
American-led invasion ousted the Taliban.

More than 30 candidates ran for president, and while preliminary results were
not expected until Tuesday, the prospect of a runoff election appeared likely,
with the incumbent president, Hamid Karzai, facing a stiff challenge from his
former foreign minister, Abdullah Abdullah.

The reported problems also included voter  intimidation,  by the Taliban and
also by some powerful candidates, in particular local candidates running for
provincial council seats. Voter turnout appeared to be low, especially in the
volatile south where the Taliban is strongest.

But women voters seemed to have faced disproportionate obstacles, election
observer groups said.

Hundreds of polling stations for women  (stations throughout the country were
segregated to keep men and women from publicly mingling) did not even open in
some areas where Taliban influence is high, but women also suffered
discrimination and intimidation in some places in central and northern
Afghanistan. Female candidates received threats and were largely ignored in news
coverage of the elections, the observers said.

''The disproportionate effects of poor security conditions, widespread cultural
opposition to women in public life and a number of attacks clearly aimed at
deterring women's activities all created significant obstacles,'' the European
Union observer mission said in its preliminary statement on Saturday.

Women are already restricted by the conservative culture in many parts of rural
Afghanistan, but the growing instability has further consolidated the opinions
of many families and communities that it is not appropriate for women to be
active outside the home, the statement said.

At least 650 women's polling centers planned did not open on the day, according
to Free and Fair Elections in Afghanistan, known as  FEFA, the largest Afghan
observer organization. In the southern province of Oruzgan, of the 36 centers
for women that were planned, only 6 opened, said Nader Naderi, director of FEFA.
In certain polling centers in the south and southeast of the country almost no
women voted, according to the National Democratic Institute, an
American-financed group that promotes democracy abroad.

The insecurity also led to greater proxy voting, in which male family members
vote for the women, further robbing women of their rights, observers said.

Afghan women have been granted equal rights under the new Constitution, and can
run for office -- and there is a quota system that provides a minimum 25 percent
representation of women in provincial councils. Two women entered the
presidential race this year and 333 the provincial council elections, roughly 10
percent of the total field of council candidates. There was a slight increase
nationwide of women's participation as candidates, but in nearly half the
provinces, women's participation decreased, the European Union observation
mission reported.

Female candidates complained that the insecurity made it impossible in some
places to campaign. Assassinations of women working in government positions in
provinces like Kandahar have undoubtedly deterred others from coming forward.
Only three women entered the contest for four reserved female seats on
Kandahar's provincial council, and none of the three candidates were living in
Kandahar during most of the campaign.

Women received almost no coverage in news reporting, and topics concerning
women's rights were virtually never featured in news coverage of the electoral
campaign, the European Union mission said.

A lack of female staff members forced the election commission to use men, which
deterred women from voting in areas, the National Democratic Institute said. A
lack of women in the Election Complaints Commission, and the location and
attitude of some of its staff members, also made it difficult for some people,
particularly women, to make use of the complaints process.

The passage of a new family law for the Shiite minority  before the election had
also been  criticized by human rights organizations and observers, since it had
been suggested that Mr. Karzai signed it in return for political support from
conservatives.

In addition to the problems listed by FEFA, which had 7,000 observers out on
election day, more than 4,000 of them women, the European Union observer mission
also criticized the appointment of election officials, unbalanced news media
coverage during the campaign and irregularities in voter registration that
increased the potential for fraud.

The National Democratic Institute also criticized the problem of multiple
registration of voters and subsequent fraud, as well as the misuse of state
resources in campaigning, and proxy voting.

A hundred complaints have been lodged with the election complaints commission,
and all the observers called for the complaints commission and election
commission to work seriously on the complaints to ensure the credibility of the
election.

Mr. Naderi said that the general participation -- estimated at 40 to 50 percent
of voters by some Western officials -- indicated that Afghans did support the
development of democratic institutions in the country. But he warned, as did all
the observers, that the credibility of the election would depend on the thorough
investigation of the irregularities.

''Acceptability and credibility of the election is a good benchmark that needs
to be observed,'' Mr. Naderi said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A woman with a child in Kabul, Afghanistan. Election observers
say that the turnout by women in the recent presidential election was depressed
by intimidation and other factors.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (92%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); VOTERS & VOTING (91%);
ELECTION MONITORING (91%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%); BALLOTS (90%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); WOMEN (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(79%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); CONSERVATISM (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (67%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1360 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 25, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Investigation Is Ordered Into C.I.A. Abuse Charges

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and SCOTT SHANE; David Johnston contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1389 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. named a veteran federal prosecutor on Monday
to examine abuse of prisoners held by the Central Intelligence Agency, after the
Justice Department released a long-secret report showing interrogators choked a
prisoner repeatedly and threatened to kill another detainee's children.

Mr. Holder chose John H. Durham, a prosecutor from Connecticut who has been
investigating the C.I.A.'s destruction of interrogation videotapes, to determine
whether a full criminal investigation of the conduct of agency employees or
contractors was warranted. The review will be the most politically explosive
inquiry since Mr. Holder took over the Justice Department in February.

The decision was a significant blow to the C.I.A, and Mr. Holder said he would
be criticized for undercutting the intelligence agency's work. He said that he
agreed with President Obama's oft-expressed desire not to get mired in disputes
over the policies of former President George W. Bush, but that his review of
reports on the C.I.A. interrogation program left him no choice.

''As attorney general, my duty is to examine the facts and to follow the law,''
Mr. Holder said in a statement. ''Given all of the information currently
available, it is clear to me that this review is the only responsible course of
action for me to take.''

The attorney general said his decision to order an inquiry was based in part on
the recommendation of the Justice Department's ethics office, which called for a
new review of several interrogation cases.

He said he was also influenced by a 2004 report by the C.I.A. inspector general
at the time, John L. Helgerson, on the agency's interrogations. The report was
released Monday under a court order in a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit.

Although large portions of the 109-page report are blacked out, it gives new
details about a variety of abuses inside the C.I.A.'s overseas prisons,
including suggestions about sexually assaulting members of a detainee's family,
staging mock executions, intimidation with a handgun and power drill, and
blowing cigar and cigarette smoke into prisoners' faces to make them vomit.

The report found that the interrogations obtained critical information to
identify terrorists and stop potential plots and said some imprisoned terrorists
provided more information after being exposed to brutal treatment.

But the inspector general's review raised broad questions about the legality,
political acceptability and effectiveness of the harshest of the C.I.A.'s
methods, including some not authorized by the Justice Department and others that
were approved, like the near-drowning technique of waterboarding.

''This review identified concerns about the use of the waterboard, specifically
whether the risks of its use were justified by the results, whether it has been
unnecessarily used in some instances,'' the report said, and whether the
frequency and volume of water poured over the prisoner's mouth and nose exceeded
the Justice Department's legal authorization.

In what appeared to be a response to the Justice Department's release, the
C.I.A. later on Monday released previously secret agency reports from 2004 and
2005 that detailed intelligence scoops produced by the interrogation program.

One of the reports calls the program ''a crucial pillar of U.S. counterterrorism
efforts'' and describes how interrogations helped unravel a network headed by an
Indonesian terrorist known as Hambali. The other report details information
elicited from Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, chief planner of the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks, saying it ''dramatically expanded our universe of knowledge on Al
Qaeda's plots.''

Those reports, which former Vice President Dick Cheney had sought to have
released earlier this year, do not refer to any specific interrogation methods
and do not assess their effectiveness.

The inspector general's report, by contrast, offers details of abusive methods.
During one session, a C.I.A. interrogator told Abd al-Rahim al Nashiri, charged
with plotting the 2000 bombing of the Navy destroyer Cole, that if he did not
cooperate with his captors, ''we could get your mother in here'' and ''we can
bring your family in here.''

According to the report, the interrogator wanted Mr. Nashiri to infer for
''psychological'' reasons that his female relatives might be sexually abused.

In another session of questioning, the report said, one C.I.A. interrogator told
investigators that Mr. Mohammed was told that if there was another attack on
American soil, the C.I.A. would ''kill your children.'' Mr. Mohammed's young
sons were in the custody of Pakistani and American authorities at the time.

Among a litany of C.I.A. tactics, the report describes the ''hard takedown,''
when a detainee was grabbed and thrown to the floor before being moved to a
sleep-deprivation cell. It details baths given to Mr. Nashiri, saying he was
sometimes scrubbed with ''the kind of brush one uses in a bath to remove
stubborn dirt'' to induce pain. In July 2002, the report says, a C.I.A.
interrogator grabbed a detainee's neck to restrict the prisoner's carotid artery
until he began to faint. Another officer then ''shook the detainee to wake
him,'' and the ''pressure point'' technique was repeated twice more.

Interrogators also staged a mock execution in 2002 to intimidate a detainee.
C.I.A. officers began screaming outside the room where he was being
interrogated. When leaving the room, he ''passed a guard who was dressed as a
hooded detainee, lying motionless on the ground, and made to appear as if he had
been shot to death.''

In 2003, C.I.A. officers began using another technique -- called ''water
dousing'' -- that involved laying a detainee on a plastic sheet and pouring
water over him for 10 to 15 minutes.

According to the report, an interrogator believed this was an effective
technique, and sent a cable back to C.I.A. headquarters requesting guidelines.

A return cable explained that a detainee ''must be placed on a towel or sheet,
may not be placed naked on the bare cement floor, and the air temperature must
exceed 65 degrees if the detainee will not be dried immediately.''

Such detailed guidelines reflected concern throughout the C.I.A. about the
potential legal consequences for agency officers. Officers ''expressed
unsolicited concern about the possibility of recrimination or legal action'' and
said ''they feared that the agency would not stand behind them,'' the report
said.

The C.I.A. director, Leon E. Panetta, issued a statement to employees Monday
that carefully avoided defending the brutal treatment while expressing support
for the agency's efforts.

Mr. Panetta wrote that he was not ''eager to enter the debate, already
politicized, over the ultimate utility of the agency's past detention and
interrogation effort.'' He said the program had produced crucial intelligence
but added that use of the harsh methods ''will remain a legitimate area of
dispute.''

Members of Congress from the left and the right criticized Mr. Holder's
decision.

Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon and a member of the Senate Intelligence
Committee, criticized the potential focus on interrogators, suggesting that
ignoring Justice Department lawyers and senior Bush administration officials in
the investigation had echoes of the Abu Ghraib scandal, when ''lower ranking
troops who committed abuses were hung out to dry.''

But Representative Peter Hoekstra of Michigan, the top Republican on the
HouseIntelligence Committee, said the Justice Department inquiry risked
disrupting current counterterrorism operations. He said abuse charges had
already been ''exhaustively reviewed.''

The choice of Mr. Durham is likely to speed the review's progress, because his
team of F.B.I. agents and lawyers was already deeply immersed in the details of
the C.I.A. program. Since January 2008, they have been investigating C.I.A.
officials' decision in 2005 to destroy videotapes documenting interrogations of
Abu Zubaydah and Mr. Nashiri.

The inspector general's staff reviewed the 92 tapes before they were destroyed,
and the report released Monday revealed that 11 of the videotapes were entirely
blank and that two others were almost blank. The report does not indicate
whether the videotapes were erased by C.I.A officers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE INQUIRY: Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. named a
federal prosecutor to investigate abuse of prisoners held by the Central
Intelligence Agency. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHIP SOMODEVILLA/GETTY IMAGES) (pg.A1)
 John H. Durham, a veteran Connecticut prosecutor, has been investigating the
C.I.A. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL McANDREWS/HARTFORD COURANT) (pg.A8)  GRAPHIC: THE
REPORT: A 2004 C.I.A. inspector general report, released Monday, provides new
details about abuses that took place inside the agency's secret prisons. (pg.A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); LAWYERS (79%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (79%); ETHICS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(78%); TERRORISM (77%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (77%); MISCONDUCT (76%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); APPROVALS (73%); SEX OFFENSES (71%);
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (67%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%)

PERSON: ERIC HOLDER (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); BARACK OBAMA (52%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1370 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 29, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Would-Be Killer Linked To Al Qaeda, Saudis Say

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Nadia Taha and Sharon Otterman contributed
reporting from New York, Mona el-Naggar from Cairo, and Muhammad al-Milfy from
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


A suicide bomber who was trying to kill the head of Saudi Arabia's antiterrorism
efforts stumbled just short of his target and fell, detonating an explosion that
had been arranged by an affiliate of Al Qaeda, a spokesman for the Saudi
Interior Ministry said Friday.

The Saudi official, Prince Mohammed bin Nayef, who serves as deputy interior
minister and is a member of the royal family, was slightly wounded in the attack
in the Red Sea port of Jidda, Saudi Arabia, on Thursday, said Gen. Mansour
al-Turki, the spokesman for the Interior Ministry.

The prince had allowed the wanted militant, who had come saying he wanted to
turn himself in, to bypass security as a sign of good faith, General Turki said.
The militant was killed by the explosion, the authorities said.

''He expressed his desire to turn himself in directly to the prince and the
prince granted him his complete trust by requesting that he not be searched,''
General Turki said. ''And this is something that the prince does. It is not the
first time, but it did not end in this deceptive manner before.''

Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Saudi arm of the terrorist network,
claimed responsibility for the attack, according to a message posted on Islamist
Internet forums and translated by the SITE Intelligence Group. The attack was
the first terrorist assault on a member of the royal family in decades.

It came during the holy month of Ramadan, after a long day of fasting, when the
prince was greeting well-wishers in his home. When the man was allowed to bypass
the security gate, he stumbled and fell, detonating the explosion, according to
Interior Ministry officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they
were not authorized to release details.

The prince was taken to a hospital, where he was met by King Abdullah, in a
meeting broadcast on Saudi television. The king could be heard on the broadcast
telling the prince that the man should have been required to go through the
security measures, and the prince acknowledged that it was his mistake.

The attacker was a wanted militant who had insisted on meeting the prince to
announce that he was giving himself up to the authorities, General Turki said.
Members of the royal family in Saudi Arabia traditionally receive visitors
during Ramadan and at other times of the year.

General Turki said that the authorities were aware of plans by Islamic militants
to kill government officials and religious figures, but that the bombing
provided a warning to be vigilant.

Prince Mohammed is the son of the interior minister, Prince Nayef bin Abdel
Aziz, who is technically third in line to the Saudi throne.

In 2003, militants launched a 20-month wave of violence across Saudi Arabia that
included the bombing of foreigners' residential compounds in Riyadh; shootings
of Western citizens and the beheading of an American; gun battles in Riyadh,
Mecca and Buraida; suicide attacks on Saudi government buildings and oil
facilities; and the storming of the United States Consulate in Jidda.

The Interior Ministry responded with a crackdown that is estimated to have
resulted in thousands of arrests. Amnesty International reported last month that
''massive human rights violations'' and acts of torture had been committed by
the Saudi security forces in their effort to contain radicalism.

Six weeks ago, after secret trials, more than 300 militants, many accused of
having ties to the Qaeda network, were tried and convicted, and some were given
prison terms of 30 years, the Saudi Press Agency reported.  Jamal A. Khashoggi,
the editor of Saudi Arabia's Al Watan newspaper, said he feared that the attack
was a sign of a new tactic for Al Qaeda. Prevented by security operations from
carrying out complex bombing attacks, he said, the militants may shift to
strategic assassinations of leaders to destabilize the Saudi state.

''It is serious,'' he said. ''What I am afraid of is that Al Qaeda in Saudi
Arabia will be transformed into an assassin's group.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); RELIGION (88%); RAMADAN (86%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%)

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (79%); CAIRO, EGYPT (70%)

STATE: RED SEA (92%); INDIAN OCEAN (72%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); GULF STATES (78%); EGYPT (70%)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1383 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 4, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

William Korey, 87, B'nai B'rith Lobbyist

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 487 words


William Korey, who as a lobbyist on international issues for B'nai B'rith fought
for the interests of Jews in the Soviet Union and helped win a long battle to
get the United States to ratify the international genocide convention, died on
Aug. 26 in Cambridge, Mass. He was 87.

The cause was complications of cardiac arrhythmia, his daughter Eileen Korey
said.

Dr. Korey left academia to become director of the Anti-Defamation League, a
division of B'nai B'rith that fights for the civil rights of Jews and others, in
Illinois and Missouri, and then in Washington.

In 1960, he became the first director of B'nai B'rith International's United
Nations Office. He later directed B'nai B'rith's international council and its
international policy research department.

At the United Nations, Dr. Korey countered countries that opposed Israel and
that denounced Zionism as racism. He formed alliances with other American
organizations accredited to the United Nations and, in 1966, was elected
chairman of a group of 86 labor, civic and religious groups that worked to
promote interest in the United Nations' activities.

As a lobbyist, he successfully helped push the Jackson-Vanik amendment to the
1974 Trade Act, which penalized the Soviet Union for restricting Jewish
immigration to Israel. In articles and speeches, he defended the 1975 Helsinki
Accords between the Communist bloc and the West as providing a framework through
which Moscow could be influenced.

For decades, he fought for the United States to ratify the convention against
genocide, which the United Nations' General Assembly had passed unanimously in
1948. Opponents included lawyers concerned about technical details and racist
senators who worried that the pact could be used to help blacks. Dr. Korey
argued forcefully that the United States had embarrassed itself internationally
by failing to ratify the convention.

Senate ratification came in 1986. Two years later, both houses of Congress
passed a bill to make genocide a crime under United States law, and President
Ronald Reagan signed it into law.

William Korey was born in Chicago on June 16, 1922, and graduated from the
University of Chicago in 1946. He earned a master's degree and a doctorate from
what is now the Harriman Institute of Columbia University. He then taught at the
City College of New York and Columbia.

He wrote prolifically in both the scholarly and the popular press. His books
included two examinations of anti-Semitism in Russia. A study he did in 1970
with Ina Schlesinger, a specialist on Russian history, found Soviet textbooks
rife with anti-Semitism. An example was the failure to list Israel among the new
nations that came into being after World War II.

Dr. Korey's wife of 54 years, the former Esther Student, died in 2002. In
addition to his daughter Eileen, Dr. Korey, who lived in Bayside, Queens, is
survived by his daughter Alix and two grandchildren.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign), Social Activism

PERSON: William Korey

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: William Korey in 1983. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DON HOGAN CHARLES/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (93%); JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); CIVIC & SOCIAL
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LOBBYING (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); RACE
& RACISM (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); PREGNANCY &
CHILDBIRTH (76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (76%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(74%); RELIGION (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); WORLD WAR II
(72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(71%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); ACCREDITATION (67%);
TEXTBOOKS (65%); HEART DISEASE (56%)

ORGANIZATION: B'NAI B'RITH INTERNATIONAL (94%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (57%)

RONALD REAGAN (51%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (90%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (73%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);
MISSOURI, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); ISRAEL (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1395 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 11, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taking Up Arms to Deal With a Drug Lord's Legacy: Wild Hippos

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Jenny Carolina Gonzalez contributed reporting from
Bogota.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; DORADAL JOURNAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: DORADAL, Colombia


Even in Colombia, a country known for its paramilitary death squads, this
hunting party stood out: more than a dozen soldiers from a Colombian Army
battalion, two Porsche salesmen armed with long-range rifles, their assistant,
and a taxidermist.

They stalked Pepe through the backlands of Colombia for three days in June
before executing him in a clearing about 60 miles from here with shots to his
head and heart. But after a snapshot emerged of soldiers posing over his
carcass, the group suddenly found itself on the defensive.

As it turned out, Pepe -- a hippopotamus who escaped from his birthplace near
the pleasure palace built here by the slain drug lord Pablo Escobar -- had a
following of his own.

The meticulously organized operation to hunt Pepe down, carried out with the
help of environmentalists, has become the focus of an unusually fierce debate
over animal rights and the containment of invasive species in a country still
struggling to address a broad range of rights violations during four decades of
protracted war with guerrillas.

''In Colombia, there is no documented case of an attack against people or that
they damaged any crops,'' said Anibal Vallejo, president of the Society for the
Protection of Animals in Medellin, referring to the hippos. ''No sufficient
motive to sacrifice one of these animals has emerged in the 28 years since Pablo
Escobar brought them to his hacienda.''

Sixteen years after the infamous Mr. Escobar was gunned down on a Medellin
rooftop in a manhunt, Colombia is still wrestling with the mess he made.

Wildlife experts from Africa brought here to study Colombia's growing numbers of
hippos, a legacy of Mr. Escobar's excesses, have in recent days bolstered the
government's plan to prevent them -- by force, if necessary -- from spreading
into areas along the nation's principal river. But some animal-rights activists
are so opposed to the idea of killing them that they have called for the firing
of President Alvaro Uribe's environment minister.

Peter Morkel, a consultant for the Frankfurt Zoological Society in Tanzania,
compared the potential for the hippos to disrupt Colombian ecosystems to the
agitation caused by alien species elsewhere, like goats on the Galapagos
Islands, cats on Marion Island between Antarctica and South Africa, or pythons
in Florida.

''Colombia is absolute paradise for hippos, with its climate, vegetation and no
natural predators,'' Mr. Morkel said.

''But as much as I love hippos, they are an alien species and extremely
dangerous to people who disrupt them,'' he continued. ''Since castration of the
males is very difficult, the only realistic option is to shoot those found off
the hacienda.''

The uproar has its roots in 1981, when Mr. Escobar was busy assembling a
luxurious retreat here called Hacienda Napoles that included a
Mediterranean-style mansion, swimming pools, a 1,000-seat bull ring and an
airstrip.

''He needed a tranquil place to unwind with his family,'' said Fernando Montoya,
57, a sculptor from Medellin who built giant statues here of Tyrannosaurus rex
and other dinosaurs for Mr. Escobar.

Hired by private administrators of the seized estate, part of which is now a
theme park (imagine mixing ''Jurassic Park'' and ''Scarface'' into a theme), Mr.
Montoya rebuilt the same statues after looters tore them apart searching for
hidden booty.

But Mr. Escobar was not content with just fake dinosaurs and bullfights. In what
ecologists describe as possibly the continent's most ambitious effort to
assemble a collection of species foreign to South America, he imported animals
like zebras, giraffes, kangaroos, rhinoceroses and, of course, hippopotamuses.

Some of the animals died or were transferred to zoos around the time Mr. Escobar
was killed. But the hippos largely stayed put, flourishing in the artificial
lakes dug at Mr. Escobar's behest.

Carlos Palacio, 54, head of animal husbandry at Napoles, said Mr. Escobar
started in 1981 with four hippos. Now, he said, at least 28 live on the estate.
''With our current level of six births a year set to climb, we could easily have
more than 100 hippos on this hacienda in a decade,'' Mr. Palacio said.

''Some experts see this herd as a treasure of the natural world in case Africa's
hippo population suffers a sharp decline,'' Mr. Palacio continued. ''Others view
our growth as a kind of time bomb.''

The number of hippos on the hacienda could have reached 31 had Pepe, the slain
hippo, not clashed about three years ago with the herd's dominant hippo, then
left with a mate for other pastures. Once established near Puerto Berrio, the
mate gave birth to a calf.

Faced with the possibility of a nascent colony away from Napoles, Colombian
authorities decided to act. After all, hippos, despite their docile appearance,
are thought to kill more people in Africa than any other large animal.

Unable to find a zoo that would accept the three hippos in Puerto Berrio,
officials in the department, or province, of Antioquia considered their options.

Capturing them was expensive, costing as much as $40,000 for each hippo, in a
country where malnourishment among the poor remains a major problem, said Luis
Alfonso Escobar -- not related to Pablo Escobar -- head of Corantioquia, a state
environmental organization. Taking them to Africa was dangerous, in addition to
being expensive, because of the new diseases they might introduce there.

So the officials opted for a hunt and hired a nonprofit conservation group, the
Neotropical Wildlife Foundation, to help manage the operation.

The foundation brought in two experienced hunters, Federico Pfeil-Schneider and
Christian Pfeil-Schneider, both of whom also represent the car manufacturer
Porsche in Colombia. To ensure the hunting party's safety, the environmentalists
also secured an escort of soldiers.

All went as planned until the hunt's details and the photo of the soldiers
appeared in the news media. Outrage ensued. Newspapers speculated on the fate of
Pepe's severed head. (Luis Alfonso Escobar, of Corantioquia, rejected rumors
that it went to the hunters.) A judge in Medellin issued a ruling suspending the
hunt for Pepe's mate and their offspring.

Meanwhile, other hippos may be on the loose. Mr. Palacio, the hippo caretaker
here, said at least one was lurking in the waters of a neighboring ranch. Mr.
Morkel, the veterinarian, said one or two others could have wandered off,
according to local reports.

On the grounds of Hacienda Napoles, a sign warns visitors to the theme park.
''Stay in your vehicle after 6 p.m.,'' it reads. ''Hippopotamuses on the road.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A tourist displayed his son inside a sculpture of the first
hippopotamus brought to Hacienda Napoles in Doradal, Colombia, by the slain drug
lord Pablo Escobar.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLOS VILLALON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Outrage ensued after the release of a photo of soldiers next to the carcass of
Pepe, killed in Puerto Berrio.(PHOTOGRAPH BY EL TIEMPO, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
-- GETTY IMAGES) MAP: Map details Doradal, Colombia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MAMMALS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ANIMAL RIGHTS (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); ANIMALS (88%); SHOOTINGS (78%); WILDLIFE (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (73%); FRESHWATER
ECOSYSTEMS (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ENVIRONMENTALISM
(73%); ZOOLOGY (73%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); ISLANDS & REEFS
(73%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (73%); ANIMAL WELFARE (69%); CATS (68%); ZOOS &
AQUARIUMS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: WORLD SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF ANIMALS (55%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (58%)

CITY: MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (91%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (79%); ANTARCTICA (72%)

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1402 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 13, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

We Can't Stop Talking About Race in America

BYLINE: By DAVID MAMET

SECTION: Section AR; Column 0; Arts and Leisure Desk; THE NEW SEASON THEATER;
Pg. 12

LENGTH: 893 words


PRESIDENT OBAMA, like his predecessor President Bill Clinton, has suggested that
this country engage in a dialogue about race.

But what has our 230-year national experience been but a dialogue about race?

Our earliest drama on the subject,  ''Metamora,'' by John Stone (1829), concerns
the relations between the Massachusetts settlers and Prince Philip of the
Wampanoags. So does the novel ''Hope Leslie'' by Catherine Sedgwick (1827).

Much of the contentiousness that characterized the First Continental Congress
centered on the subject of slavery. Since then the Fugitive Slave Law, the
Kansas-Nebraska Act, the Missouri Compromise, the Dred Scott decision, the
Emancipation Proclamation, the 14th Amendment and so on, down to the Voting
Rights Act and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the trial of the
Scottsboro Boys, the internment of the Japanese, busing, affirmative action and
the 2008 election, have kept the subject alive in the national discourse.

My current play, ''Race,'' is intended to be an addition to that dialogue.

As a Jew, I will relate that there is nothing a non-Jew can say to a Jew on the
subject of Jewishness that is not patronizing, upsetting or simply wrong. I
assume that the same holds true among African-Americans.

In my play a firm made up of three lawyers, two black and one white, is offered
the chance to defend a white man charged with a crime against a black young
woman. It is a play about lies.

All drama is about lies. When the lie is exposed, the play is over.

Race, like sex, is a subject on which it is near impossible to tell the truth.
In each, desire, self-interest and self-image make the truth inconvenient to
share not only with strangers (who may, legitimately or not, be viewed as
opponents) but also with members of one's own group, and, indeed, with oneself.

For just as personal advantage was derived by whites from the defense of slavery
and its continuation as Jim Crow and segregation, so too personal advantage,
political advantage and indeed expression of deeply held belief may lead
nonwhites to defense of positions that, though they may be momentarily
acceptable, will eventually be revealed as untenable.

(Though its acceptability may be understandable, the notion that a wise Latina
woman is better qualified to dispense justice than a white man is no less tragic
or absurd than the opposite assertion.)

Drama may be used to buttress popular beliefs (see agitprop, the Soviet
apotheosis of the tractor, and issue plays generally), but tragedy, like
psychoanalysis, must strive to uncover those beliefs so unacceptable that their
existence has been unconsciously repressed and would be consciously denounced.
Tragedy's end is their resolution. Here, as Aristotle teaches, heroes realize
their previously repressed knowledge and are, by the revelation, freed from
repression and transformed.

Most contemporary debate on race is nothing but sanctimony -- efforts at
exploitation and efforts at restitution seeking, equally, to enlarge and prolong
dissent and rancor.

The question of the poor drama is ''What is the truth?'' but of the better
drama, and particularly of tragedy, ''What are the lies?''

I have never spent much time thinking about the themes of my plays, as, I have
noticed, when an audience begins to talk about the play's theme, it means the
plot was no good. But my current play does have a theme, and that theme is race
and the lies we tell each other on the subject.

Chris Rock, in his last tour, addressed the subject of the Rev. Jeremiah Wright
and asked, rhetorically and on behalf of the whites in the audience: Is it
possible that a 70-year-old black man hates the whites? Let me enlighten you.
You cannot find a 70-year-old black man who does not hate the whites.

This made sense to me. (I apologize to the esteemed Mr. Rock for what I am sure
is a clunky paraphrase.)

There has always been, at the very least, a little bit of hate between blacks
and whites in this country, with each side, in its turn, taking advantage of its
political strength (as who does not?). But that relationship is also perhaps
like a marriage. Both sides at different times are bitching, and both at
different times are bailing, but we're all in the same boat.

We are bound to each other, as are all Americans. Bound though subdivided, not
only by race, but by religion, politics, age, region and culture. And we not
only seem to be but are working it out.

Contemporary considerations of diversity, multiculturalism, affirmative action,
reparations and so on are, I believe, the beginning of the final wave of the
exceptionalism of the black American experience.

These difficult, divisive questions, like those of abortion, gun control, gay
rights and illegal immigration, are and will continue to be adjudicated in the
legislatures, the courts and the public consensus -- until the dialogue is done.

When will it be over? It will be over, like any marital fight, at an
unforeseeable time, when it has run its natural course. The length and tenor of
that course are unknown to the participants, who, as in a marital fight, are
each convinced, above all things, that the fight will be prolonged until his or
her own side has triumphed. But as in a marriage the dialogue will take its own
course until fatigue, remorse and finally forgiveness bring resolution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY THOMAS FUCHS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLITICS (79%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (75%); ELECTION LAW (75%); WOMEN (74%); EMPLOYMENT (68%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (68%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (55%)

ORGANIZATION: US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (56%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); BARACK OBAMA (90%); PRINCE PHILIP (56%)

STATE: NEBRASKA, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1405 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 13, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Somalia Shell Attack Kills 15, Including Disabled Veterans

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 400 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia


Mortar shells slammed into Somalia's capital, killing three civilians and at
least 12 men at a home for disabled veterans, an official said Saturday. Nearly
a dozen other former soldiers were wounded in the attack.

Islamic insurgents fired mortar shells Friday night toward Mogadishu's port, but
the explosives landed in residential areas, including a home for former army
officers paralyzed or missing limbs from the country's 1977 war with Ethiopia,
according to a government spokesman, Sheik Abdirisaq Qeylow.

Sheik Qeylow gave the toll of those killed and wounded.

Mohamed Abdi, 50, said he had moved to the home for veterans after a bullet left
him paralyzed in 1977.

He said he was sitting in a wheelchair in the home on Friday night about 30 feet
away from his friends when a mortar exploded and smoke and dust covered them
all.

''I saw my friends on the ground, with blood scattered everywhere like
slaughtered goats,'' he said.

Somalia has been ravaged by violence and anarchy since warlords overthrew
Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991 and then turned on one another.

A moderate Islamist was elected president in January with hopes that he could
unite the country's feuding factions, but the violence has continued unabated.

The government, which is supported by African Union peacekeepers, holds only a
few blocks of Mogadishu.

A powerful Islamic insurgent group called Al Shabab, which has foreign fighters
in its ranks, operates openly in the capital and seeks to overthrow the weak
government and impose a strict form of Islam in Somalia.

Mogadishu experiences violence nearly every day, with both sides of the conflict
accused of indiscriminate shelling.

The residence for the war veterans is near the port, which is one of the areas
here in the capital controlled by the government and the African Union
peacekeepers.

''It is horrific and inhumane to shell civilian areas,'' said the Somali human
rights activist Ali Sheik Fadhaa.

Many experts fear the country's lawlessness could provide a haven for Al Qaeda,
offering a place for terrorists to train and gather strength -- much like
Afghanistan did in the 1990s.

The United States accuses Al Shabab of having ties to Al Qaeda's terrorist
network, which Al Shabab denies.

Somalia's lawlessness also has allowed piracy to flourish off its coast, making
the vital Gulf of Aden one of the most dangerous waterways in the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Residents of Mogadishu gathered around the bodies of people
killed in a shelling.(PHOTOGRAPH BY FEISAL OMAR/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VETERANS (91%); DISABLED PERSONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PEACEKEEPING (87%); ARMIES (78%); PARALYSIS
(78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); RELIGION (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
ARMED FORCES (77%); MARITIME PIRACY (77%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (55%)

CITY: MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (92%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (79%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (99%); AFRICA (92%); ETHIOPIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1407 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Opposition Leader's Top Aide, Arrested in Post-Election Crackdown, Is Freed

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


The main Iranian opposition leader's top aide, who was arrested last week
because of his investigations into the abuse of prisoners in the crackdown after
the disputed election, has been released in what appears to be a sign of retreat
by the hard-core conservative authorities running Iran.

The release of the aide, Alireza Hosseini-Beheshti, was reported Sunday by the
semiofficial ILNA news agency. He is a highly regarded academic with Islamic
revolutionary credentials who worked directly under the opposition leader, Mir
Hussein Moussavi.

No explanation for the release was given. However, an Iranian source close to
Mr. Moussavi, speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution, said
Mr. Beheshti's freedom was secured only after immense pressure by senior
politicians.

Mr. Beheshti's arrest had seemed to illustrate the length the government was
willing to go to silence its opposition. His father, Mohammad Beheshti, who was
killed in an explosion in 1981, was one of the main architects of the 1979
Islamic Revolution and the country's Constitution.

Along with other signs of intolerance by Iran's authorities after the election,
Mr. Beheshti's arrest had led to speculation that Mr. Moussavi and another top
opposition figure, Mehdi Karroubi, would be arrested.

Both ran in the June 12 election and have asserted that the incumbent, Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, won by fraud.

In what appeared to be a sign of support for Mr. Beheshti from other veteran
figures, Hassan Khomeini, the grandson of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the
founder of the 1979 revolution, visited Mr. Beheshti at his home after his
release on Saturday, ILNA reported.

Mr. Beheshti was the head of one of the two committees that investigated the
torture  allegations of detainees during  the post-election protests.

The other committee was led by Mr. Karroubi, who has charged that prisoners were
raped and sodomized.

Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, referred to their allegations on
Friday as ''lies and rumors,'' and he warned that the system would respond
harshly ''to those who challenged its principles.''

On Saturday a judicial panel ruled that the allegations of rape were baseless
and that Mr. Karroubi's proof was fabricated. However, the panel also said the
government's measures to extinguish criticism have alienated many influential
religious and political figures.

A source close to Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a powerful politician whose
family  supported Mr. Moussavi's campaign, on Sunday corroborated reports that
Mr. Rafsanjani  threatened to resign his posts a few weeks ago after Ayatollah
Khamenei issued an order for Mr. Karroubi's arrest.

It remains unclear why that order was never carried out, but it may reflect a
continuing power struggle between Ayatollah Khamenei and Mr. Rafsanjani, who is
the head of the Council of Experts, which has the legal power to dismiss the
supreme leader.

Several Iranian Web sites sympathetic to Mr. Moussavi, including mowjcamp.com,
reported last week that Hussein Nouri Hamedani, the only senior cleric to have
congratulated Mr. Ahmadinejad, had expressed regret and had said he was
''tricked'' by Mr. Ahmadinejad's supporters.

Senior clerics in Iran's holy city of Qum have historically given religious
legitimacy to the government. Mohsen Kadivar, a senior cleric and a visiting
professor at Duke University, who has ties with clerics in Qum, said that the
number of clerics who were withdrawing their support for the government was
increasing.

''We have the progressive clerics who have criticized the post-election events
and openly sided with the protesters,'' he said. ''But some of the more
conservative ones have also shifted their support and have stayed away from
government ceremonies in a sign of protest.''

It is possible that the government is delaying Mr. Karroubi's arrest until after
this Friday, the date of Iran's annual pro-Palestinian rally, to avoid further
tension. Protesters and opposition leaders, including Mr. Karroubi, have said
that they will use the occasion to hold antigovernment street protests.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TORTURE
(78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); RELIGION (76%); GRANDCHILDREN (68%)

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (89%); MIR HOSSEIN MOUSAVI (79%); HASHEMI RAFSANJANI (78%);
MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1412 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 16, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Bosnian Leader May Be Freed Soon

BYLINE: By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 115 words


Biljana Plavsic, the former Bosnian president serving an 11-year prison term in
Sweden for crimes against humanity, is to be released early, a United Nations
court said Tuesday. The president of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Patrick Robinson, said Ms. Plavsic ''appears to have
demonstrated substantial evidence of rehabilitation'' and had accepted
responsibility for her crimes. Under Swedish law, she becomes eligible for
release Oct. 27, after serving two-thirds of her term, though her release date
has not been set. The Swedish Justice Ministry said Ms. Plavsic would be
released only after a formal approval by Sweden, which could take several weeks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (90%); EVIDENCE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (88%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (85%); APPROVALS (82%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SWEDEN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1413 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 16, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Malaysia: Untried Terror Suspects Freed

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 99 words


Malaysia on Tuesday freed five terrorism suspects held for up to seven and a
half years without trial under a strict security law that has been severely
criticized by civil rights groups. Home Minister Hishammuddin Hussein  said the
men were released because they no longer presented a threat. They had been
arrested under the Internal Security Act, accused of involvement in Jemaah
Islamiyah,  a regional militant network linked to Al Qaeda. Last month, tens of
thousands of people took part in a protest against the law,  saying it was
outdated and had been abused to jail political dissidents.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (87%); AL-QAEDA
(86%); ARRESTS (86%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (84%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (57%)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1430 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 26, 2009 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Before German Vote, Qaeda Threatens Europe on War

BYLINE: By SOUAD MEKHENNET

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT


In a new  recording, the leader of Al Qaeda, Osama bin Laden, urged European
nations on Friday to withdraw their troops from Afghanistan, with a veiled
threat of reprisals and an allusion to past bombings in Madrid and London.

The message came as European nations, and particularly Germany, have come under
increasing public and political pressures to reconsider their part in the Afghan
war.

Germany has 4,200 troops in Afghanistan, and domestic pressure to rethink its
mission has mounted since its  forces called in a NATO airstrike this month that
left scores of Afghans dead.

For Germany, the message, which was posted online, was the fourth in recent days
purporting to come from Al Qaeda, raising concerns of a terrorist attack and
placing German security officials on high alert.

The recording released on Friday, though addressed to Europeans generally,
seemed directed at Germany, coming before parliamentary elections on Sunday and
with both English and German subtitles.

Its release also coincided with a request from the American commander in charge
of Afghan operations, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal for more soldiers and
resources.

The recording was posted in password-protected jihadist forums and produced by
''as-Sahab,'' Al Qaeda's media arm. A copy was obtained by The New York Times.

In it, a voice playing over Mr. bin Laden's picture says that it is a matter of
justice for Europeans to stop assisting the ''oppression'' of Afghans.

Europeans would ''understand the causes of the bloody events in Madrid and
London,'' it says, if they were to see what the United States and its allies
have done in Afghanistan.

A series of bombs on a train in Madrid killed 191 people in 2004, and four
suicide bombers on the London mass transportation system killed 52 other people
in 2005.

''You are aware that oppression topples those who commit it and injustice has
unhealthy consequences for the unjust,'' the recording says. It accuses European
soldiers of killing women and children under the NATO mandate. ''So on what
basis are you violating what you talk about holding in high esteem, like justice
and human rights?'' the speaker asks.

''If today Europe is suffering the travails of the economic crisis, and the
heart of Europe is no longer No. 1 in world exports, and America is reeling from
the hemorrhage caused by the economic war,'' he says, ''then how do you think
you will fare after America pulls out, Allah permitting, for us to retaliate
from the oppressor on behalf of the oppressed?''

In recent days, a Qaeda operative, Bekkay Harrach, a German citizen of Moroccan
descent, released three videos warning Germans of  a rude awakening if they do
not withdraw from  the Afghan war  after the elections on Sunday.

Mr. Harrach -- clean shaven, with shoulder-length black hair and wearing a suit
and tie -- addressed the message to the German people. In previous videos he
wore a robe and covered his face.

He spoke in German and said that in a democracy people decide who will govern
for them and can order soldiers home. ''If the German people choose war, then
they have delivered their own sentence,'' he said.

He warned Muslims in Germany to avoid public places   for the two weeks after
the election, if parties in favor of keeping German soldiers in Afghanistan won.

On Friday a group that said it belonged to the Taliban released a video in which
a German speaker threatened Germany. He accused German soldiers of killing
innocent Afghans in the airstrike this month.

German security officials said they thought  the Taliban and Al Qaeda had
coordinated their threats.

''We are very worried and all our security forces are on high alert,'' said a
senior security official, who did not want to be identified because of the
delicacy of the matter. The official said that ''the fact that bin Laden's
message was published with a German subtitle is underlining that we have to take
it seriously.''

The official added that foreign intelligence agencies, including American,
Israeli and Arab, told  Germany  ''the threat is serious.''

''The Germans are very up on Al Qaeda's list because of their troops in
Afghanistan,'' an Arab intelligence official said. ''If I were them, I would be
very worried.''

In an official travel alert on Wednesday, the State Department warned United
States citizens about the threats.

Meanwhile, Germany has stepped up security at airports and train stations and in
the city centers for the weekend.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 8, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Sept. 26 about a recorded Al Qaeda warning to European
nations that they could face violent reprisals similar to the 2004 transit
bombing in Madrid and 2005 transit bombing in London if they did not withdraw
their troops from Afghanistan misstated the number of trains targeted in the
Madrid attack, which killed 191 people. It was four, not one.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A German convoy near Kunduz, Afghanistan, this month. Militants
are pressing Germans to use a vote Sunday to oppose the war.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANJA
NIEDRINGHAUS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); AL-QAEDA (92%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (78%); STANLEY A MCCHRYSTAL (58%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (91%)

STATE: FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (99%); EUROPE (99%); AFGHANISTAN (97%); SPAIN (94%); UNITED
STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1449 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 7, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Major Suspect In Genocide Of Rwandans Is Captured

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 322 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


One of the most wanted fugitives in Rwanda's genocide, an intelligence officer
accused of organizing the slaughter of civilians, including a ceremonial queen,
was arrested in Uganda this week, Ugandan and Rwandan officials said Tuesday.

The fugitive, Idelphonse Nizeyimana, had been on the run for years. He was
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 2000 and charged
with crimes against humanity and offenses related to genocide in the
orchestration of massacres of civilians, including whole families. He had been
an intelligence officer in the former Rwandan Army and was the second in command
of an elite military school in Rwanda before the country exploded in genocide in
1994.

More recently, Mr. Nizeyimana was a top commander of a rebel army of former
Rwandan soldiers hiding out in the forests of eastern Congo, Rwandan officials
said. That force, the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda, has been blamed
for some of the most atrocious attacks in eastern Congo and is widely seen as a
threat to regional peace.

Eric Kayiranga, a Rwandan police spokesman, said Mr. Nizeyimana was arrested
Monday in Kampala, Uganda's capital, though the spokesman did not have many
details about the capture. The BBC said Mr. Nizeyimana was trying to travel to
Kenya from Congo and was caught in Uganda with false papers.

''This guy was causing terror in Congo, and he was a threat to the region,'' Mr.
Kayiranga said.

The most notorious accusation against Mr. Nizeyimana is that he ordered a squad
of soldiers to kidnap and execute a ceremonial Tutsi queen, believed to be in
her 80s, at the beginning of the genocide in 1994. Local Rwandan courts have
convicted and punished several other men who were part of that killing.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, in Arusha, Tanzania, said Mr.
Nizeyimana was transferred Tuesday to a United Nations detention center in
Arusha, where he will be tried.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); ARMIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); MILITARY
SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (58%)

CITY: KAMPALA, UGANDA (79%); NAIROBI, KENYA (78%)

COUNTRY: UGANDA (95%); RWANDA (94%); KENYA (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1457 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 13, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

United Arab Emirates: Court Convicts American

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 145 words


The Supreme Court convicted an American citizen on Monday of terrorism-related
charges after claims that torture had been used to extract a confession. The
court sentenced the American, Naji Hamdan, left, to 18 months in prison, but he
should be freed soon because the sentence counts time served and he was detained
last year. Mr. Hamdan, 43, faced charges of supporting terrorism, working with
terrorist organizations and being a member of a terrorist group. Hearings in the
case were closed to the public and the chief justice, Khalifa al-Muhairi, gave
no details on his decision. Mr. Hamdan has denied the allegations and says he
was tortured and forced to sign a confession. Rights groups, including the
American Civil Liberties Union, have accused United States authorities of
pushing the case in the Emirates because they lacked enough evidence for
American courts.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); SENTENCING
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
SUPREME COURTS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1458 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 14, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Faith-Based Discrimination

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 335 words


President Obama promised in his campaign to preserve President George W. Bush's
faith-based initiative aimed at helping social service programs sponsored by
religious organizations win federal grants and contracts. He also promised a
vitally important change: groups receiving federal money would no longer be
allowed to hire employees on the basis of their religion.

The idea was to prevent discrimination and preserve the boundary between church
and state.   But Mr. Obama has not made good on the promise. His February
executive order revamping the White House office for religion-based and
neighborhood programs left untouched a 2002 presidential directive authorizing
religious-oriented programs that receive federal financing  to hire and fire on
religious grounds.

Also left untouched was a constitutionally suspect 2007 memo concluding that the
government cannot order religious groups not to discriminate as a condition of
federal financing -- even in programs like Head Start, where religious
discrimination is outlawed. The memo, based on a far-fetched interpretation of
the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act, was produced by the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Counsel. That is the same outfit that wrote the
memos authorizing torture.

A coalition of 58 religious, educational and civil liberties groups is now
seeking to reverse the 2007 memo. A group letter last month to Attorney General
Eric Holder Jr. asked him to direct the current Office of Legal Counsel to
review and withdraw the memo. Mr. Holder should do so, and Mr. Obama should
revise his February executive order to include the anti-discrimination language
that he omitted the first time around.

As a candidate, Mr. Obama drew the right line. Effective social service programs
should not be ineligible for federal dollars just because they have a religious
affiliation. But they should be required to abide by the same
anti-discrimination laws as everyone else. Public money should not be used to
pay for discrimination.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (96%); CHURCH & STATE (90%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); LAWYERS (87%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (79%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); GRANTS & GIFTS (77%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (76%); PUBLIC FINANCE
(76%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING
(72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (82%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (74%); ERIC HOLDER (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1459 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 14, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Netherlands: Bosnian Serb Loses Bid for Immunity

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 118 words


Judges at the Yugoslavia war crimes tribunal on Tuesday rejected a claim of
immunity by the former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, as well as his
appeal to delay the start of his war crimes trial. Mr. Karadzic faces 11 counts
of war crimes and crimes against humanity related to the 1992-95 Bosnian war,
including two counts of genocide, at the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in The Hague. He denies all charges, and has demanded that
they be dropped on the grounds that Richard C. Holbrooke, who was then an
American peace mediator, had offered him immunity if he left public life. Mr.
Holbrooke denies he made such an offer. The trial is expected to start late this
month.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); IMMUNITY
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (67%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1466 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Louisiana: Calls for Resignation

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING SOUTH; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 136 words


Gov. Bobby Jindal joined civil rights groups and others in  calling for the
resignation of a white justice of the peace who said he had refused to issue a
marriage license to an interracial couple out of concern for any children they
might have. The justice of the peace, Keith Bardwell, said earlier that he had
discussed the topic with blacks and whites. ''There is a problem with both
groups accepting a child from such a marriage,'' Mr. Bardwell said. ''I think
those children suffer, and I won't help put them through it.'' The couple, Beth
Humphrey, who is white, and Terence McKay, who is black, both of Hammond, say
they would consult the federal Justice Department about filing a discrimination
complaint. Senator Mary L. Landrieu in a statement said Mr. Bardwell's practices
and comments were deeply disturbing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (90%);
RESIGNATIONS (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%)

PERSON: BOBBY JINDAL (74%); MARY LANDRIEU (51%)

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1469 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 18, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

HELD BY THE TALIBAN

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 4452 words


THE car's engine roared as the gunman punched the accelerator and we crossed
into the open Afghan desert. I was seated in the back between two Afghan
colleagues who were accompanying me on a reporting trip when armed men
surrounded our car and took us hostage.

Another gunman in the passenger seat turned and stared at us as he gripped his
Kalashnikov rifle. No one spoke. I glanced at the bleak landscape outside --
reddish soil and black boulders as far as the eye could see -- and feared we
would be dead within minutes.

It was last Nov. 10, and I had been headed to a meeting with a Taliban commander
along with an Afghan journalist, Tahir Luddin, and our driver, Asad Mangal. The
commander had invited us to interview him outside Kabul for reporting I was
pursuing about Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The longer I looked at the gunman in the passenger seat, the more nervous I
became. His face showed little emotion. His eyes were dark, flat and lifeless.

I thought of my wife and family and was overcome with shame. An interview that
seemed crucial hours earlier now seemed absurd and reckless. I had risked the
lives of Tahir and Asad -- as well as my own life. We reached a dry riverbed and
the car stopped. ''They're going to kill us,'' Tahir whispered. ''They're going
to kill us.''

Tahir and Asad were ordered out of the car. Gunmen from a second vehicle began
beating them with their rifle butts and led them away. I was told to get out of
the car and take a few steps up a sand-covered hillside.

While one guard pointed his Kalashnikov at me, the other took my glasses,
notebook, pen and camera. I was blindfolded, my hands tied behind my back. My
heart raced. Sweat poured from my skin.

''Habarnigar,'' I said, using a Dari word for journalist. ''Salaam,'' I said,
using an Arabic expression for peace.

I waited for the sound of gunfire. I knew I might die but remained strangely
calm.

Moments later, I felt a hand push me back toward the car, and I was forced to
lie down on the back seat. Two gunmen got in and slammed the doors shut. The car
lurched forward. Tahir and Asad were gone and, I thought, probably dead.

The car came to a halt after what seemed like a two-hour drive. Guards took off
my blindfold and guided me through the front door of a crude mud-brick home
perched in the center of a ravine.

I was put in some type of washroom the size of a closet. After a few minutes,
the guards opened the door and pushed Tahir and Asad inside.

We stared at one another in relief. About 20 minutes later, a guard opened the
door and motioned for us to walk into the hallway.

''No shoot,'' he said, ''no shoot.''

For the first time that day, I thought our lives might be spared. The guard led
us into a living room decorated with maroon carpets and red pillows. A
half-dozen men sat along two walls of the room, Kalashnikov rifles at their
sides. I sat down across from a heavyset man with a patu -- a traditional Afghan
scarf -- wrapped around his face. Sunglasses covered his eyes, and he wore a
cheap black knit winter cap. Embroidered across the front of it was the word
''Rock'' in English.

''I'm a Taliban commander,'' he announced. ''My name is Mullah Atiqullah.''

FOR the next seven months and 10 days, Atiqullah and his men kept the three of
us hostage. We were held in Afghanistan for a week, then spirited to the tribal
areas of Pakistan, where Osama bin Laden is thought to be hiding.

Atiqullah worked with Sirajuddin Haqqani, the leader of one of the most
hard-line factions of the Taliban. The Haqqanis and their allies would hold us
in territory they control in North and South Waziristan.

During our time as hostages, I tried to reason with our captors. I told them we
were journalists who had come to hear the Taliban's side of the story. I told
them that I had recently married and that Tahir and Asad had nine young children
between them. I wept, hoping it would create sympathy, and begged them to
release us. All of my efforts proved pointless.

Over those months, I came to a simple realization. After seven years of
reporting in the region, I did not fully understand how extreme many of the
Taliban had become. Before the kidnapping, I viewed the organization as a form
of ''Al Qaeda lite,'' a religiously motivated movement primarily focused on
controlling Afghanistan.

Living side by side with the Haqqanis' followers, I learned that the goal of the
hard-line Taliban was far more ambitious. Contact with foreign militants in the
tribal areas appeared to have deeply affected many young Taliban fighters. They
wanted to create a fundamentalist Islamic emirate with Al Qaeda that spanned the
Muslim world.

I had written about the ties between Pakistan's intelligence services and the
Taliban while covering the region for The New York Times. I knew Pakistan turned
a blind eye to many of their activities. But I was astonished by what I
encountered firsthand: a Taliban mini-state that flourished openly and with
impunity.

The Taliban government that had supposedly been eliminated by the 2001 invasion
of Afghanistan was alive and thriving.

All along the main roads in North and South Waziristan, Pakistani government
outposts had been abandoned, replaced by Taliban checkpoints where young
militants detained anyone lacking a Kalashnikov rifle and the right Taliban
password. We heard explosions echo across North Waziristan as my guards and
other Taliban fighters learned how to make roadside bombs that killed American
and NATO troops.

And I found the tribal areas -- widely perceived as impoverished and isolated --
to have superior roads, electricity and infrastructure compared with what exists
in much of Afghanistan.

At first, our guards impressed me. They vowed to follow the tenets of Islam that
mandate the good treatment of prisoners. In my case, they unquestionably did.
They gave me bottled water, let me walk in a small yard each day and never beat
me.

But they viewed me -- a nonobservant Christian -- as religiously unclean and
demanded that I use a separate drinking glass to protect them from the diseases
they believed festered inside nonbelievers.

My captors harbored many delusions about Westerners. But I also saw how some of
the consequences of Washington's antiterrorism policies had galvanized the
Taliban. Commanders fixated on the deaths of Afghan, Iraqi and Palestinian
civilians in military airstrikes, as well as the American detention of Muslim
prisoners who had been held for years without being charged. America, Europe and
Israel preached democracy, human rights and impartial justice to the Muslim
world, they said, but failed to follow those principles themselves.

During our captivity, I made numerous mistakes. In an effort to save our lives
in the early days, I exaggerated what the Taliban could receive for us in
ransom. In response, my captors made irrational demands, at one point asking for
$25 million and the release of Afghan prisoners from the American detention
center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. When my family and editors declined, my captors
complained that I was ''worthless.''

Tahir and Asad were held in even lower esteem. The guards incessantly berated
both of them for working with foreign journalists and repeatedly threatened to
kill them. The dynamic was not new. In an earlier kidnapping involving an
Italian journalist and his Afghan colleagues, the Taliban had executed the
Afghan driver to press the Italian government to meet their demands.

Despite the danger, Tahir fought like a lion. He harangued our kidnappers for
hours at a time and used the threat of vengeance from his powerful Afghan tribe
to keep the Taliban from harming us.

We became close friends, encouraging each other in our lowest moments. We
fought, occasionally, as well. At all times, an ugly truth hovered over the
three of us. Asad and Tahir would be the first ones to die. In post-9/11
Afghanistan and Pakistan, all lives are still not created equal.

As the months dragged on, I grew to detest our captors. I saw the Haqqanis as a
criminal gang masquerading as a pious religious movement. They described
themselves as the true followers of Islam but displayed an astounding capacity
for dishonesty and greed.

Our ultimate betrayal would come from Atiqullah himself, whose nom de guerre
means ''gift from God.''

What follows is the story of our captivity. I took no notes while I was a
prisoner. All descriptions stem from my memory and, where possible, records kept
by my family and colleagues. Direct quotations from our captors are based on
Tahir's translations. Undoubtedly, my recollections are incomplete and the
passage of time may have affected them. For safety reasons, certain details and
names have been withheld.

Our time as prisoners was bewildering. Two phone calls and one letter from my
wife sustained me. I kept telling myself -- and Tahir and Asad -- to be patient
and wait. By June, our seventh month in captivity, it had become clear to us
that our captors were not seriously negotiating our release. Their arrogance and
hypocrisy had become unending, their dishonesty constant. We saw an escape
attempt as a last-ditch, foolhardy act that had little chance of success. Yet we
still wanted to try.

To our eternal surprise, it worked.

ON Oct. 26, 2008, I arrived in Afghanistan on a three-week reporting trip for a
book I was writing about the squandered opportunities to bring stability to the
region. I had been covering Afghanistan and Pakistan since 2001 and was inspired
by the bravery and pride of the people in those two countries and, it seemed,
their popular desire for moderate, modern societies.

The first part of my visit proved depressing. I spent two weeks in Helmand
Province, in southern Afghanistan, and was struck by the rising public support
for the Taliban. Seven years of halting economic development, a foreign troop
presence and military mistakes that killed civilians had bred a deep resentment
of American and NATO forces.

For the book to be as rigorous and fair as possible, I decided that I needed to
get the Taliban's side of the story.

I knew that would mean taking a calculated risk, a decision journalists
sometimes make to report accurately in the field. I was familiar with the
potential consequences. In 1995, I was imprisoned for 10 days while covering the
war in Bosnia. Serbian authorities arrested me after I discovered mass graves of
more than 7,000 Muslim men who had been executed in Srebrenica.

My detention was excruciating for my family. Promising I would never put them
through such an ordeal again, I was cautious through 13 subsequent years of
reporting.

I flew from Helmand to Kabul on Sunday, Nov. 9, to meet with Tahir Luddin, who
worked for The Times of London and was known as a journalist who could arrange
interviews with the Taliban.

After making some inquiries, Tahir told me that a Taliban commander named Abu
Tayyeb would agree to an interview the next day in Logar Province. We could meet
him after a one-hour drive on paved roads in a village near an American military
base.

Tahir had already interviewed Abu Tayyeb with two other foreign journalists and
said he trusted him. He said Abu Tayyeb was aligned with a moderate Taliban
faction based in the Pakistani city of Quetta.

The danger, he said, would be the drive itself. ''Nothing is 100 percent,'' he
told me. ''You only die once.''

I felt my stomach churn. But if I did the interview, the most dangerous
reporting for the book would be over. I could return home with a sense that I
had done everything I could to understand the country.

''Yes,'' I told Tahir. ''Tell him yes.''

That night, I had dinner with Carlotta Gall, a dear friend and the Kabul bureau
chief for The New York Times, and asked her if the interview was a crazy idea.
Carlotta said she had never felt the need to interview the Taliban in person and
preferred phone conversations. She recommended that we hire a driver to serve as
a lookout and end the meeting after no more than an hour.

I also met with a French journalist who had interviewed Abu Tayyeb twice with
Tahir. In the fall of 2007, she spent two days filming him and his men as they
trained. In the summer of 2008, she spent an evening with them and filmed an
attack on a police post.

She pointed out that I was more vulnerable as an American, but she said she
thought Abu Tayyeb would not kidnap us. She said she believed that he was trying
to use the media to get across the Taliban's message.

I slept poorly the night before the interview. I got out of bed early and put on
a pair of boxer shorts my wife had given me on Valentine's Day emblazoned with
dozens of ''I love you'' logos, hoping they would bring good luck.

I left two notes behind. One gave Carlotta the location of the meeting and
instructed her to call the American Embassy if we did not return by late
afternoon. The other was to my wife, Kristen, in case something went wrong.

I walked outside and met Tahir and Asad Mangal, a friend he had hired to work as
a driver and lookout. As we drove away, Tahir suggested that we pray for a safe
journey. We did.

Dressed in Afghan clothes and seated in the back, I covered my face with a scarf
to prevent thieves from recognizing me as a foreigner. Most kidnappings in and
around Kabul had been carried out by criminal gangs, not the Taliban.

From the car, I sent Carlotta a text message with Abu Tayyeb's phone number. I
told her to call him if she did not hear from me. If something went wrong along
the way, Abu Tayyeb and his men would rescue us. Under Afghan tradition, guests
are treated with extraordinary honor. If a guest is threatened, it is the host's
duty to shelter and protect him.

We arrived at the meeting point in a town where farmers and donkeys meandered
down the road. But none of Abu Tayyeb's men were there. Tahir called Abu Tayyeb,
who instructed us to continue down the road.

Moments later, I felt the car swerve to the right and stop. Two gunmen ran
toward our car shouting commands in Pashto, the local language. The gunmen
opened both front doors and ordered Tahir and Asad to move to the back seat.

Tahir shouted at the men in Pashto as the car sped down the road. I recognized
the words ''journalists'' and ''Abu Tayyeb'' and nothing else. The man in the
front passenger seat shouted something back and waved his gun menacingly. He was
small, with dark hair and a short beard. He seemed nervous and belligerent.

I hoped there had been some kind of mistake. I hoped the gunmen would call Abu
Tayyeb, who would vouch for us and order our release. Instead, our car continued
down the road, following a yellow station wagon in front of us.

The gunman in the passenger seat shouted more commands. Tahir told me they
wanted our cellphones and other possessions. ''If they find we have a hidden
phone,'' Tahir said, ''they'll kill us.''

''Tell them we're journalists,'' I said. ''Tell them we're here to interview Abu
Tayyeb.''

Tahir translated what I said, and the driver -- a bearish, bearded figure --
started laughing.

''Who is Abu Tayyeb? I don't know any Abu Tayyeb,'' he said. ''I am the
commander here.''

They are thieves or members of another Taliban faction, I thought. I knew that
what we called the Taliban was really a loose alliance of local commanders who
often operated independently of one another.

I looked at the two gunmen in the front seat. If we somehow overpowered them, I
thought, the men in the station wagon would shoot us. I did not want to get Asad
and Tahir killed. My arrest in Bosnia had ended peacefully after 10 days. I
thought the same might occur here.

One of the gunmen said something and Tahir turned to me. ''They want to know
your nationality,'' he said. I hesitated and wondered whether I should say I was
Canadian. Being an American was disastrous, but I thought lying was worse. If
they later learned I was American, I would instantly be declared a spy.

''Tell them the truth,'' I told Tahir. ''Tell them I'm American.''

Tahir relayed my answer and the burly driver beamed, raising his fist and
shouting a response in Pashto. Tahir translated it for me: ''They say they are
going to send a blood message to Obama.''

BY the time I met face to face later that day with Atiqullah, our kidnapper, I
still did not know which Taliban faction had abducted us.

A large man with short dark hair protruding from the sides of his cap, he
appeared self-assured and in clear command of his men. He also seemed suspicious
of us, which worried me. I knew many Taliban believed all journalists were
spies.

With Tahir translating, we explained that we had been invited to Logar Province
to interview Abu Tayyeb, the Taliban commander. I said I had worked as The
Times's South Asia correspondent from 2002 to 2005. I described articles I had
written during the war in Bosnia and told him that Serbian Orthodox Christians
had arrested me there after I had exposed the massacre of Muslims.

Atiqullah remained unmoved. He denied our request to call Abu Tayyeb or a
Taliban spokesman. He controlled our fate now, he announced. Atiqullah handed me
the notebook and pen his gunmen had taken from me and ordered me to start
writing.

American soldiers routinely disgraced Afghan women and men, he said. They forced
women to stand before them without their burqas, the head-to-toe veils that
villagers believe protect a woman's honor. They searched homes without
permission and forced Afghan men to lie on the ground, placing boots on the
Afghans' heads and pushing their faces into the dirt. He clearly viewed the
United States as a malevolent occupier.

He produced one of our cellphones and announced that he wanted to call The
Times's office in Kabul. I gave him the number, and Atiqullah briefly spoke with
one of the newspaper's Afghan reporters. He eventually handed me the phone.
Carlotta, the paper's Kabul bureau chief, was on the line. I said that we had
been taken prisoner by the Taliban.

''What can we do?'' Carlotta asked. ''What can we do?''

Atiqullah demanded the phone back before I could answer. Carlotta -- the most
fearless reporter I knew -- sounded unnerved.

Atiqullah turned off the phone, removed the battery and announced that we would
move that night for security reasons. My heart sank. I had hoped that we would
somehow be allowed to contact Abu Tayyeb and be freed before nightfall. As we
waited in the house, I thought Carlotta would be calling my family and editors
at any minute to inform them that I had been kidnapped.

I awoke before dawn to the sound of the guards performing a predawn prayer with
Tahir and Asad. We had been taken to a small dirt house and then spent the day
trapped in a claustrophobic room with our three guards. Measuring roughly 20
feet by 20 feet, its only furnishings were the carpet on the floor and a dozen
blankets.

One of our guards introduced himself as ''Qari,'' an Arabic expression for
someone who had memorized the Koran. He later said he was one of the
''fedayeen,'' an Arabic term the Taliban use for suicide bombers.

Food arrived at mealtimes, and no one was beaten. Yet Tahir grew increasingly
worried. ''These guys are really religious,'' he whispered to me at one point.
''They're really religious. They're praying a lot.''

Confined to the room for most of the day, I found it increasingly suffocating.
By now, I was sure my family had heard the news.

Several hours after sunset, we were hustled into a small station wagon.

''We have to move you for security reasons,'' said Atiqullah, who was sitting in
the driver's seat, his face still concealed behind a scarf. Arab militants and a
film crew from Al Jazeera were on their way, he said.

''They're going to chop off your heads,'' he announced. ''I've got to get you
out of this area.''

As we drove away, I asked for permission to speak. Atiqullah agreed, and I told
him we were worth more alive than dead. He asked me what I thought he could get
for us. I hesitated, unsure of what to say. I was desperate to keep us alive.

I knew that in March 2007, the Afghan government exchanged five Taliban
prisoners for the Italian journalist after the Taliban executed his driver.
Later, they killed his translator as well. My memory of the exchange was vague,
but I thought money was included. In August 2007, the South Korean government
had reportedly paid $20 million for the release of 21 Korean missionaries after
the Taliban killed two members of the group.

''Money and prisoners,'' I said.

''How much money?'' Atiqullah asked.

I hesitated again.

''Millions,'' I said, immediately thinking I would regret the statement.

Atiqullah and one of his commanders looked at each other.

Over the next hour, the conversation continued. Atiqullah promised to do his
best to protect us. I promised him money and prisoners.

As we wound our way through steep mountain passes, Atiqullah asked for the names
and professions of my father and brothers. I told him the truth. Given the
unusual spelling of my last name, I thought he could easily find my relatives
online.

My father was a retired insurance salesman, I said. One of my brothers worked
for an aviation consulting company. A stepbrother worked for a bank. I thought
being forthright was helping convince him that I was a journalist, not a spy.

FOR the next four days, we lived with Qari, the suicide bomber, in another small
dirt house. On one afternoon, he allowed us to sit outside in a small walled
courtyard.

He even let Tahir play a game on a cellphone. But when Tahir asked for the phone
a second time, Qari shouted that we planned to send a text message to the Kabul
bureau of The Times. Suddenly enraged and irrational, he denounced us as liars.
He picked up his Kalashnikov, pointed it at Tahir's chest and threatened to
shoot him.

Tahir stared back, unmoved. Pashtunwali -- an ancient code of honor practiced by
ethnic Pashtuns in Afghanistan and Pakistan -- prevented each man from showing
fear and losing face.

Asad and I stepped in front of Tahir. We begged Qari to put down his gun.
''Lutfan, lutfan,'' I said, using a local expression for please. Qari lowered
his weapon but motioned for Tahir to step into an outer room.

Through the wall, I heard Tahir begin praying in Arabic. I heard a thump and
Tahir cried out, ''Allah!'' A second thump and ''Allah!'' Several minutes later,
Tahir walked back into the room, crawled under a blanket and began moaning. Qari
had beaten him on the back with his rifle.

Qari unnerved me. Earnestly reciting hugely inaccurate propaganda about the West
I had seen on jihadi Web sites, Qari seemed utterly detached from reality. Other
guards joked that he had mental problems.

In my mind, Qari and Atiqullah personified polar ends of the Taliban. Qari
represented a paranoid, intractable force. Atiqullah embodied the more
reasonable faction: people who would compromise on our release and, perhaps,
even on peace in Afghanistan.

I did not know which one represented the majority. I wanted to believe that
Atiqullah did. Yet each day I increasingly feared that Qari was the true
Taliban.

The following day, Atiqullah arrived to move us again. During the ride, he said
we would be taken to a place where I could receive bottled water and we could
call our families. He promised to protect me.

''I will not kill you,'' he said. ''You will survive.''

I insisted that he promise to save Tahir and Asad as well. ''You will not kill
the three of us,'' I said. ''It has to be the three of us.''

Initially, Atiqullah refused. For days, I raised the issue over and over,
remembering that under the Pashtunwali code a promise of protection should be
ironclad. At one point, I suggested that he cut off my finger instead of harming
Tahir and Asad.

Later that day, he finally promised to protect all three of us. ''I give you my
promise,'' he said, as I lay down in the back of the station wagon. ''I will not
kill any of the three of you.''

Then, he said, ''Let's kill Asad first,'' and laughed.

THE following afternoon, a new commander arrived. A bone-thin man with a long
beard and one arm, he got into the driver's seat and guided us through barren,
rock-strewn territory, steering the car and shifting gears with lightning-quick
movements of his one hand.

At sunset, he stopped the vehicle, and Atiqullah announced that we would have to
walk through the mountains. A large American base blocked the path in front of
us, he said. The one-armed commander gave me a pair of worn loafers, and another
guard gave me his jacket.

As we walked, I understood why Western journalists had grown enamored of the
anti-Soviet Afghan resistance fighters in the 1980s. Under a spectacular
panorama of stars, we wound our way along a steep mountain pass. Emaciated
Taliban fighters carried heavy machine guns with little sign of fatigue. Their
grit and resilience seemed boundless.

I thought about making a run for it but had not had a chance to talk it over
with Tahir and Asad. I also knew that the half-dozen guards would quickly shoot
us.

As the hike continued, I grew suspicious. Atiqullah -- who had promised to carry
me if needed -- proved to be in poor shape. On one of the steepest parts of the
ascent, he stopped, sat on a rock and panted.

Nine hours after we set out, the sun rose and the hike dragged on. Asad
approached me when the guards lagged behind, pointed at the way ahead and
whispered, ''Miram Shah.'' Miram Shah is the capital and largest town in North
Waziristan, a Taliban and Qaeda stronghold in Pakistan's lawless tribal areas.
North Waziristan was the home of some of the Taliban's most hard-line members.
If we were headed there, we were doomed.

After 11 hours, our hike finally ended. The guards lighted a fire, and we warmed
our hands as we waited for a vehicle to pick us up.

Exhausted and anxious, I told myself that Asad was wrong and Atiqullah was
right. I told myself that we were walking into southern Afghanistan, not
Pakistan. I told myself we would survive.

Held By the Taliban: This is the first in a series of articles, running today
through Thursday, that offer a first-person account by David Rohde of his seven
months as a captive of the Taliban in Pakistan.Mr. Rohde, a New York Times
reporter, was kidnapped with an Afghan journalist, Tahir Luddin, and their
driver, Asad Mangal, on Nov. 10, 2008, as they traveled to an interview with a
Taliban commander outside of Kabul, Afghanistan. The articles are based on Mr.
Rohde's recollections and, where possible, records kept by his family and
colleagues. For safety reasons, certain names and details have been withheld.;
Tomorrow: Inside the Islamic Emirate

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE KIDNAPPER: The Taliban commander, left, who abducted David
Rohde, a New York Times reporter, and two Afghan colleagues introduced himself
as Mullah Atiqullah. The three spent most of their captivity in
Pakistan.(PHOTOGRAPH BY FRANCE 24)(A1)
 REPORTING FROM AFGHANISTAN: David Rohde interviewed villagers in southern
Afghanistan, above, in the late summer of 2007, about a year before he was
kidnapped while working on a book about the region.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TOMAS MUNITA
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A18) MAP: A Kidnapping Outside Kabul areas Two weeks
before Thanksgiving in 2008, David Rohde, a New York Times reporter, and two
Afghan colleagues are kidnapped by Taliban militants. (MAP BY JOE BURGESS AND
ARCHIE TSE THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A19)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERVIEWS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (93%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1474 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 22, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Goods Flood Gaza's Tunnels, Turning Border With Egypt Into a Shopping Mecca

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; RAFAH JOURNAL; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: RAFAH, Gaza


Dusty sacks filled with cans of Coca-Cola were being loaded onto trucks by young
boys, headed for supermarkets in Gaza City. Thousands of motorcycles were lined
up on display in a nearby stadium, ranging in price from $2,000 to $10,000.

At Nijma market, refrigerators, flat-screen televisions, microwaves,
air-conditioners, generators and ovens filled the tents, all at inflated prices,
having been spirited into this town on the border with Egypt through tunnels
under the sand. Some Gazans have even purchased cars smuggled in parts into the
isolated Palestinian enclave.

The tunnels emerged as an essential lifeline for Gaza two years ago, when Israel
imposed a political and economic embargo after Hamas took over the area. Israel
did its best to obliterate them during its three-week military offensive in Gaza
last winter, saying they were being used for smuggling weapons and explosives.

But the builders set to work immediately after that, and with little hope of the
border crossings with Israel opening anytime soon -- and rich profits to be
harvested -- there are more tunnels now than ever, and Rafah has turned into a
shopping mecca where the tunnel owners are kings.

''If the siege were to be lifted,'' said Osama, 22, a tunnel owner, ''I would
end up in intensive care.'' Osama would not give his family name, fearing he
would never be able to travel legally out of Gaza if identified. Locally, he
goes by the nickname of Doda, which means worm.

In the past, armed gangs roamed this frontier town with a lawless feel;
journalists and humanitarian workers were about the only visitors to venture
here. Now, customers flock in from all over Gaza. What started as a few
clandestine tunnels dug beneath houses has turned into a booming industry that
nobody bothers to hide.

Before the Gaza war the tunnels numbered in the hundreds. Today about 1,500 of
them are said to be crammed into an eight-mile stretch along the border,
employing in the neighborhood of 30,000 Palestinians from all over the
territory. A local merchant has opened a 24-hour grocery store called ''Dubai''
to cater to them. Only the milk and the yogurt come from Israel. The soft
drinks, beans, chocolate, cookies and cooking oil come in consignments from
under the ground.

Across the street Abu Raed Alarja, 58, fixes tools that are used to dig the
tunnels. Inside his dark store, he also stocks cement, generators and blue
plastic barrels strung together with strong ropes, used to drag goods from the
Egyptian side.

For the tunnel owners the profits are high, but precarious. Israel regularly
bombards the tunnels in response to rocket fire, and some that are not well
constructed collapse. Egypt also occasionally seals them from its side, a tactic
it uses to keep Hamas in line.

Hamas runs some tunnels of its own, but local residents say the group does not
collect taxes from those that are privately owned.

A syndicate has been formed to supervise the tunnel system and to defend the
rights of workers killed on the job -- at least 116 to date, according to local
human rights groups. Five workers 17 to 20 years old were killed in one of
Osama's three tunnels five months ago when it collapsed because of the dryness
of the sand. Osama paid the five families $2,000 each in compensation and has
promised to pay an additional $7,000 each in a few months.

Osama started out as a day laborer, digging tunnels from the age of 16. He
graduated to running drugs and TNT through the tunnels into Gaza. Though he is a
supporter of Fatah, the secular rival of Hamas, he says he supplied both
parties. He was young but intimidating enough. He says he used to eat in
restaurants in Gaza City and leave without paying. ''Now it is different,'' he
said. ''We fear Hamas.''

For the same reason he no longer smuggles drugs or weapons, though the money he
made from that illicit trade helped set him up in legitimate business. He says
that each of his three tunnels cost about $300,000 to build, and that four
friends helped him finance the enterprise.

By night he brings in live animals, motorcycles, potato chips, Coca-Cola and
clothing for women and children. But the most lucrative import is fuel, which he
pumps through a pipe fixed on the ceiling of a tunnel more than half a mile long
and collects in a large tank on the Palestinian side. Like any smart
businessman, Osama does most of his pumping after Israel has blocked fuel
supplies from its side or has bombed a few competing tunnels, lifting prices in
Gaza.

The tunnel owners, Gaza's nouveau riche, say they make on average more than $1
million a year from each tunnel.

Sharif Abu Daf, 30, used to work as a contractor in Gaza City until Israel
closed the commercial crossings and prevented cement and other construction
materials from coming in. Now he is digging to feed his wife and his six
children and making 120 shekels, about $32, a day.

The tunnel owners have brought little change to Rafah, which they consider a
conservative backwater. Instead, they prefer to invest their money in property
in Gaza City and beyond.

''We make millions, but we are not educated,'' said Imad, 29, one of Osama's
partners. Some local men, he noted, marry more than one wife. ''If I want to
invest, I'll go to Morocco. I heard it is a beautiful place. They have a normal
government.''

''What's the point of having so much money when you are not able to travel?''
said Hazim, 23, another partner who started out digging tunnels. He said he
wanted  to go to Egypt, study business administration and then invest in Cairo.

''They have never seen beyond Gaza,'' said Imad's father-in-law, Abu Mohammed,
57, of the younger generation. ''They think like they are in a tunnel,'' he
continued. ''They have never seen malls or real supermarkets like I saw in
Dubai.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Palestinian smuggled a sheep through one of the estimated
1,500 tunnels that employ 30,000 Gazans along the border. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID
KHATIB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 Profits are high, but precarious. Israel regularly bombards the tunnels. This
entrance was struck last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS) MAP: The tunnels
emerged as a lifeline for Gaza two years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SMUGGLING (90%); RETAILERS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%);
GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (89%); HAMAS (89%); SOFT DRINK INDUSTRY (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (88%); MOTOR VEHICLES (78%); BORDER CONTROL (76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS
(75%); SOFT DRINKS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(69%); TELEVISION EQUIPMENT (57%)

COMPANY: COCA-COLA CO (58%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (56%)

TICKER: KO (NYSE) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED
SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1476 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 23, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Hague: Karadzic To Skip Trial Start

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 89 words


The former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic has said in a letter to the
United Nations war crimes tribunal that he will not attend the start of his
trial on Monday, insisting that he needs more time to prepare his defense.  Mr.
Karadzic, who faces charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
for his role in Bosnia's 1992-95 war, has repeatedly asked for more time. The
judges at the tribunal have maintained that Mr. Karadzic has had ample time to
prepare for his defense since his arrest in Belgrade in July 2008.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); GENOCIDE (85%); ARRESTS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1477 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 23, 2009 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Karadzic to Boycott Start of War Crimes Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic has said he will not come to the
start of his trial on Monday, insisting that he needs more time to prepare his
defense. In a letter to the court, released on Thursday, he said he was not
ready for the ''gigantic'' case, in which he faces charges of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity for his role in Bosnia's 1992-95 war.

Mr. Karadzic's move is the latest in a long battle of wills between the former
political leader and the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague. Mr.
Karadzic has filed a large number of motions and appeals, tried to get one of
his judges replaced and repeatedly asked for more time and more resources.

Just days ago, he expressed his frustrations through a lawyer when an appeals
court turned down his request to delay the trial by 10 more months. He said he
needed the time to examine the volumes of evidence produced by the prosecution,
now adding up to close to one million pages.

But the judges have maintained that Mr. Karadzic has had ample time to prepare
for his defense since his arrest in Belgrade in July 2008. Before that, he had
lived in hiding for more than 10 years while running from the court. As for
resources, the judges have said that, while Mr. Karadzic receives some funds to
pay for legal assistants and researchers, he is not entitled to lawyers' fees
because he has chosen to act as his own defense lawyer. A large team of unpaid
volunteers is also assisting him.

It was unclear what would happen next.

Nerma Jelacic, the court's spokeswoman, said that the trial would still start
Monday ''as previously scheduled.'' But Mr. Karadzic told the court in his
six-page letter, ''I shall not appear before you on that date.''

Lawyers following the case said there were several options. Judges may simply
postpone the case or hold a hearing to seek a compromise with Mr. Karadzic,
rather than start the trial with an empty dock. The tribunal cannot hold a trial
in absentia, but judges can proceed when an accused waives his right or plainly
refuses to show up. They may also ask a lawyer to represent him during his
absence, but Mr. Karadzic is likely to refuse this.

The tribunal is trying other high-level officials linked to the wars that broke
up Yugoslavia, but the prosecution of Mr. Karadzic will be the most high-profile
trial since Slobodan Milosevic, the former Serbian president, died in his cell
before the end of his case in 2006. Mr. Milosevic also obstructed proceedings to
gain concessions or to buy time, including abruptly calling in sick rather than
face an important hostile witness.

His former security chief, Jovica Stanisic, is refusing to attend his own trial,
saying he is too ill, and he has declined to use the video link set up for him
at the tribunal's detention unit.

Another Serbian political leader, Vojislav Seselj, has repeatedly refused to
come to court and even went on a prolonged hunger strike until his judges met
several of his demands.

Mr. Karadzic faces criminal prosecution for some of the greatest atrocities of
the Bosnian war, when Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims fought over territory.
While he was leader of the Bosnian Serbs, forces under his command maintained a
brutal 43-month siege of the city of Sarajevo, and more than 8,000 unarmed men
and boys were executed at Srebrenica.

He has said he is innocent of all charges. His letter said he would continue
preparing his defense, ''and as soon as I will be prepared, I will be happy to
inform'' court officials ''a few weeks in advance.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAWYERS (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY
(78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); APPEALS COURTS (77%); COSTS &
ATTORNEY FEES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); ARRESTS
(71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); VOLUNTEERS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (77%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (77%)

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1478 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 24, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinians Now Have Voting Date, But No Unity

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: RAMALLAH, West Bank


The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, issued a decree on Friday for
presidential and parliamentary elections to be held on Jan. 24. The move
resolved an immediate constitutional crisis, but created new complications and
underscored the depth of the Palestinian political divide.

Mr. Abbas, who leads Fatah, the mainstream nationalist party, had been hoping to
put off the elections until June, to be held in the framework of an
Egyptian-brokered reconciliation agreement with the rival Islamic group Hamas.
But Hamas has so far refused to sign the accord.

In the absence of an agreement, Mr. Abbas was obliged to call the election three
months before the current Parliament ended its four-year term, as required by
the Palestinian basic law.

The last parliamentary elections were held on Jan. 26, 2006, and were won by
Hamas. The Islamic group went on to seize control of Gaza in mid-2007, routing
pro-Fatah forces there and confining the power of Mr. Abbas and his
Western-backed Palestinian Authority to the West Bank.

The decree issued by Mr. Abbas, who was elected to the presidency in 2005,
specifies that the elections will be held in Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza.
But it is highly unlikely that a vote can take place in Gaza without Hamas's
consent, and many Palestinians strongly oppose the idea of holding elections
only in Jerusalem and the West Bank.

''Elections are supposed to give legitimacy to the leadership,'' said Qaddoura
Fares, a Fatah leader in Ramallah who is a critical voice within the party. If
elections take place only in part of the Palestinian territory, under a boycott
by the opposition, ''how can the president then stand up and say he represents
all the Palestinian people?'' Mr. Fares said.

Some Fatah representatives suggested that calling the election would increase
pressure on Hamas to reach a deal with Fatah. ''We will declare elections,''
said Jibril Rajoub, a Fatah Central Committee member, in an interview in his
Ramallah office hours before the presidential decree was issued, ''but we will
leave the door open for them to come.''

He added, ''We pray day and night for a national reconciliation.'' But he warned
that ''Hamas is playing with fire.''

Hamas reacted furiously to the elections decree, giving no hint of readiness for
power sharing or of imminent reconciliation.

''Abbas has declared his end,'' said Ayman Taha, a Hamas spokesman in Gaza.

Ismail Ridwan, another Hamas leader in Gaza, said Mr. Abbas's decree was ''a
blow to reconciliation efforts'' and showed that Mr. Abbas ''does not enjoy
credibility and is not serious about ending the Palestinian division.''

Dimitri Diliani, a Fatah representative in Jerusalem, said there were technical
solutions, like electronic voting, to get around a ban on elections in Gaza.
''The geographical parameters of elections should not be held hostage by
Hamas,'' he said.

But it is far from clear that balloting will take place in any of the
Palestinian areas in January. Others within Fatah raised the possibility that
the Palestinian Election Commission would request a delay, ostensibly for
technical reasons, giving Hamas, Fatah and the Egyptian brokers more time to
reach an accord.

The talk of reconciliation has done little to diminish the hatred between Fatah
and Hamas. The prospect of elections could either spur some semblance of
Palestinian unity or make that prospect even more distant.

In the current venomous atmosphere, even if the two rivals were to sign a
document, there would be widespread doubts about whether the practical steps it
called for would be carried out.

Hamas recently whipped up public sentiment against Mr. Abbas after he agreed,
under pressure from the United States, to delay action on a United Nations
report detailing evidence of possible war crimes, mainly by Israel but also by
Hamas.

Protesters in Gaza threw shoes at posters of Mr. Abbas that branded him a
traitor, before Mr. Abbas reversed himself and pressed for the report to be
endorsed by the United Nations Human Rights Council last week.

Muhammad Dahlan, a former Fatah strongman in Gaza and an old nemesis of Hamas,
called a news conference for the Arabic news media at his new headquarters in
Ramallah earlier this week. Reflecting the abiding acrimony, he accused Hamas of
foiling Egypt's efforts for reconciliation, of ''inciting to kill'' Mr. Abbas
and of trying to create chaos in the West Bank.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Hamas backers in Gaza burned posters of the Palestinian
president, Mahmoud Abbas, protesting his effort to delay action on a Gaza war
report critical of Israel. He later reversed his decision.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASHRAF
AMRA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); AL FATAH (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); INTERVIEWS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(77%); ELECTRONIC VOTING MACHINES (73%); RELIGION (71%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (92%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (93%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (94%); EGYPT (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1482 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 25, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Carrots in the Peace Pipe

BYLINE: By JAMES TRAUB

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1086 words


The Obama administration released a document last week outlining its strategy on
Sudan, and in its midst was a sentiment that has become almost canonical in the
first year of the administration: ''We must engage with allies and with those
with whom we disagree.'' President Obama has pushed the ''reset'' button with
any number of countries with whom we disagree, including Russia, Iran and Cuba.
The question raised by the new Sudan policy is whether ''engagement'' can be a
suitable paradigm in dealing with a regime accused of committing genocide.

The argument over engagement has a long pedigree, at least by the standards of a
very young president. In 2007, Obama declared that he would meet without
preconditions with the leaders of rogue states like Iran and North Korea, adding
that it was ''a disgrace'' that the Bush administration had refused on principle
to do so. In the face of withering accusations of naivete -- above all from his
Democratic rival, Hillary Rodham Clinton -- Mr. Obama reaffirmed that
commitment, arguing that turning our back on adversaries had only hardened their
resolve.

The administration's special envoy on Sudan, Maj. Gen. J. Scott Gration, has
thus been listening, and talking, to the government in Khartoum, whose
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, has been indicted by the International
Criminal Court, accused of committing crimes against humanity in Darfur, where
some 300,000 civilians have died in state-sponsored violence since 2003. The new
policy seeks to bring the genocidal violence to an end; to implement the terms
of a 2005 peace deal between the government and forces in the south, who fought
a savage civil war for 20 years; and to ensure that Sudan does not become a
haven for terrorists, as it was in the late 1990s. The policy offers to ease
sanctions to help advance those goals, and threatens to impose ''credible,
meaningful disincentives'' should the Sudanese government prove noncompliant.

There is no serious argument, from experts or from advocates, that the
administration should not talk to Khartoum or that it should not offer a mix of
incentives and threats. Even the most ardent activists no longer argue for a
military intervention, as many of them did at the height of the violence in
Darfur, five or six years ago. As John Norris, executive director of Enough, a
group dedicated to ending genocide, says, ''It is the conditions with which that
engagement is undertaken that are really the sticking points.''

What does Mr. Bashir have to do to start emerging from international isolation?
At what point does Mr. Obama further ratchet up the pressure? The practical
meaning of the policy of engagement has been to change this balance -- to accept
the regime's bona fides more than had been true before, to throttle back the
language of accusation and threat.

Darfur advocates and other critics argue that General Gration has offered muted
criticism of the Bashir regime, and has been willing ''to give carrots for
little confidence-building measures'' rather than for real changes in policy,
says Donald Steinberg, deputy president of the International Crisis Group. A
long history of failed diplomacy shows that Mr. Bashir's government will ignore
any commitment that interferes with its goal of crushing opposition, in Darfur
and elsewhere.

Officials involved with the Sudan policy say, however, that there are now a
variety of reasons to believe that conscientious diplomacy will work: Mr. Bashir
fears for his survival; he craves legitimacy; the Sudanese, like everyone else,
want to interact with Mr. Obama; the international community is prepared to act
as it was not before. Sudan experts do not generally share this optimism.

A curious compound of deep hopefulness and blunt pragmatism seems to suffuse the
Obama administration. What underlines the belief in engagement is a faith that
Mr. Obama can accomplish what other statesmen cannot. Still, the underlying
calculus is hard-headed -- ''evidence-based,'' as one official put it. And the
evidence, in Sudan, is that the genocide in Darfur is no longer front and
center. The 2.7 million Darfuris in camps for the displaced live wretched lives
but are no longer being killed in large numbers, if only because the
government's campaign of terror has largely achieved its objectives.

Attention has now shifted back to the conflict between north and south, which
claimed two million lives. The peace agreement between the two sides calls for a
national election next year, and a referendum in 2011 in which the south can
choose independence. There is every reason to fear that the war will resume if
the government of Sudan, which does not want to lose oil fields in the south,
obstructs the referendum. ''And if Humpty Dumpty falls off the wall,'' as
General Gration says, ''we're all in trouble.''

The administration must ensure that the referendum occurs, and is honored.
Officials explain that Mr. Bashir wants to assure his grip on the remaining half
of the country through next year's elections. Otherwise, says one policy maker,
who insisted on anonymity in order to offer a candid assessment, ''the north has
few incentives to move forward on the referendum.'' And what if the regime
violates pledges to allow freedom of speech and assembly, and effectively
disenfranchises Darfur's displaced people, as activists fear? ''We have to have
the election we can have and be honest about that,'' the official says.

General Gration and others say they will do everything they can to ensure fair
conditions for the election, but they seem prepared to help deliver Mr. Bashir a
political victory, and a chance for legitimacy in order to keep Humpty Dumpty
intact. The calculation may prove wrong; but it is hard to argue, under the
circumstances, that the choice itself is morally obtuse.

The word ''engagement'' refers to a means of action, but the concept itself has
to do with ends. You offer engagement not because the interlocutor deserves it,
but because doing so is the best way of producing the desired end. The
alternative policy, of righteous accusation, has been tried in Sudan. In 2004,
Secretary of State Colin Powell officially characterized the violence in Darfur
as ''genocide'' -- but then testified that ''no new action is dictated by this
determination.'' And none was forthcoming. Here, perhaps, was moral truth; but
to what end? Engagement is susceptible to criticism both for naivete and for
cynicism; but like any policy, it will be judged by the results.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: KINGPIN: Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, reviled
internationally, may be crucial to achieving United States
objectives.(PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EXECUTIVES (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); GENOCIDE (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%);
NEWS BRIEFS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); INDICTMENTS (70%); FOREIGN
POLICY (70%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (65%); TERRORISM (64%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (93%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); J SCOTT GRATION (58%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); UNITED STATES (92%);
KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1488 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Gaza, Opportunities Fade As Feeling of Isolation Grows

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: GAZA


The bank executive sits in a suit and tie behind his broad empty desk with
plenty of time to talk. Almost no loans are being issued or corporate plans
made. The Texas-trained engineer closed his firm because nothing is being built.
The business student who dreamed of attending an American university -- filling
a computer file with meticulous hopes and plans -- has stopped dreaming. He goes
from school to a part-time job to home, where he joins his merchant father who
sits unemployed.

Ten months after the Israeli military said it invaded this Palestinian coastal
strip to stop the daily rocket fire of its Islamist rulers, there are many ways
to measure the misery of Gaza.

Bits of rubble are being cleared, but nothing is going up. Several thousand
homes remain destroyed. Several dozen families still live in United Nations
tents strung amid their ruined houses. A three-year-old embargo on Hamas imposed
by Israel and Egypt keeps nearly all factories shut and supplies away. Eighty
percent of the population gets some form of assistance.

But the misery of the educated and professional class has a particular
poignancy. Many abroad view Gaza as a large slum, yet there is near universal
literacy here and infant mortality is low by regional standards. Midsize glass
towers gleam. Many thousands have advanced degrees. Half a dozen stylish
restaurants fill each day with young women -- a few with heads uncovered --
carrying laptop computers, and with the underemployed, who smoke hookahs and
lament their future.

''We are entering very dark years,'' remarked Slama Bissiso, vice chairman of
the Palestinian Bar Association, slowly exhaling scented tobacco smoke on the
balcony of the Deira Hotel overlooking the Mediterranean. He said that the
embargo on Gaza and the divide between the Hamas government here and the
Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority in the West Bank were driving Gaza into
deeper isolation every month.

Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, announced on Friday that elections
would be held in January. But it was effectively an announcement that Fatah and
Hamas had failed to reconcile their differences despite Egyptian mediation.
There will be no election here without the agreement of Hamas, and it has no
intention of granting it now. If that means a vote will be held in the West Bank
only, the horizons of Gaza will retreat even further.

Hamas's control of Gaza feels solidly unchallenged. Its security forces patrol
the streets. Pictures of President Abbas with big X's across his face line the
main avenue, sadly known as Unity Street. A new sign on the Gaza side of the
Israeli border bars even foreigners from bringing in alcohol.

Left out of the banking system, Hamas affiliates opened their own bank recently.
In keeping with Muslim strictures, it does not charge interest or offer loans,
making money by buying cars or homes the customer wants, then reselling them at
a higher price.

Israel allows about 100 trucks a day to pass into Gaza bearing food, medicine
and other humanitarian goods. But it has closed off commerce in the hope of
alienating the population here from their rulers. That seems to be happening.
Yet if no election occurs, it is hard to see how the alienation can be expressed
or government changed.

Israel wants to isolate Hamas because the group rejects Israel's existence. As
Ayman Taha, a Hamas movement spokesman, said in an interview, ''Our long-term
strategy is the liberation of all of Palestine, but we would agree to a
temporary solution involving a state in the 1967 borders with a truce of about
10 years, depending on the conditions of the truce.''

Egypt rejects Hamas because of its affiliation with the Cairo-based Muslim
Brotherhood. Both Egypt and Israel worry about Iranian arming of the group as
well.

The increasing isolation of Gaza is taking its toll. Opportunities for training
and education abroad or for outsiders to come here, for example, are scarce. The
children's library in the center of the city could not persuade either Israeli
or Egyptian officials to let anyone in to help set up new programs or carry out
quality control.

Executives at Jawwal, the Palestinian cellphone company, sat last week at their
work stations in blue jeans -- as at the end of every work week it was Casual
Thursday -- and said their jobs were getting harder because spare parts and
training were unavailable. Their senior managers, who used to travel abroad once
a month, now cannot travel at all.

While 1,100 students admitted to programs abroad did get through the crossing
into Egypt over the past few months -- and another 50 were granted permission
through Israel -- more than 800 others who had spots waiting for them were
unable to leave, according to Gisha, an Israeli human rights group.

Many of the professionals here reject Hamas's ideology, although some voted for
the party in 2006 out of rage over the corruption in Fatah.

''Hamas won by a slim margin, and it was because of people like me,'' said
Mohamed, who comes from a Fatah family and works for a charity. ''I regret
voting for them. I wanted to punish Fatah.''

Like nearly all in Gaza who spoke about politics, he asked that his identity be
hidden for fear of what the government might do. The rules of political dissent
remain fuzzy.

The Texas-trained engineer also voted for Hamas in 2006 and wishes he had not.

''Israel is saying, 'Because you elected Hamas, you should have no life,' '' he
said. ''Yet people elected Hamas because of Fatah corruption. I believe in peace
with Israel, but I wanted desperately to get away from the corruption. I didn't
expect Hamas to win. Next time, I won't vote at all.''

While the legitimate economy here depends on foreign aid that provides salaries
for tens of thousands to do little, the black market for high-priced goods
smuggled in from Egypt through hundreds of tunnels is thriving, leading to the
growth of a tunnel mafia.

Professionals here are frustrated that their political options are Fatah, which
they still consider corrupt, and Hamas, whose ideology poses problems for them
and for many foreign governments.

Some said the rejection of Hamas by the world meant it made no sense for it to
stay in power, but they had no idea how to effect a change.

''I'd like to see the creation of a political alternative with businesspeople
instead of Hamas and Fatah,'' said Rami Alagha, 39, manager of the Jawwal
cellphone company. ''The United States and the Europeans could get behind such a
program. Otherwise we have no future.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Hamas members in Gaza burn a coffin with pictures of Mahmoud
Abbas, the Palestinian president. Many Gaza professionals reject Hamas's
ideology. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAID KHATIB/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); HAMAS (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
(72%); PERSONAL COMPUTERS (72%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (72%);
LAPTOP COMPUTERS (71%); RESTAURANTS (70%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (69%);
ELECTIONS (67%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (67%); SMOKING (64%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (63%); INFANT MORTALITY (51%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (74%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (95%); EGYPT (92%);
MEDITERRANEAN (77%)

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1489 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Leader of Bosnian Serbs Refuses to Go to Court on First Day of Genocide Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 491 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


On the first day of his trial, Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader
who stands accused of genocide against Bosnia's Muslim population, refused to
appear in court on Monday and sent word once again that he wanted more time to
prepare his defense in proceedings that aim to cover three years of warfare and
widespread brutality against civilians.

With no lawyers present to represent Mr. Karadzic, a potentially historic moment
-- the trial of the most senior Bosnian Serb leader called to account for the
horrors of the 1990s -- fell flat. The presiding judge, a soft-spoken jurist
from South Korea, ended the session in less than 20 minutes but warned that the
trial would continue on Tuesday anyway.

Even from his cell, Mr. Karadzic, a former psychiatrist turned extreme Serbian
nationalist, managed to distress a number of the victims' families. More than
160 people had made the 24-hour trek by bus from Bosnia to the United Nations
war crimes tribunal in The Hague, and part of the group watched through the
bulletproof glass of the public gallery.

As the short session closed, many in the group shouted in anger and frustration.
Munira Subasic, one of the organizers of the group, said the majority had to
return to Bosnia during the night because they had no money for hotel rooms.
Several women who said they had lost husbands and sons in the war said they felt
betrayed by the court.

The judge, O-gon Kwon, last week wrote a private letter to Mr. Karadzic, asking
him to reconsider his position not to attend. Mr. Karadzic had announced his
absence in a letter to the court, after he lost his appeal requesting more
preparation time.

The judge, who sat on the bench that struggled with the often unruly Slobodan
Milosevic, the former Serbian president, has ample experience with chaos in the
courtroom and evidently tried to reach out to Mr. Karadzic.

Reading from his letter to Mr. Karadzic, the judge stressed that ''we will do
our utmost to protect your rights.''

He added that Mr. Karadzic could ask for extra time when needed for
cross-examining witnesses, for example. But the judge also hinted that his
absence could force the court to impose a lawyer, stripping Mr. Karadzic of his
right to defend himself.

A panel of four international judges is trying Mr. Karadzic, 64, who is viewed
as one of the main architects of what was called the ethnic cleansing of Bosnia
-- that is, the violent removal of non-Serbs from a range of towns and villages
during the 1992-95 war. He faces 11 counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including two counts of genocide.

On Monday, a lawyer for Mr. Karadzic, Marko Sladojevic, said his client would
not be in court on Tuesday.

He said Mr. Karadzic was working his way through more than a million pages of
prosecution documents, adding, ''He wants a trial and tell his side of the story
but he still has months of work and does not want to commit legal suicide.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); JUDGES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (74%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (70%)

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1490 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Legislators Dissatisfied With Deal Reached by Top Leaders on Election Laws

BYLINE: By JOHN LELAND; Mohammed Hussein contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


The country's political parties failed to agree on election laws on Tuesday,
despite a proposed deal put together by the nation's top political figures the
day before. The stalemate was another blockage in negotiations that have dragged
on for weeks, threatening national elections scheduled for Jan. 16.

The official deadline for passing the election laws was Oct. 15. Elections can
still be held on time if the parties agree on terms this week, but not much
later, said Said Arikat, a spokesman for the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, which proposed guidelines to break the logjam among the parties.

''This is really crunch time,'' Mr. Arikat said. ''We have everything in place
to conduct an election on time. With every passing day, it becomes more
difficult.'' Any postponement in the elections carries the potential for slowing
the withdrawal of American troops.

Legislators said that they would continue to meet, but that they were far from
agreement. ''Yes, we're closer than a week ago,'' said Osama Nujaifi, a
Parliament member from the Iraqiya bloc, who said he was confident that the
elections would go forward as scheduled.

Iraq's top political leaders, including Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki and
President Jalal Talabani and their deputies, moved quickly Monday night to agree
on a compromise in the wake of coordinated suicide bombings on government
buildings on Sunday that appeared intended to stall negotiations.

Abdul Hadi al-Hassani of the Shiite Dawa Party said the bombings had added
urgency to the discussions. ''It makes us see the enemy, and all want to join
together,'' he said.

Members of political parties said there was broad general agreement on allowing
people to vote for individual candidates, rather than lists. But the parties
remained divided on legislation governing elections in Kirkuk, an oil-rich
province to the north of Baghdad that has long been a point of contention
between Kurds and Arabs.

Mahmoud Othman, a Kurdish legislator, said he was critical of the proposal for
Kirkuk, which would combine voting registration records from 2004 and 2009 to
reflect the province's changing population, which grew more Kurdish in those
years. But he welcomed a United Nations proposal of using only 2009 records in
the current election, then revisiting the question for future elections.

''It's a great injustice to use the 2004 records,'' Mr. Othman said, because
many Kurds were driven from Kirkuk in ethnic cleansing campaigns under Saddam
Hussein. He added, ''If we don't reach a solution this week, the election will
be delayed, and we will have a constitutional vacuum after Jan. 16.''

The negotiations on Tuesday took place against the backdrop of an announcement
by the Islamic State of Iraq, an umbrella group of terrorist organizations that
includes Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a mostly homegrown group that American
intelligence says has some foreign leadership. The group claimed responsibility
for the bombings Sunday and another recent attack and called Sunday's attacks --
in which at least 155 people were killed and several government buildings were
destroyed -- ''the second stage of the good harvest plan.''

On Monday the Iraqi military arrested eight members of a terrorist cell it said
was involved in the bombings Sunday as well as a similar attack on the Foreign
Ministry in August.

As the party members debated election laws, Baghdad's governor, Salah Abdul
Razzaq, called for the firing of the interior minister and the operations
commander over the recent bombings, which he said resulted from negligence.

Also on Tuesday, in the northern province of Nineveh, American forces killed a
civilian during a raid, and gunmen killed two civilians in separate episodes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Security guards on Tuesday inspected a Baghdad day care center
damaged Sunday by suicide bombings of government buildings.(PHOTOGRAPH BY HADI
MIZBAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTION LAW (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(91%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); TERRORISM
(86%); LEGISLATION (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ & THE LEVANT (75%); BOMBINGS
(75%); AL-QAEDA (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); RELIGION (64%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (70%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (55%); JALAL TALABANI (55%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1491 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

One Man's Crusade Against Slavery, Seen From Two Angles

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; EXHIBITION REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1569 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, Va.


His body may lie a-moldering in the grave, but in what form exactly does his
soul go marching on? We may think we know something about John Brown, the
abolitionist and stern Calvinist who 150 years ago this month led 21 followers
to take over the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Va., expecting to gather
weapons to fuel a widespread slave rebellion. His self-proclaimed Provisional
Army of the United States took hostages (including a great-grandnephew of George
Washington) and killed four innocent citizens. Finally, after being captured by
a detachment of Marines led by Robert E. Lee, and tried, Brown and six other
insurgents were hanged for treason, though their cause ultimately triumphed.

But in two small-scale but heavily laden exhibitions -- one at the New-York
Historical Society, drawing on the extraordinary Gilder Lehrman Collection, the
other at the Virginia Historical Society in Richmond (the first show devoted to
Brown in a city that was the capital of the Confederacy) -- it becomes clear
that Brown's legacy is nearly as riven now as it was on the eve of the Civil
War. His actions still raise unresolved issues about the limits of dissent, the
nature of terrorism and the effects of revolutionary violence.

The two exhibitions are also subtly different, reflecting in some respects
contrasts that have their origins in the controversies of that earlier era. In
New York ''John Brown: The Abolitionist and His Legacy,'' developed by James G.
Basker, president of the Gilder Lehrman Institute, and others, states its goal
from the start: to examine ''John Brown's beliefs and actions in the context of
growing national divisions over slavery in the 1850s.'' We read in the wall text
how, in that crucial decade, the passage of the Fugitive Slave Law in 1850 and
the Kansas-Nebraska Act four years later, as well as the Dred Scott decision of
1857, ''precipitated a firestorm between slaveholding Southerners and free-labor
Northerners.''

Violence even broke out on the Senate floor in May 1856, when Representative
Preston Brooks of South Carolina assaulted an antislavery colleague, Senator
Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, beating him so badly that it was three years
before Sumner returned to the Senate.

Out of that atmosphere, Brown's violence also took shape. We see his fierce
intelligence in letters to followers, and read reminiscences of his hanging and
its aftermath. There are shadows here, but his legacy is given few ambiguities.
It is displayed in documents representing the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments,
which ended institutional slavery and its legal culture. Brown's legacy, the
show suggests, finally found fruition in the 1960s civil rights movement (evoked
here by a placard carried in a march that the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
joined the day he was murdered).

Ultimately, the assessment of Brown that remains is that of Frederick Douglass,
who disagreed with Brown's tactics but is quoted here in 1881: ''If John Brown
did not end the war that ended slavery, he did at least begin the war that ended
slavery.''

In Richmond in ''The Portent: John Brown's Raid in American Memory,'' something
quite different happens. In the South Brown was condemned not only for his
abolitionist views but also because he tapped into latent fears of a slave
rebellion. Now, of course, the curators, the historians William M. S. Rasmussen
and Robert S. Tilton,  take the virtues of Brown's abolitionist cause for
granted; indeed, the last part of the exhibition is devoted to a series of 22
schematic, affecting prints of Brown's life and his martyrdom by the artist
Jacob Lawrence (based on his 1941 paintings). Melville's 1859 poem ''The
Portent,'' about Brown's hanging, gives the show its title, presciently calling
Brown a metaphysical herald, a ''meteor of the war'' that was about to begin.

But in Richmond abolition is not the theme; Brown's tactics are. And we can hear
the clamor of the debate more clearly. As the show points out, Brown's virtue
was not always so transparent, even in the North.

Brown was hailed by Emerson, who said he would ''make the gallows as glorious as
the cross.'' Thoreau glorified him as living beyond death. Victor Hugo called
him ''this liberator, this fighter for Christ,'' whose hanging (''so great a
crime'') ''would impart to the Union a creeping fissure.''

The first biography of Brown, published soon after his hanging, is open here to
its title page, where the author, James Redpath, with a typographical shout,
dedicated the book to Emerson and Thoreau, ''WHO, WHEN THE MOB SHOUTED,
'MADMAN!' SAID, 'SAINT!' ''

But at the same time Hawthorne called Brown a ''blood-stained fanatic.'' Lincoln
called his raid ''absurd'' and deplored Brown's ''violence, bloodshed and
treason.'' In the major Northern cities ''Union meetings'' were held to condemn
Brown.

A petition signed by 3,500 Bostonians proclaimed, ''We deeply sympathize with
the people of Virginia.'' In New York, the exhibition says, there was a huge
political meeting: 6,000 people filled the Academy of Music; 15,000 gathered
outside; and 20,000 signed a resolution regarding ''the recent outrage at
Harpers Ferry as a crime.''

There were some, clearly, who opposed Brown because he was both violent and an
abolitionist, but others opposed him simply because he was violent. One of the
remarkable objects on display here is a long pike topped with the blade of a
Bowie knife. In March 1857, in preparation for the raid, Brown ordered a
thousand such custom-designed weapons from a Connecticut manufacturer, for use
by slaves with no experience with guns. The weapon has a primitive power, and
helps give some idea of the kind of battles Brown imagined.

The money for such weaponry, as both shows point out, came from abolitionist
financiers in New England, brilliant and educated men (including the founder of
the Boston Symphony) who may have tried to preserve their ignorance about
Brown's specific intentions; they became known as the Secret Six. But could they
have been ignorant of Brown's attacks in Kansas in 1856, when he and several of
his sons and supporters armed themselves and aimed, in Brown's words, to
''strike terror in the hearts of the pro-slavery people''? Brown's group barged
into one home, pulling out the father and two older sons, and hacked at them
with swords, severing arms and fingers and gouging  their bodies.

There is a letter in New York, written to Brown before his hanging by Mahala
Doyle, the wife and mother of those murdered. ''Altho  vengeance is not mine, I
confess, that I do feel gratified to hear that you ware stopt in your fiendish
career,'' she writes, pointing out that the Doyles didn't even own slaves.

''O how it pained my Heart to hear the dying groans of my Husband and
children,'' she recalls, noting that her youngest son, whom Brown spared in
response to her entreaties, wished he could be at the hanging to help adjust the
rope around Brown's neck.

This makes the issues more stark, and in Richmond they become explicit. ''Does
an individual have the right to carry out violent acts based on conscience?''
the exhibition asks in a video surveying the history of the raid. ''Does a noble
end justify a bloody means?'' And given Brown's unwavering belief in his own
righteousness and his embrace of the most extreme methods, the show asks, ''Is
Brown so different from today's bombers from Oklahoma City to Iraq?''

The exhibition does not answer those questions; it is effective enough just to
raise them. What makes this case so disturbing is that here we have a cause that
is now considered inherently virtuous: the abolition of an institution that had
led to untold violence and degradation. Moreover, slavery seemed to be so firmly
established that nothing but violence could unseat it.

Brown's vision of a spontaneous slave insurrection might have been fantastical,
and his strategic abilities sorely strained, but one judgment (as in New York)
is that good grew out of this apparent evil. Like the Union forces in the Civil
War, Brown used violence in the service of ending violence.

''I think I did right,'' Brown told his captors after the raid, and he
considered his effort to be ''the greatest service man can render to God.'' The
New York exhibition has a letter Brown wrote in prison: ''I do not feel myself
in the least degraded by my imprisonment, my chain, or the near prospect of the
Gallows. ... I go joyfully in behalf of Millions that have no rights that this
'great, & glorious';  'this Christian Republic,' is bound to respect.''

But can we not also be distressed by the implications of Brown's methods, and
worry over their enthusiastic embrace over the last 150 years? In his welcome of
martyrdom, his visions of apocalyptic retribution and his unshakable belief in
his own virtue, Brown is now so familiar a type on the world scene that we
cannot resist being horrified by the temptation of terror that he succumbed to,
even if, as in this particular case, we welcome its long-sought goal.

''The Portent: John Brown's Raid in American Memory'' is on view through April
11 at the Virginia Historical Society, 428 North Boulevard, Richmond; (804)
358-4901, vahistorical.org. ''John Brown: The Abolitionist and His Legacy'' is
on view through March 25 at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park
West, at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400, nyhistory.org.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Portent: John Brown's Raid in American Memory, at the
Virginia Historical Society in Richmond, is one of two new exhibitions devoted
to Brown. The other is at the New-York Historical Society. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CASEY
TEMPLETON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.C1)
A broadside evoking the spirit of John Brown is on view at the New-York
Historical Society. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GILDER LEHRMAN COLLECTION)
An oil painting of Brown by Thomas Satterwhite Noble, at the New-York Historical
Society. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY)
 A terra-cotta statue of Brown by Jean-Marie-Phileas Lassaux, at the Virginia
Historical Society. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CASEY TEMPLETON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
(pg.C5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); RELIGION (77%); TERRORISM (76%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); HOSTAGE TAKING (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); TREASON
(71%)

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (79%)

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (93%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (93%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1493 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

California: Court to Reconsider Secrets Case

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING WEST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 131 words


The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit will reconsider a
decision allowing a lawsuit against a company suspected of involvement in C.I.A.
''extraordinary rendition'' flights in which detainees were transferred to other
countries. The Obama administration, like the Bush administration, argued that
the case should not go forward because it would expose state secrets. In April,
a three-judge panel ruled against the government, but the court said in a brief
order that an 11-judge panel would rehear the case. The American Civil Liberties
Union filed the civil lawsuit on behalf of five plaintiffs who said they had
been kidnapped and flown to secret facilities where they were tortured; a Boeing
subsidiary, Jeppesen Dataplan, arranged the flights, according to the suit.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); APPEALS COURTS (88%); JUDGES
(88%); TORTURE (87%)

COMPANY: BOEING CO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (56%); BA (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (56%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (56%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1494 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Wider Authority for F.B.I. Agents Stirs Concern

BYLINE: By CHARLIE SAVAGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1316 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After a Somali-American teenager from Minneapolis committed a suicide bombing in
Africa in October 2008, the Federal Bureau of Investigation began investigating
whether a Somali Islamist group had recruited him on United States soil.

Instead of collecting information only on people about whom they had a tip or
links to the teenager, agents fanned out to scrutinize Somali communities,
including in Seattle and Columbus, Ohio. The operation unfolded as the Bush
administration was relaxing some domestic intelligence-gathering rules.

The F.B.I.'s interpretation of those rules was recently made public when it
released, in response to a Freedom of Information lawsuit, its ''Domestic
Investigations and Operations Guide.'' The disclosure of the manual has opened
the widest window yet onto how agents have been given greater power in the
post-Sept. 11 era.

In seeking the revised rules, the bureau said it needed greater flexibility to
hunt for would-be terrorists inside the United States. But the manual's details
have alarmed privacy advocates.

One section lays out a low threshold to start investigating a person or group as
a potential security threat. Another allows agents to use ethnicity or religion
as a factor -- as long as it is not the only one -- when selecting subjects for
scrutiny.

''It raises fundamental questions about whether a domestic intelligence agency
can protect civil liberties if they feel they have a right to collect broad
personal information about people they don't even suspect of wrongdoing,'' said
Mike German, a former F.B.I. agent who now works for the American Civil
Liberties Union.

But Valerie Caproni, the F.B.I.'s general counsel, said the bureau has adequate
safeguards to protect civil liberties as it looks for people who could pose a
threat.

''Those who say the F.B.I. should not collect information on a person or group
unless there is a specific reason to suspect that the target is up to no good
seriously miss the mark,'' Ms. Caproni said. ''The F.B.I. has been told that we
need to determine who poses a threat to the national security -- not simply to
investigate persons who have come onto our radar screen.''

The manual authorizes agents to open an ''assessment'' to ''proactively'' seek
information about whether people or organizations are involved in national
security threats.

Agents may begin such assessments against a target without a particular factual
justification. The basis for such an inquiry ''cannot be arbitrary or groundless
speculation,'' the manual says, but the standard is ''difficult to define.''

Assessments permit agents to use potentially intrusive techniques, like sending
confidential informants to infiltrate organizations and following and
photographing targets in public.

F.B.I. agents previously had similar powers when looking for potential criminal
activity. But until the recent changes, greater justification was required to
use the powers in national security investigations because they receive less
judicial oversight.

If agents turn up something specific to suggest wrongdoing, they can begin a
''preliminary'' or ''full'' investigation and use additional techniques, like
wiretapping. But even if agents find nothing, the personal information they
collect during assessments can be retained in F.B.I. databases, the manual says.

When selecting targets, agents are permitted to consider political speech or
religion as one criterion. The manual tells agents not to engage in racial
profiling, but it authorizes them to take into account ''specific and relevant
ethnic behavior'' and to ''identify locations of concentrated ethnic
communities.''

Farhana Khera, president of Muslim Advocates, said the F.B.I. was harassing
Muslim-Americans by singling them out for scrutiny. Her group was among those
that sued the bureau to release the manual.

''We have seen even in recent months the revelation of the F.B.I. going into
mosques -- not where they have a specific reason to believe there is criminal
activity, but as 'agent provocateurs' who are trying to incite young individuals
to join a purported terror plot,'' Ms. Khera said. ''We think the F.B.I. should
be focused on following actual leads rather than putting entire communities
under the microscope.''

Ms. Caproni, the F.B.I. lawyer, denied that the bureau engages in racial
profiling. She cited the search for signs of the Somali group, Al Shabaab,
linked to the Minneapolis teenager to illustrate why the manual allows agents to
consider ethnicity when deciding where to look. In that case, the bureau worried
that other such teenagers might return from Somalia to carry out domestic
operations.

Agents are trained to ignore ethnicity when looking for groups that have no
ethnic tie, like environmental extremists, she said, but ''if you are looking
for Al Shabaab, you are looking for Somalis.''

Among the manual's safeguards, agents must use the ''least intrusive
investigative method that effectively accomplishes the operational objective.''
When infiltrating an organization, agents cannot sabotage its ''legitimate
social or political agenda,'' nor lead it ''into criminal activity that
otherwise probably would not have occurred.''

Portions of the manual were redacted, including pages about ''undisclosed
participation'' in an organization's activities by agents or informants,
''requesting information without revealing F.B.I. affiliation or the true
purpose of a request,'' and using ''ethnic/racial demographics.''

The attorney general guidelines for F.B.I. operations date back to 1976, when a
Congressional investigation by the so-called Church Committee uncovered decades
of illegal domestic spying by the bureau on groups perceived to be subversive --
including civil rights, women's rights and antiwar groups -- under the bureau's
longtime former director, J. Edgar Hoover, who died in 1972.

The Church Committee proposed that rules for the F.B.I.'s domestic security
investigations be written into federal law. To forestall legislation, the
attorney general in the Ford administration, Edward Levi, issued his own
guidelines that established such limits internally.

Since then, administrations of both parties have repeatedly adjusted the
guidelines.

In September 2008, Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey signed the new F.B.I.
guidelines that expanded changes begun under his predecessor, John Ashcroft,
after the Sept. 11 attacks. The guidelines went into effect and the F.B.I.
completed the manual putting them into place last December.

There are no signs that the current attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., plans
to roll back the changes. A spokeswoman said Mr. Holder was monitoring them ''to
see how well they work'' and would make refinements if necessary.

The F.B.I., however, is revising the manual. Ms. Caproni said she was taking
part in weekly high-level meetings to evaluate suggestions from agents and
expected about 20 changes.

Many proposals have been requests for greater flexibility. For example, some
agents said requirements that they record in F.B.I. computers every assessment,
no matter how minor, were too time consuming. But Ms. Caproni said the rule
aided oversight and would not be changed.

She also said that the F.B.I. takes seriously its duty to protect freedom while
preventing terrorist attacks. ''I don't like to think of us as a spy agency
because that makes me really nervous,'' she said. ''We don't want to live in an
environment where people in the United States think the government is spying on
them. That's an oppressive environment to live in and we don't want to live that
way.''

What the public should understand, she continued, is that the F.B.I. is seeking
to become a more intelligence-driven agency that can figure out how best to
deploy its agents to get ahead of potential threats.

''And to do that,'' she said, ''you need information.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Valerie Caproni, the general counsel for the F.B.I. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (69%); LITIGATION (69%); LAWYERS
(68%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%)

CITY: SEATTLE, WA, USA (92%); COLUMBUS, OH, USA (92%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (92%); WASHINGTON, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); SOMALIA (94%); AFRICA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1495 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 30, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Admitted Qaeda Agent Receives Prison Sentence

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 706 words


A man who confessed to trying to aid Al Qaeda in the United States was sentenced
by a federal judge Thursday to more than eight years in prison.

Under a plea bargain with federal prosecutors, the man, Ali Saleh Kahlah
al-Marri, had faced 15 years in prison, but the judge agreed to consider the
time he had already served.

Mr. Marri, the last enemy combatant held on United States soil, admitted in May
to having attended terrorist training camps from 1998 to 2001, to meeting with
Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a high official within the Qaeda organization, and to
having ''offered his services.''

The sentence was imposed by Judge Michael M. Mihm of Federal District Court in
Peoria, Ill. Mr. Marri's lawyers urged Judge Mihm to reduce the sentence, asking
him to take into account Mr. Marri's eight years in custody, including five and
a half years in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., much of that  spent in
isolation.

They argued that whatever Mr. Marri's intentions when he traveled to this
country in 2001, he no longer harbored a desire to attack the United States.

Prosecutors had argued for the full sentence, however, and on Wednesday they
presented testimony from a psychologist that Mr. Marri was ''likely to engage in
hostile acts towards the United States,'' according to The Peoria Journal Star.

According to the plea agreement, Mr. Marri said he had been ordered by Mr.
Mohammed ''to enter the United States no later than Sept. 10, 2001'' and await
instructions. Mr. Marri, a native of Qatar, did so, arriving with his wife and
five children on Sept. 10 and enrolling at Bradley University in Peoria, where
he had studied during an earlier stay. In that time, he ''researched online
information related to various cyanide compounds'' and communicated in code with
other Qaeda operatives.

Mr. Marri was initially arrested in December 2001 on charges that included
financial fraud, but the government later argued that he was a ''sleeper agent''
for Al Qaeda. Eighteen months after his arrest, as the criminal trial
approached, the government changed course and named Mr. Marri an enemy
combatant, transferring him from Peoria, and Justice Department custody, to
military detention and the Navy brig. The original charges against him were
dropped.

Lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union challenged the constitutionality
of detaining Mr. Marri in the brig without charging him or putting him on trial,
and the Supreme Court set an April 2009 hearing in the case.

In February, however, with that hearing and its difficult constitutional issues
approaching, President Obama ordered Mr. Marri returned to the criminal justice
system, and he was indicted on two counts related to supporting terrorism.

In eight minutes of tearful testimony on Thursday, Mr. Marri told the judge he
was sorry that he had helped Al Qaeda, and no longer wished harm to the American
people. He said he had been punished in many ways while in prison, and mentioned
missing the first words of his youngest child.

Lawrence S. Lustberg, Mr. Marri's lead counsel for the sentencing phase of the
trial, said the team of lawyers was pleased with the results. ''What we hoped
for was that Mr. al-Marri would get a fair hearing and would reach a resolution
that tempered justice with mercy,'' Mr. Lustberg said.

David B. Rivkin Jr., a lawyer who served in the administrations of President
Ronald Reagan and the first President Bush, questioned the Obama
administration's decision to try Mr. Marri in criminal court instead of the
military commissions favored by the administration of President George W. Bush,
saying that the sentence underscores how ''ill suited'' conventional courts are
for dealing with these issues.

While not criticizing Judge Mihm's decision, Mr. Rivkin said that criminal
courts are ''a crapshoot,'' with wildly varying sentences, while the military
commissions ''arrive at a better judgment, being comprised of warriors, as to
what level of danger the person poses.''

But Jonathan Hafetz, the lawyer at the A.C.L.U. who led the challenge to Mr.
Marri's military detention, called the sentence ''a powerful reminder that
America's civilian courts can deliver justice even in the most challenging
circumstances.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ali Saleh Kahlah al-Marri

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (91%); JUDGES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (90%); AL-QAEDA (89%);
PRISONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(88%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); US PRESIDENTS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (66%); CYANIDES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: PEORIA, IL, USA (90%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (90%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1496 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 30, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Crime, Punishment and Painful Memories of Bosnia

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; MOVIE REVIEW
'STORM'; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 712 words


''Storm,'' Hans-Christian Schmid's dry, concise thriller, examines the politics
surrounding the prosecution of a former Bosnian Serb Army commander for war
crimes. Its United States release seems inspired by the current trial in The
Hague of the former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic. In the movie his
apparent fictional stand-in, Goran Duric (Drazen Kuhn), is charged with
supervising the ''ethnic cleansing'' of Bosnian Muslim civilians.

What seems to be an open-and-shut case against him suddenly falls apart with the
suicide of the prosecution's chief witness, Alen Hajdarevic (Kresimir Mikic), a
gaunt, wild-eyed Muslim, who hangs himself after it is discovered that he lied
to the court about witnessing events at which he wasn't present. His death is a
bitter blow to Hannah Maynard (Kerry Fox), an intrepid prosecutor who has just
been handed the case by her cynical, hard-nosed boss, Keith Haywood (Stephen
Dillane).

Determined that she not be made a scapegoat for others' failures and that the
case remain open, Hannah is given one week to travel to Bosnia to find new
evidence against Duric. At Hajdarevic's funeral in Sarajevo, she meets his
sister, Mira Arendt (Anamaria Marinca, the Romanian actress from ''4 Months, 3
Weeks and 2 Days''), who has returned briefly from Berlin, where she lives with
a husband and young son.

Hannah extracts information from Mira about a hotel that was a Bosnian Serb Army
headquarters where atrocities were committed. Mira warily confesses that she was
held prisoner there with other women and repeatedly raped. Hannah persuades Mira
to travel to The Hague and testify against Duric, although because of time
restrictions she can offer no assurances that Mira's testimony will be admitted.

''Storm'' begins with a prologue set three years earlier, in 2005,  that shows
Duric's arrest  while on vacation with his wife and two daughters. The movie is
unambiguous about his presumed guilt. In the courtroom he is a bulky, glowering
presence who casts a cold, imperious eye on the proceedings.

For a political thriller, ''Storm'' is remarkably restrained. There are no
flashbacks to the wars in the Balkans or to the atrocities in the hotel, which
Hannah visits seeking information. While there she is surreptitiously
photographed and menaced by Serbian nationalists, one of whom throws a rock
through her car window.

Mira, just before leaving for the Netherlands, is thrown violently against a
wall by a Serbian thug and warned not to cooperate with ''those pigs in The
Hague.'' Ms. Marinca plays her as a worried but brave woman buffeted by outside
forces as she prepares to unleash a flood of traumatic memories. Once she
arrives in The Hague word is leaked to a newspaper of her presence, and there
are several tense moments that could explode into car chases and kidnappings but
don't. The movie's central moral quandary is Hannah's internal conflict between
her desire for justice and her need to keep her job and play by the rules.

Filmed in a rigorous semidocumentary style, ''Storm'' has so much history to
impart in its relatively brief running time (105 minutes) that much of its
dialogue (by Mr. Schmid and Bernd Lange) is expository. But it is very well
acted, especially by Ms. Marinca and Ms. Fox.

As Mira faces the possibility that she won't be allowed to testify about her
ordeal, she blurts out a question about the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia that lies at the heart of the movie: ''What kind of court
is this? What the hell is it actually for?'' The frustrating answer, which
Hannah must swallow hard to accept: Partial justice is better than none.

STORM

Opens on Friday in Manhattan.

Directed by Hans-Christian Schmid; written by Bernd Lange and Mr. Schmid;
director of photography, Bogumil Godfrejow; edited by Hansjorg Weissbrich;
produced by Britta Knoller and Mr. Schmid; released by Film Movement. In German,
English, Bosnian and Serbian, with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 45
minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Kerry Fox (Hannah Maynard), Anamaria Marinca (Mira Arendt), Stephen
Dillane (Keith Haywood), Rolf Lassgard (Jonas Dahlberg), Alexander Fehling
(Patrick Farber), Drazen Kuhn (Goran Duric) and Kresimir Mikic (Alen
Hajdarevic).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Storm (Movie)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Kerry Fox, left, and Anamaria Marinca in ''Storm,'' the story of
a war crimes prosecution, directed by Hans-Christian Schmid.(PHOTOGRAPH BY FILM
MOVEMENT)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (90%); TESTIMONY (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS
(77%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (76%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); SEX OFFENSES (71%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(93%)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1501 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                   (The Lede)

                             June 11, 2009 Thursday

Bosnian TV Airs Ratko Mladic Home Movies

BYLINE: ROBERT MACKEY

LENGTH: 669 words



HIGHLIGHT: Judging by the many slices of Ratko Mladic's life on display in the
trove of home movie footage broadcast Wednesday night on Bosnian television, the
former commander of the Bosnian Serb Army appears to have lived a fairly normal
life in Serbia while he was officially in hiding.


He sang a little, he danced a lot. He popped corks, poured drinks and toasted
friends. He posed for photographs and took part in snowball fights. He bounced a
grandchild on his knee and played table tennis. He even cried inconsolably at a
funeral.

Judging by the many slices of Ratko Mladic's life on display in the trove of
home movie footage seized by Serbian authorities in December and broadcast
Wednesday night on Bosnian television, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb
Army appears to have lived a fairly normal life for years after being charged
with war crimes. General Mladic, who remains at large, has officially been in
hiding for more than a decade, but the videos suggest that for at least part of
that time, he felt no need to disguise himself or avoid public events.

Bosnia's Federation TV reported that the footage, some of which carries date
stamps, was all shot in Serbia and Bosnia after General Mladic was indicted on
war crimes charges in 1995. According to the Bosnian station, one sequence,
showing General Mladic walking in the snow, might have been shot as recently as
last year.

Rasim Ljajic, a Serbian government official, told the BBC that it was "simply
impossible" that any of the video was shot in 2008. According to Mr. Ljajic,
"The material that was shown last night was seized in Mladic's house in December
2008 and handed to the Hague tribunal in March this year." He assured the BBC
that none of the footage was shot after 2001: "Not a single shot is less than
eight years old."

Still, as the Croatian newspaper Jutarnji List pointed out on Thursday, the
scenes of General Mladic apparently living in a Belgrade suburb during those
years seems to confirm what one of his former bodyguards told a Serbian court on
Tuesday: that he was under the protection of the Serbian government during those
years.

Jutarnji List's Web site also has a short edit of the video highlights of
General Mladic's frolics. Long excerpts from videos broadcast on Bosnian
television are also available on the Serbian Web site Blic.

As The Associated Press reported on Tuesday, the former bodyguard said that
until 2002, General Mladic was hiding from international justice in plain sight
around the Serbian capital:Branislav Puhalo told a Belgrade court that Mladic
was guarded by about 50 heavily armed men who were staying at an army barracks
in Belgrade. He said the protection unit was set up in 1997 under orders from
former President Slobodan Milosevic.

"It was all legal," Puhalo said at the trial of 10 people charged with helping
Mladic evade justice. "We were tasked with protecting Mladic from criminals and
bounty hunters."

"We went to soccer matches, to the police headquarters, to restaurants," Puhalo
said. "Mladic moved freely around Belgrade throughout 2001."Serbia's current
government insists that it really has no idea where General Mladic is now,
although, as The A.P. reports, a recent government investigation "revealed that
he had been hiding in different apartments in a new part of Belgrade as recently
as 2006."

According to The A.P., some of the footage aired in Sarajevo on Wednesday showed
General Mladic "receiving guests at his house in a Belgrade neighborhood, or
cuddling his baby granddaughter." One video in particular demonstrates that, at
least while Slobodan Milosevic was still in power, General Mladic showed no fear
of arrest. In a shot in September 2000, the man who personally oversaw the
treatment of prisoners at Srebrenica and the siege of Sarajevo was filmed at a
wedding party for one of his bodyguards outside Sarajevo at a restaurant located
close to NATO's Bosnian headquarters.

On Thursday, Radio Srbija reported that a spokesman for the international
tribunal at The Hague said the prosecution does possess the same cache of
videos.

     ·    A Bosnian Serb General Who Loved the Cameras Returns to the Spotlight
     ·    In Jail or on the Run, Karadzic and Mladic Could Still Win Bosnia's
          War
     ·    Two Apologies, No Trial Over Srebrenica
     ·    Radovan Karadzic's Defense, the First Draft


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); ARMIES (89%); SPORTS &
RECREATION EVENTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); INDICTMENTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); MILITARY
BASES (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); RESTAURANTS (72%); POLICE
FORCES (71%); GENOCIDE (70%); SOCCER (50%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS (50%) bosnia;
fugitives; international justice; ratko mladic; Mladic, Ratko; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia; Europe;
News; world

PERSON: Mladic, Ratko

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); CROATIA (79%); EUROPE (79%) Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                             1507 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 1, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

ISRAEL REJECTS GAZA CEASE-FIRE, BUT OFFERS AID

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER; Reporting was contributed by Taghreed El-Khodary from
Gaza; Steven Erlanger from Cairo; Mark Landler from Washington; Robert Pear from
Crawford, Tex.; Alan Cowell from London; and Graham Bowley from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1343 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel sought on Wednesday to fend off growing international pressure over
civilian casualties from its military assault on Gaza, saying it would expedite
and increase humanitarian aid and work with its allies to build a durable,
long-term truce. But Israel would not agree to a proposed 48-hour cease-fire.

The government said it would push ahead with its air, sea and ultimately ground
operation, which one senior military official described as ''making Hamas lose
their will or lose their weapons.''

A strike Thursday morning included the Parliament building among its targets,
news agencies reported.

During the five days of combat, Israeli warplanes have been destroying buildings
once considered off limits, including mosques and government and university
compounds, with officials asserting that rocket launchers and ammunition were
made, stored and even operated from there. They were also hitting the homes of
militants, smuggler tunnels and even money exchange shops to choke off Hamas
from its suppliers.

The military official said that Gaza was limited in size and cut off from the
outside and that Israel could win if it stopped future supplies and destroyed
enough of what Hamas had. He added, however, that targets were running short,
and that a limited ground operation aimed at destroying remaining sites was
likely once the wet weather cleared.

Meanwhile, overwhelmed hospital officials in Gaza said that of the more than 390
people killed by Israeli fighter planes since Saturday, 38 were children and 25
women. The United Nations, which has estimated the number of dead to be between
320 and 390, said 25 percent of those killed were civilians. Israel said that it
was still checking the numbers.

In the Jabalya Refugee Camp north of Gaza City, hundreds lined up for hours in
the rain for bread and other staples as F-16 jets menaced overhead. At one
point, two rockets were launched from within the camp -- among about 60 shot
into Israel on Wednesday -- and an Israeli missile then hit the launcher.

The rockets that have been sent some 20 miles into the Israeli cities of
Ashkelon, Ashdod and Beersheba in recent days are known as grads. They measure
nine feet in length with warheads that weigh 30 to 40 pounds and were not
manufactured in Gaza but were bought abroad and smuggled through tunnels from
Egypt, Israeli officials said.

In Shifa Hospital in Gaza City, emergency personnel engaged in a brutal form of
triage, allowing the worst cases to fade as they found themselves unable to
cope.

A senior Israeli official said the country was seeking ways to increase
humanitarian aid so that its military endeavor could continue without further
pressure to stop. It permitted a dozen wounded and ill Gazans into Israel on
Wednesday for treatment at hospitals here and allowed in some 100 trucks of food
and medicine.

He also said that one limitation on the aid was that crossing points had come
under attack by Hamas. A second, he said, is that donors are not bringing enough
goods. Of the donations so far, some come from United Nations agencies, but most
are from private donors.

Tens of thousands of Gazans have received recorded phone calls from the Israeli
Army warning them that their houses have been marked as targets because they
harbored either militants or weapons facilities like rocket workshops.
Noncombatants were urged to clear out. Hundreds of thousands of leaflets gave
the same message.

Israeli officials say their goals for a truce include a complete cessation of
rocket and mortar fire from Gaza, a ban on armed men approaching the border with
Israel, full Israeli control over the border crossings and a mechanism to ensure
that Hamas is meeting its commitments.

The Hamas leader, Ismail Haniya, told Israel that there would be no talk of a
truce until it ended its attack and all the crossings into Gaza from Israel as
well as from Egypt were opened to full commercial traffic. He did not mention
the rockets that Israel considers the central cause of its campaign.

On Thursday, Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni was expected to fly to Paris to meet
with Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and President Nicolas Sarkozy, who are
seeking ways to promote a cease-fire.

From his ranch in Crawford, Tex., President Bush called Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert. A White House spokesman, Gordon D. Johndroe, said Mr. Olmert had
''assured President Bush that Israel is taking appropriate steps to avoid
civilian casualties'' in Gaza. In addition, he said, the Israeli leader told Mr.
Bush that Israel was ''targeting only Hamas operatives and those affiliated with
Hamas.''

They discussed prospects for a cease-fire -- ''what steps could lead to a
cessation of violence,'' Mr. Johndroe said -- but did not ''get into specific
timetables.''

''It all begins with Hamas agreeing to stop firing rockets'' into Israel, Mr.
Johndroe added. ''The onus is on Hamas.''

The White House praised the diplomatic efforts of Egypt, Jordan and Saudi
Arabia, but denounced Iran and Syria, saying they had supplied weapons to
terrorist groups.

''Hamas is pretty well supplied by Iran and, to a certain extent, Syria,'' Mr.
Johndroe said. ''Neither Iran nor Syria is playing a helpful role. They're not
playing a constructive role in this current crisis, which is pretty typical for
their actions with regard to Hamas and Hezbollah.''

Israel's Supreme Court told the government on Wednesday to allow foreign
journalists limited access to Gaza, which had been closed to them since early
November. The ruling, which urged the government to allow in a group of up to a
dozen foreign journalists, came in response to a petition filed by the Foreign
Press Association.

Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, based in the West
Bank, appealed to the United Nations Security Council for a cease-fire. Mr.
Abbas, whose troops were forcibly ejected from Gaza by Hamas 18 months ago, is
in a delicate position of not wishing Hamas to triumph but not wishing
Palestinians to suffer.

In a speech delivered on Wednesday, Mr. Abbas reiterated that Hamas was
responsible for the Israeli invasion because it ended the cease-fire between it
and Israel 12 days ago. But he called what Israel was doing ''the bloodiest
massacre and systemic destruction of all forms of life; it is an aggression that
does not target Gaza only but the entire Palestinian people and their cause and
future and their most basic human rights.''

In the West Bank, the Palestinian police and security forces have had their
leaves canceled. Some men associated with Hamas have been detained, and strict
rules have been established for demonstrations in support of Gaza to avoid their
turning into support for Hamas. Slogans and flags are limited, and close contact
with Israeli forces and checkpoints has been barred to prevent trouble.

In Cairo, Arab countries appeared deeply divided over how to respond to the
latest escalation in fighting between Israel and Hamas, with sharply differing
comments from foreign ministers at the opening of an emergency Arab League
meeting.

Moderate Arab states generally allied with the United States blamed Palestinian
disunity for the crisis and more radical states, some of whom did not attend,
urged collective action to defend the Palestinians against Israel.

In the most striking comments, Saudi Arabia's foreign minister, Prince Saud
al-Faisal, criticized the Palestinians for their inability to remain
unitedbehind President Abbas of Fatah -- an implicit condemnation of Hamas,
which took over Gaza entirely in 2007 in a brief but violent civil war with
Fatah. Normally, during periods of Israeli-Palestinian fighting, Arab leaders
condemn only Israel.

''This terrible massacre would not have happened if the Palestinian people were
united behind one leadership, speaking in one voice,'' Prince Saud said at the
league meeting's opening. ''We are telling our Palestinian brothers that your
Arab nation cannot extend a real helping hand if you don't extend your own hands
to each other with love.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A member of Hamas on Wednesday raised the group's flag on the
rubble of a mosque that was destroyed by Israeli warplanes in raids south of
Gaza City. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (pg.A13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); HAMAS (90%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (78%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS
(78%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (75%);
SMUGGLING (75%); REFUGEES (73%); HOSPITALS (70%); RELIGION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (74%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1508 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 1, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Dense Gaza, Civilians Suffer

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY; Marc Santora contributed reporting from the
United Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: GAZA


A dentist stood at the bed of a doctor, his good friend Ehab Madhoun, 32, who
had just died, his shrapnel-pitted body wrapped in a white shroud.

The day before, Dr. Madhoun, a general practitioner, was in an ambulance
responding to an Israeli strike at the Jabalya refugee camp in northern Gaza.
Another missile hit the ambulance. The driver, Muhammad Abu Hasira, died
instantly. Dr. Madhoun lingered for a day, dying of his wounds on Wednesday in
the intensive care unit of Shifa Hospital, where hundreds of people have been
brought since Israel began its heaviest assault on Gaza in three decades.

The dentist cried.

''He was just doing his work,'' said the dentist, who would not give his name.
''He's a doctor, and I can't understand why Israel would hit an ambulance. They
can tell from the cameras it's an ambulance.''

It has always been this way, over years of conflict here, that civilians are
killed in the densely populated Gaza Strip when Israel stages military
operations it says are essential for its security. But five days of Israeli
airstrikes have surpassed past operations in scale and intensity; the
long-distance bombardment of the Hamas-controlled territory has, however well
aimed at those suspected of being militants, splintered families and shattered
homes in one of the most densely populated places on Earth.

Among the total dead -- between 320 and 390, according to the United Nations --
Palestinian medical officials say that 38 were children and 25 were women. The
United Nations agency that helps Palestinian refugees said 25 percent of those
killed had been civilians. Israel said it knew of 40 civilian deaths but that it
was still checking.

Israeli officials are coming under increasing pressure to ease conditions for
civilians, with tight supplies of electricity, water, food and medicine
worsening shortages in an area already largely sealed off from the outside
world. While Israel on Wednesday refused a 48-hour cease-fire suggested by the
French to allow critical supplies into Gaza, it has been sensitive enough to the
ever-louder complaints to say it will do all it can to allow in supplies.

On the issue of civilian casualties, Israeli officials maintain that they do not
take aim at civilians and do everything possible -- like using
precision-guidance systems, up-to-the minute intelligence, leaflets and phone
calls to targeted areas -- to avoid hitting them.

They say killing and wounding civilians only undermines their primary mission:
to stop Hamas from firing rockets into civilian areas of Israel.

''I haven't seen too many tears shed in Paris, London or Berlin over the fact
that we have hit Hamas targets,'' said Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israel's
prime minister, Ehud Olmert. ''So we have many reasons, both moral and
political, for doing the utmost to make sure that our strikes are as surgical as
possible.''

Further complicating matters is that fact that Gaza is the size of Detroit, with
one and a half times as many people. The military and government facilities of
Hamas are intertwined with buildings where Gaza's civilian population lives and
works. Israelis say Hamas fires rockets at Israel from civilian neighborhoods.

The United States military has also faced much criticism for killing civilians
in Iraq and Afghanistan, despite what officials say is the utmost precaution
against doing so.

In Gaza, human rights groups say that the new scale of Israel's operation puts
the area's civilians, even those accustomed to conflict, under particular
stress. Some of the wounded are afraid to seek treatment at the already
overwhelmed hospitals, fearful of heading into a rocket attack while driving
through streets of pummeled buildings and concrete shards.

Large, multigenerational families huddle in their houses, hoarding the shrinking
supplies of water, food and gasoline. Despite the cold, many have kept their
windows open to prevent them from shattering when bombs explode nearby. Shops
are closed except for grocery stores, bakeries and pharmacies.

''Conditions for parents and children in Gaza are dangerous and frightening,''
Maxwell Gaylard, United Nations humanitarian coordinator for the Palestinian
territories, said in a statement.

''It is absolutely crucial that there is an end to the fighting,'' he said.
''Without it, more civilians will continue to be killed. Without the violence
stopping, it is extremely difficult to get food to people who need it, we cannot
assess where the most urgent needs are.''

In the debate over civilian casualties, there is no clear understanding of what
constitutes a military target. Palestinians argue that because Hamas is also the
government in Gaza, many of the police officers who have been killed were civil
servants, not hard-core militants. Israel disagrees, asserting also that a
university chemistry laboratory, which it claims was used for making rockets,
was a fair target in an attack this week, even if it could not show conclusively
that those inside the laboratory at the time where engaged in making weapons.

The ambiguity was evident at the intensive care ward in Shifa Hospital, where
Dr. Madhoun's body lay. There were 11 patients. One was a pharmacist, Rawya
Awad, 32, who had a shrapnel wound to the head. Several were police officers. It
was impossible to know the identities of many of the others.

But there were several children in another intensive care unit on Tuesday. Among
them was Ismael Hamdan, 8, who had severe brain damage as well as two broken
legs, according to a doctor there. Earlier that day, two of his sisters, Lama,
5, and Hayya, 12, were killed.

''I prepared them breakfast that day in the garden,'' said their mother, Ayda,
36. ''They had the tea, bread and thyme. Lama wanted a second pita, but we all
teased her saying, 'Keep it for lunch.' She told us, 'Don't worry, God will
provide us with bread.'

''She made all of us laugh,'' the mother said. ''I cleaned after them and
collected the garbage. Ismael volunteered to dump the garbage, but Hayya and
Lama joined him. The garbage can is in front of the house, a five-minute walk
away. All of a sudden I heard the news from a neighbor, and I ran barefoot to
the hospital. A relative collected the bodies of Lama and Hayya on a donkey
cart.

''The neighbors ran trying to save Ismael, who was the only one breathing,'' she
said. ''They say my kids flew 40 meters before hitting the ground.''

Ismael died Wednesday night.

At Kamal Edwan Hospital in Beit Lahiya, in northern Gaza, Mahmoud al-Sheik, 11,
was recovering from wounds he received two days before -- he thinks from a
rocket fired by an Israeli warplane. Even at his age, he is aware of how
fighters and civilians are mixed together in Gaza, saying that the bomb was
aimed at the house of his neighbor, Salim Zaqout, whom he identified as a member
of Hamas.

''But Zaqout and his family evacuated the house a few days ago,'' Mahmoud said.
''Can't Israel see all these houses that are adjacent to Zaqout's? Now Zaqout's
house is completely destroyed, but so are other houses that have nothing to do
with Hamas.

''I have a big hole in my left hand. The doctor told me I'm fine. He filled the
hole,'' Mahmoud said, ''but it's hurting. It feels like fire inside it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Palestinian boy, Ismael Hamdan, 8, was wounded in an Israeli
airstrike, in which his two sisters died. He died Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MAHMUD HAMS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (pg.A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY VEHICLES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); POPULATION DENSITY
(90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(89%); HAMAS (89%); INTENSIVE CARE UNITS (78%); REFUGEES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (72%); SHORTAGES (65%); FOOD
CRISES & SHORTAGES (64%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (64%); PRIME MINISTERS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (55%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (57%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (50%)

STATE: EARTH (54%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1509 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 1, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

City Settles Sex Harassment Case at Department for Aging

BYLINE: By TRYMAINE LEE; Michael Barbaro contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 639 words


New York City will pay $225,000 to settle a lawsuit brought by a former
secretary who accused the recently resigned commissioner of the city's
Department for the Aging of sexual harassment and discrimination, the city's Law
Department said on Wednesday.

The former secretary, Auritela Santos, filed the lawsuit  in February against
the city, the department and  Edwin Mendez-Santiago, who resigned as the
department's commissioner on Dec. 12.

Ms. Santos, 38, who started working as Mr. Mendez-Santiago's secretary in 2004,
said that she was subjected to frequent sexual remarks and that he had sex with
subordinates in his office while she was sitting at her desk nearby. She also
said that he sent her violent and threatening e-mail messages when she rebuffed
his advances, according to court papers.

Ms. Santos resigned in the summer of 2007.

Under the settlement agreement, the Department for the Aging agreed to pay Ms.
Santos $69,000 in back pay. The city will also pay Ms. Santos an additional
$156,000, including $39,000 in lawyers' fees and $117,000 in damages.

''We believe the settlement is in the best interest of all parties,'' said
Connie Pankratz, a spokeswoman for the Law Department, which handled the case.

Mr. Mendez-Santiago, who denied Ms. Santos's accusations in court papers, did
not return a call to his home on Wednesday night.

Efforts to reach Ms. Santos and Doris Traub, a lawyer for Ms. Santos,  were also
unsuccessful.

As part of the settlement, neither the city nor Mr. Mendez-Santiago admitted any
wrongdoing.

Ms. Santos's case went unnoticed until Mr. Mendez-Santiago's unexpected
resignation, which occurred amid strong opposition to plans to overhaul programs
for the elderly. At the time, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg attributed the
departure to ''personal reasons.''

The accusations against Mr. Mendez-Santiago tainted the Bloomberg
administration's near sparkling record of hiring strong administrators;   nearly
all of the administration's senior officials have avoided scandal since Mr.
Bloomberg took office  in 2002.

Though Mr. Mendez-Santiago, 54, has long held the respect of advocates for the
elderly, the allegations against him were too serious to weather, city officials
have said.

According to the federal complaint against Mr. Mendez-Santiago, he sent sexually
explicit e-mail messages to Ms. Santos to try to entice her into joining him on
out-of-town trips, even though she told him repeatedly that she was married with
three children. Ms. Santos also accused him of attempting to woo her with the
promise that a friend of his would buy her a house in the Dominican Republic if
she agreed to accompany the two of them and a female friend to the island.

When she resisted, according to the state complaint, Mr. Mendez-Santiago began
sending Ms. Santos threatening messages.

The State Human Rights Division determined in August 2007 that Ms. Santos had
probable cause to proceed with a legal claim against the commissioner. In
February 2008, Ms. Santos filed her lawsuit.

Before Ms. Santos's case came to light, there was speculation that Mr. Mendez
-Santiago had resigned amid  one of Mr. Bloomberg's more controversial
initiatives, which  would have overhauled the city's decades-old system of
managing more than 300 senior centers. The mayor sought to create a more
results-driven, business-oriented operation. The proposal was met with
opposition from older citizens with most Council members also protesting it, and
the mayor has since backed off from the plan.

After Mr. Mendez-Santiago's resignation, Mr. Bloomberg quickly replaced him with
a respected government veteran, Lillian Barios-Paoli. At the time, the mayor
reiterated that Mr. Mendez-Santiago's decision to leave the agency was for
''totally personal reasons'' that had ''nothing to do with any policy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 14, 2009



CORRECTION: An article on Jan. 1 about New York's settlement of a sexual
harassment case against Edwin Mendez-Santiago, who recently resigned as
commissioner for the aging, misspelled the surname of his successor, and,
because of an editing error, also misspelled her given name. She is Lilliam
Barrios-Paoli, not Lillian Barios-Paoli.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (91%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); AGING
(90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); RESIGNATIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); CITIES (78%); DAMAGES (78%); COSTS &
ATTORNEY FEES (78%); SENIOR CITIZENS (77%); MAYORS (74%); BACK PAY (53%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (59%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1510 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Proud and Joyous Night for a Tradition Born in Hope

BYLINE: By PAUL VITELLO; Mick Meenan and Rachel Pomerance contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1205 words


Members of many black churches in New York and around the country concluded
services at the stroke of midnight Wednesday with the same simple act that has
signaled the arrival of the new year in their tradition for almost 150 years.

They got up off their knees.

It is the concluding ritual moment of Watch Night, a midnight prayer service
first adopted in 1862, on the eve of the signing of the Emancipation
Proclamation. This time around, with the first black president-elect poised for
inauguration, it was a moment layered with profound meaning.

Black churches in the cities and suburbs of New York, Atlanta, Boston and Los
Angeles were filled to capacity on Wednesday for Watch Night, also known as
Freedom's Eve. The Rev. Dr. Brad R. Braxton of Riverside Church in Manhattan
described the passing year as one in which, for many black Americans, ''the
rhetoric of freedom in America came to be an actuality.''

So many people showed up for services at the historic Ebenezer Baptist Church in
Atlanta that the street out front was closed to traffic. So many signed up to
attend at Columbus Avenue A.M.E. Zion Church in Boston that members of the
smaller church next door, who usually come to Watch Night, had to make other
arrangements.

Though barely known to most white Americans, Watch Night as observed in black
churches holds a place among the highest holy days, surpassed only by Easter and
Christmas. Originally an 18th-century Methodist addition to the calendar -- and
still observed in many Christian denominations -- its special significance in
the black religious tradition was cemented by its link to the New Year's Eve of
1862, when free blacks and abolitionists gathered to pray that President Abraham
Lincoln would carry out his promise to sign the Emancipation Proclamation on
Jan. 1, 1863.

''What makes this Watch Night different from all other Watch Nights is that we
prayed for an incoming president who is African-American,'' said Cheryl Townsend
Gilkes, a professor of African-American studies and sociology at Colby College
in Maine. ''But it must be noted that African-Americans have been praying for
this nation for a long time.''

Ronald Kinard, 55, attending the service at St. Luke African Methodist Episcopal
Church on Amsterdam Avenue in Harlem on Wednesday night, said the swearing-in of
Barack Obama would be, in effect, the answered prayer of millions of people,
living and dead, ''from the time the slaves were freed.''

Though services vary in their particulars according to the denomination and the
minister, the fundamental purpose of Watch Night is prayer -- giving thanks for
the blessings of the past year, and asking for blessings in the coming one.

In many churches on Wednesday, Mr. Obama figured at both ends of that equation.

''In the name of Jesus, touch the president who's about to take over the
country, God, because you brought us him from a very long way and we say thank
you!'' said the Rev. Patrick Adams, preaching to the hundreds of people at St.
Luke. ''Help us, so we leave the past in the past as we bust on through to the
new year.''

At Memorial Presbyterian Church in Roosevelt, N.Y., on Long Island, the Rev.
Reginald Tuggle spoke to a packed house where people who were dressed as if for
Sunday morning -- or in some cases, for the after-party -- were squeezed into
the pews with heavy overcoats and children in their laps. He sounded a common
theme about the sacrifices of past generations.

''Our ancestors, who were denied the right to be called a child of God, who did
not have the privilege to be alive in this time -- their prayers as well as ours
have been in some measure answered today,'' he said.

Older people in the pews, like Mary Carter, a retired schoolteacher and church
historian who keeps the record of congregants' births and deaths, among other
duties, could easily picture the people to whom the pastor referred. What she
had some difficulty grasping, she said afterward, was the reality of Mr. Obama's
election. ''I am still processing the fact that in this country, this could
happen,'' she said.

Sarah Berryhill, a 16-year-old high school student sitting in the same church,
said her feelings about the service were no different now than in any other
year. ''It's about feeling that you have people around you who care for you,''
she said. ''I mean, it's nice to be around for the Obama presidency, but I don't
know what it means yet. It's important, I know, but we don't know what he's
going to do.''

In many churches, parts or all of the Emancipation Proclamation were read aloud.

The fusion of the spiritual and the historical is inherent to the black church
experience, said the Rev. Raphael Warnock, pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church
in Atlanta, where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and his father, the Rev.
Martin Luther King Sr., were pastors.

''The black church was born fighting for freedom in a very real sense,'' he
said, explaining that most black churches were established by worshipers who
refused to sit in the segregated pews of the white churches. ''For us, the
struggle for spiritual formation has always been inextricably tied to the
struggle for liberation.''

Mr. Warnock's sermon to the more than 2,000 people who attended Watch Night
services at Ebenezer was, in a way, evidence itself of the cross-pollination of
the church and the world. His theme was change.

''I'm sick and tired of the same old, same old!'' he said, echoing the principle
at the core of Mr. Obama's presidential campaign (and eventually those of his
opponents), while voicing a perennial Christian challenge to the flock: to stop
doing bad things, and get right with God. ''Should old acquaintance be forgot?
Well, sometimes -- yes!'' he said.

He made only a few references to Mr. Obama's election in his remarks.

Among the worshipers in the pews, the Rev. Albert Paul Brinson, 70, who was
mentored by both Dr. King and his father, said it was almost redundant to
mention Mr. Obama from the pulpit.

''He is part of everything we are thinking, everything we do, every conversation
we have,'' Mr. Brinson said. ''He is the elephant in the room that everybody
talks about, all the time.''

For Mr. Brinson, a civil rights-era activist, the Watch Night tradition was rich
with nuance and emotion even before the first black president-elect: It was
about prayer, to be sure, he said, but also about the dangers of black life in
the days of the Ku Klux Klan, and the sense of wary waiting, and the expectation
of a better world, which was at the root of the civil rights movement.

''If you have been a black man of my generation,'' Mr. Brinson said, ''you have
been on the verge of tears at the drop of a hat. What I think moves people so
deeply is not so much that Obama's election was some kind of civil rights
achievement. It was a human rights achievement.''

At Watch Night on Long Island, as at many services, the lights were dimmed and
then turned off completely for the five minutes before midnight.

Mr. Tuggle, the pastor, stood in the pulpit overlooking the congregation he
could not see, as they prayed on their knees in silence.

And then the lights went up and everyone rose, and hooted and hugged in the new
year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Worshipers at Watch Night at St. Luke A.M.E. Church in Harlem.
The year-end service became a tradition in black churches in 1862.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
GABRIELE STABILE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A17)
Congregants celebrating the stroke of midnight during Watch Night services at
Riverside Church in Manhattan.
Barbara Ann Green at St. Luke A.M.E. Church. Many churches turn the lights out
five minutes before midnight.
 The organ at St. Luke. Unknown to most white Americans, Watch Night is an
important holy day at black churches.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY GABRIELE STABILE FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(A18)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES
(90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (89%); SLAVERY
(89%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (78%); CHRISTMAS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); OBAMA'S
FIRST 100 DAYS (75%); EASTER SEASON (73%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (68%);
SOCIOLOGY (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (61%)

COMPANY: AQUANTIVE INC (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541830 MEDIA BUYING AGENCIES (55%); NAICS541810 ADVERTISING
AGENCIES (55%); SIC7319 ADVERTISING, NEC (55%); SIC7311 ADVERTISING AGENCIES
(55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (92%); RIVERSIDE, CA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%);
BOSTON, MA, USA (90%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); GEORGIA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (72%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1511 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 2, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Broadening Offensive, an Israeli Strike Kills a Senior Hamas Leader

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza;
Rina Castelnuovo from Ashdod, Israel; and Alison Smale from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1296 words


JERUSALEM -- Israel broadened the scope of its air offensive against the Hamas
infrastructure in Gaza on Thursday, destroying important symbols of the
government and, for the first time in its six-day-old campaign, killing a senior
leader of the militant Islamic group.

With Israeli troops and tanks massing along the border with Gaza in preparation
for a possible ground invasion, Israel also pursued diplomatic avenues to
explain its positions.

The Israeli foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, flew to Paris to meet with French
leaders who are seeking ways to promote a cease-fire. Before she left, Ms. Livni
suggested that Israel was seeking more time for its military operation, which
officials say is intended to bring an end to the rocket fire from Gaza that has
plagued southern Israel for years.

The Israeli Air Force on Thursday afternoon bombed the house of Nizar Rayyan, a
senior Hamas leader, killing him along with his four wives and nine of his
children, four of them under the age of 18, Palestinian hospital officials said.
An Israeli military spokeswoman, Maj. Avital Leibovich, described Mr. Rayyan as
one of the ''most extreme'' figures of Hamas, which controls Gaza. The military
said he had helped plan a deadly suicide bombing in Israel in 2004, had sent his
own son on a suicide mission against Jewish settlers in Gaza in 2001 and was
advocating renewed suicide missions against Israel in retaliation for the
current offensive.

Mr. Rayyan was known in Gaza as a highly influential figure with strong links to
the military wing of Hamas, particularly in northern Gaza, where he lived, and
as a popular Hamas preacher who openly extolled and championed the idea of
martyrdom.

The Israeli military said in a statement that there were many secondary
explosions after the air attack, ''proving that the house was used for storing
weaponry.'' It was also used as a communications center, the statement said, and
a tunnel that had been dug under the house was used by Hamas operatives.

Most Hamas leaders in Gaza have been in hiding since the Israeli operation
began, but Mr. Rayyan was said to have refused to leave his home on ideological
grounds. In the past, he had been known to gather supporters to stand on the
rooftops of other houses in Gaza that Israel had threatened to strike.

While hundreds of thousands of Gazans have received warnings in the form of
telephone messages or fliers that their buildings are Israeli targets, Major
Leibovich said she could not give details or specify whether Mr. Rayyan's family
had been warned.

Hamas called on Palestinians in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem to mark
Friday as a ''day of wrath'' by holding marches after noon prayers, according to
Agence France-Presse.

Hamas has so far responded to the Israeli military assault by firing yet more
rockets deeper into the country. On Thursday, a rocket fired from Gaza struck an
apartment building in the major port city of Ashdod, about 20 miles north of the
Palestinian territory, causing extensive damage but no serious injuries.

Earlier on Thursday, Israeli warplanes and naval forces bombed Hamas security
installations, militants' houses and tunnels used for smuggling weapons, as well
as symbols of the government like the legislative building -- a Gaza landmark --
and the Ministry of Justice, the Israeli military said.

In Gaza City, a large section of the main street around the destroyed
legislative building was filled with rubble. Armed Hamas security officers in
civilian clothes were out on the streets maintaining control.

Medical officials in Gaza said the number of Palestinians killed in the Israeli
bombardment had topped 400. While many of the dead were Hamas security
personnel, the United Nations said, a quarter of those killed were civilians.
Some Israeli officials have put the number of Palestinian civilians killed at
closer to 10 percent.

In France -- which on Thursday handed over the rotating presidency of the
European Union to the Czech Republic -- Ms. Livni met with President Nicolas
Sarkozy and Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner for ''an exchange of opinions and
ideas'' and to share information about Israel's intentions and plans, an Israeli
official said.

Ms. Livni, speaking from Paris, again rejected the idea proposed this week by
Mr. Kouchner for a 48-hour lull in the fighting for humanitarian purposes.

''There is no humanitarian crisis'' in Gaza, she said, ''and therefore there is
no need for a humanitarian truce.''

The Israeli official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not
authorized to comment publicly on the French proposal, called it
''unrealistic,'' ''hasty'' and bordering on ''offensive,'' saying that Israel
was already allowing relief supplies into Gaza every day.

The European Union has in the meantime issued a statement calling for an
''immediate and permanent cease-fire,'' including an ''unconditional halt to
rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli military action.''

But as she left for Paris, Ms. Livni told Israel Radio that Jerusalem would not
agree to a cease-fire at this point and that it would continue with its military
operation. ''This is not a short battle and it is not a single battle, and we
have long-range goals,'' Ms. Livni said.

Mr. Sarkozy is now scheduled to stop in Israel on Monday during a tour of the
Middle East.

Israel's stated goal for its operation is to halt the rocket fire from Gaza and
to create a new security situation in southern Israel, where three civilians and
a soldier have been killed in rocket attacks in the past six days.

Israeli officials have been less clear about whether or not they hope to topple
Hamas, which won Palestinian parliamentary elections in 2006 and then took full
control of Gaza after routing forces loyal to the rival Palestinian Authority in
June 2007.

But in attacking symbols of the government on Thursday, Israel seemed to be
blurring the lines. The military said in a statement on Thursday that Hamas
government sites ''serve as a critical component of the terrorist group's
infrastructure in Gaza.''

Israel, like the United States and the European Union, classifies Hamas as a
terrorist group. Ms. Livni has emphasized that Israel will not accept Hamas's
rule as legitimate unless the organization fulfills conditions set by the
international community, including recognizing Israel's right to exist,
renouncing all violence and accepting previous agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians -- conditions that Hamas has so far rejected.

Israeli officials have said they will work with allies to build a durable,
long-term truce while seeking to increase humanitarian aid to Gaza, a measure
that will help prolong the Israeli military's ability to act.

Israeli human rights groups on Thursday issued an urgent appeal to Ehud Barak,
the defense minister, demanding that Israel restore fuel supplies to Gaza to
ensure the proper functioning of hospitals, water wells and other vital
humanitarian institutions.

Sari Bashi, the director of one of the groups, Gisha, which advocates the free
movement of Palestinians, said that while food and medicine were coming into
Gaza, the supply of fuel was ''extremely minimal'' for the past two months.

Mirek Topolanek, the Czech prime minister, told Czech television that organizing
a cease-fire would be the European Union's ''main role in the coming days and
weeks.''

The European Union initiative said the cessation of fighting ''should allow
lasting and normal opening of all border crossings'' to Gaza, a fundamental
Hamas demand for any renewal of the six-month truce that expired on Dec. 19. But
the European initiative suggests that the crossings should be operated by Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, with European monitors, a provision that Hamas is
likely to reject.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A man carried the body of a boy killed in a strike on the home
of a senior Hamas leader on Thursday. Medical officials in Gaza said
Palestinians deaths topped 400.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ISMAIL ZAYDAH/REUTERS)
Israelis in the port city of Ashdod evacuated a building hit by a rocket from
Gaza on Thursday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A6)
 An Israeli woman in Sderot on Thursday looked at the damage to her home from a
rocket. So far, four Israelis have been killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY URIEL SINAI/GETTY
IMAGES) (A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); BOMBINGS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); RELIGION (77%); AIR FORCES (77%);
ARMED FORCES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); JEWS & JUDAISM (74%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); HOSPITALS (52%)

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (50%)

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (74%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (93%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); FRANCE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1518 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Era In Politics, New Focus For '24'

BYLINE: By EDWARD WYATT

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1365 words


LOS ANGELES -- Can Jack Bauer make it in the age of Obama?

Bauer, the counterterrorism agent at the center of Fox's serialized hit ''24,''
is an archetype of the Bush years. The series made its debut just two months
after 9/11, at a time when the nation seemed ready to embrace a hero who did not
stop to ask questions about legal niceties in his pursuit of the bad guys.

Five years later the series, like the Bush administration, was engulfed in
controversy over how it treated suspected terrorists. In fall 2006 the creators
of ''24'' received a visit from the dean of the United States Military Academy
at West Point and other experts in military interrogation, who told them that
West Point cadets and soldiers in Iraq were being influenced by the uninhibited
-- and unrepentant -- use of torture on the series.

When ''24'' begins its seventh season on Sunday with a two-night, four-hour
premiere, much will have changed in the world since Bauer was last on the job.
The show opens with Bauer testifying before a Senate committee investigating the
use of torture by his dismantled Counter Terrorist Unit, and the producers face
the daunting task of acknowledging that the public's view of Bauer's methods
might have changed without sacrificing their hero and making him renounce all
that he has stood for.

Fox faces an equally challenging task in trying to revive a series that suffered
a sharp decline in its audience over the course of its sixth season, which ended
in May 2007 and was viewed by many fans and most critics as being among the
weakest since the show began.

During its nearly 20 months off the air -- a hiatus that was extended by last
year's strike by television writers -- overall viewing of network television
programs has declined precipitously, especially among serialized shows like
''24,'' which, with their season-long story lines, require viewers to keep
abreast of weekly developments.

''I think we all took this year as somewhat of a challenge, in the wake of some
of the criticism that had been leveled at Season 6 and politically some of the
things that the show had weathered,'' Howard Gordon, an executive producer of
''24,'' said in an interview last month at the show's production facilities in
the Chatsworth neighborhood of the San Fernando Valley here.

Peter Liguori, chairman of Fox Entertainment, said he was confident the fans
would return to the series, citing the 12 million viewers who tuned in to a
two-hour prequel episode in November. That was only slightly below the estimated
13 million viewers who, on average, watched each episode in the sixth season,
according to Nielsen Media Research. ''It's a wildly loyal audience,'' Mr.
Liguori said, one that includes a large number of so-called time-shifters, who
record the show for later viewing.

That optimism notwithstanding, the writers' strike probably came at the best
possible time for ''24.''

''Season 6 was our weakest year creatively,'' said Mr. Gordon, who is the show's
lead writer and responsible for day-to-day operations. ''That said, the reaction
to it was outsized to the quality of the show itself.''

As the writers and producers sat down in spring 2007 to draw the outlines of
Season 7, they knew, Mr. Gordon said, that most of the low-hanging fruit in the
action genre had already been picked: Bauer had foiled assassination attempts,
interrupted bomb plots, saved his family, lost his family and been imprisoned
and tortured.

The new season was to be set in Africa, but that plan was scrapped when the
strike interrupted production after eight episodes. When it became apparent that
filming wouldn't resume in time to get a full season on the air until early
2009, Fox urged the producers to create a sort of interstitial episode to
reintroduce the series.

That resulted in ''24: Redemption,'' the movie that was broadcast in November
and used the Africa setting. (For his role in the prequel, Kiefer Sutherland,
who has previously won both an Emmy and a Golden Globe for his portrayal of Jack
Bauer, has been nominated for another Golden Globe, and the awards will be
handed out Sunday on NBC at the same time that ''24'' resumes on Fox.) Meanwhile
the new season kept Africa as a backdrop but moved the primary setting to
Washington for a fortuitously timed change in administrations, both on the
series and in real life.

Mr. Gordon and his staff also had more time to contemplate the political
firestorm that erupted after a February 2007 article in The New Yorker magazine
revealed the military's concern about the show's effect on soldiers. Mr. Gordon
said that too helped the series gain a new focus.

It also led Mr. Gordon to participate in ''Primetime Torture,'' a short film
produced by Human Rights First, a nonprofit organization that helped bring the
''24'' producers together with the military advisers. David Danzig, who oversaw
the production, created the film for use by military educators. It uses
interviews with former military interrogators to emphasize that techniques
popularized on shows like ''24'' are rarely effective -- or legal -- in real
life.

Nevertheless Mr. Danzig said he was nervous about the degree to which the new
season of ''24'' would take the film's lessons to heart. ''Howard Gordon
deserves a lot of credit, outside the lines of the show, for trying to do the
responsible thing,'' Mr. Danzig said.

But he said he had doubts that those views would completely translate into the
program's plot. Mr. Danzig noted that previews portray Jack Bauer as vigorously
defiant in defending his methods of interrogation, which have included beatings,
stabbings, electrocutions and the use of drugs, suffocation and other coercive
measures. ''I fear that the result,'' he said, ''will be for the show to contend
that Bauer has always been right.''

Early on, Bauer does begin to show a softer side, becoming reflective about the
questions he is being asked. ''We've done so many secret things over the years
in the name of protecting this country, we've created two worlds -- ours and the
people we promise to protect,'' Bauer says. ''They deserve to know the truth.
Then they can decide how far they want to let us go.''

Mr. Gordon said that Bauer's more nuanced worldview ''wasn't designed to answer
directly to The New Yorker piece or the visit from the generals.''

''It was to sort of account for the fact that the world has changed,'' he added,
''that things are much more complex than maybe we thought, and that some of our
actions have had consequences in the world.''

At times Mr. Gordon appears uneasily to straddle the two sides in the debate
over the program's depictions of torture. On the one hand he defends the show
against the claims that it causes anyone to commit acts that he wouldn't be
inclined to commit anyway. ''If our field interrogators are being more impacted
by Jack Bauer than by their training, then obviously '24' shouldn't be the one
being skewered, it should be the training and the supervision of these field
interrogators,'' he said.

But he also said that he has sometimes hidden behind the claim that ''24'' is
just a television show, but that he no longer believes so. The debates ''have
made us more sensitive to some of the things we've done, and that is why I think
we've actually dug deeper,'' he said. ''You'll see very key scenes throughout
the course of the year reflecting, I think, some fairly nuanced arguments on
these very subjects.''

Over the years the creators of ''24'' have bragged that it has drawn accolades
from fans as diverse as Rush Limbaugh and Barbra Streisand. This year, in
addition to Cherry Jones in the role of the president, new cast members include
Janeane Garofalo, the comic and former host of a liberal radio talk show, and
Jon Voigt, an ardent conservative.

Their participation, Mr. Gordon said, implies that the show does not serve one
political agenda. He also said that anyone who claims that ''24'' has promoted
torture should also acknowledge that with Dennis Haysbert it cast an
African-American president seven years ago.

''If we're going to take the blame for Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib, I think we
should at least get the credit for Obama,'' he said. ''It's the other side of
the same coin.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: 24 (TV Program)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Kiefer Sutherland in ''24.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY KELSEY
MCNEAL/FOX)(pg. C1)
 Kiefer Sutherland, above and below left with Paul McCrane, in ''24,'' which has
its seventh season premiere Sunday on Fox.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY KELSEY MCNEAL/FOX)(pg.
C6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES
(90%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (89%); TELEVISION RATINGS & SHARES (89%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); NETWORK TELEVISION (78%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TESTIMONY (74%); ARMED FORCES (69%); INTERVIEWS
(67%); INVESTIGATIONS (66%); WRITERS (62%)

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (84%); NIELSEN MEDIA RESEARCH (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY (90%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (84%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (84%); NAICS541910 MARKETING RESEARCH & PUBLIC OPINION
POLLING (60%)

PERSON: KIEFER SUTHERLAND (92%)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (76%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1520 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Gets $240,000 Settlement in T-Shirt Incident at U.S. Airport

BYLINE: By JOHN SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 492 words


An Iraqi-born resident of the United States who was ordered to cover a T-shirt
with Arabic script before boarding a plane in New York has received $240,000 in
a settlement with two officials of the Transportation Safety Administration and
JetBlue Airways.

The Iraqi, Raed Jarrar, was headed for a JetBlue flight from John F. Kennedy
International Airport to Oakland, Calif., in August 2006 when, according to
court papers, he was told at a security checkpoint that his T-shirt, which said
''We will  not  be silent'' in Arabic and English, would have to go.

One federal employee, according to Mr. Jarrar's account, told him that wearing a
shirt with Arabic script to an airport was like going to the bank in a shirt
that said ''I am a robber.''

Ultimately, the JetBlue workers gave Mr. Jarrar another T-shirt to wear over the
first one, and led him to a seat at the back of the plane, even though his
original ticket had been issued for a seat at the front.

In an interview, Mr. Jarrar, 30, a legal resident, called the experience ''very
painful.'' At the time, he said, he was a new immigrant to the United States and
had been reading histories of discrimination and the civil rights movement,
which he thought of as ''things that happened in the past, and in this other
place and time.''

''When it happened to me,'' he said,  ''it was very much of a shock.''

The settlement, made public Monday, was reached last month, said Aden Fine, a
lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, who represented Mr. Jarrar. The
size of the settlement ''should send a clear and strong message to all T.S.A.
officials and airlines that they can't discriminate against people for how they
look or for the ethnic content of their speech,'' Mr. Fine said.

Neither the Transportation Safety Administration officials or JetBlue admitted
having done anything wrong, and the settlement agreement states that it ''is not
an admission of liability or fault or wrongdoing or responsibility.''

The agreement says that the government employees, Garfield Harris and Franco
Trotta, ''disavow any allegation'' that they had violated Mr. Jarrar's rights,
and said that ''their actions were at all times reasonable and within their
discretion and authority.''

Bryan Baldwin, a spokesman for the airline, said the company was ''pleased''
with the settlement, although it denied Mr. Jarrar's version of events. The
company settled, Mr. Baldwin said, ''to stop incurring future legal cost.''

The incident occurred at a time of heightened tension for air travel, just after
the arrests of two dozen people  in England who were accused of plotting to
detonate liquid explosives on several airliners on flights from London to the
United States and Canada.

Mr. Jarrar said he was ''disappointed'' that the agency and airline did not
admit fault or apologize. But, he said, ''the point was proven.''

If they had done nothing wrong, he asked, ''why did they pay $240,000?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Raed Jarrar, an Iraqi-born resident of the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRPORTS (92%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); AIRLINES (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES (78%);
TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); IMMIGRATION (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); CIVIL SERVICES (70%); INTERVIEWS
(66%)

COMPANY: JETBLUE AIRWAYS CORP (86%)

TICKER: JBLU (NASDAQ) (86%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (86%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (86%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ENGLAND (72%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1522 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2009 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Gaza Battle Goes On, Israel Is Set to Negotiate With Egypt on Cease-Fire

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Reporting was contributed by Taghreed El-Khodary
from Gaza, Katrin Bennhold from Paris and Neil MacFarquhar from the United
Nations.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel said Wednesday that it would send senior officials to talk with Egypt
about halting the conflict in Gaza, but there were no immediate signs of a
diplomatic breakthrough. Fighting between Israel and Hamas militants continued
after a brief pause earlier in the day.

International pressure for a negotiated cease-fire intensified a day after
Israeli shells killed some 40 people at a United Nations school in Gaza. Israel
said Hamas militants had fired mortar shells from the school compound prior to
Israel's shelling.

Israel suspended its military operations in Gaza for three hours on Wednesday to
allow humanitarian aid and fuel for power generation to reach Gazans, who used
the afternoon break to shop.

But fighting resumed soon afterward. In the evening, the Israeli Army dropped
leaflets warning the citizens of Rafah, next to the border with Egypt, to leave
their homes. Israel has been bombing the tunnel networks through which arms and
consumer goods are smuggled from Egypt into Gaza.

Hamas fired 22 rockets into Israel, but no one was wounded.

The Israeli government said it welcomed the efforts of France and Egypt to work
out a durable cease-fire. It said it would end its assault if Hamas stopped
firing rockets into Israel and ended the smuggling of weapons from Egypt. It
said that if a durable cease-fire took hold, it would reopen border crossings
into Gaza for goods and people. But Israeli and Hamas officials both denied an
assertion by the French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, that a cease-fire had been
agreed upon.

''There is an agreement on general principles, that Hamas should stop rocket
fire and mustn't rearm,'' a senior Israeli official said Wednesday evening.
''But that's like agreeing that motherhood is a good thing. We have to transform
those agreed principles into working procedures on the ground, and that's barely
begun.''

The government spokesman, Mark Regev, said that ''the challenge now is to get
the details to match the principles.''

There were early signs that a formal diplomatic negotiation could begin after 12
days of fighting. Egypt's chief of intelligence, Omar Suleiman, is expected to
serve as a go-between for Israel and Hamas. Two Israeli officials -- a senior
aide to Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, Shalom Turgeman, and a senior defense
official, Amos Gilad -- are expected to go to Egypt on Thursday to begin
discussions, Israeli officials said.

The United States has been involved behind the scenes, senior Israeli and French
officials said, with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice ''constantly on the
phone'' with Mr. Olmert, according to one Israeli official.

In Washington, the White House spokeswoman, Dana M. Perino, said of talks about
a cease-fire: ''As I understand, the Israelis are open to the concept, but they
want to learn more about the details; so do we.''

At the United Nations, several Arab delegates said Wednesday night that they
thought they now had enough votes to approve a Security Council resolution
calling for an immediate cease-fire. That would likely put the United States and
other Western powers, which oppose a binding resolution, in the awkward position
of having to veto a cease-fire.

A senior French official in Paris said that Mr. Sarkozy's earlier comment about
an agreement on a cease-fire was misunderstood: ''The plan is not a cease-fire;
the plan is a road map toward a cease-fire.'' One crucial aspect of any deal is
how to prevent new smuggling tunnels from being built under Egypt's border with
Gaza.

The senior Israeli official raised the possibility of reaching ''tacit
agreements'' with Hamas to end rocket fire, while also persuading Egypt to allow
American and perhaps European army engineers to help seal its border with Gaza
above and below ground.

Hamas is insisting that any new arrangement include the reopening of border
crossings for trade with Israel and the reopening of the Rafah crossing into
Egypt for people.

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt has said that a 2005 agreement on the Rafah
crossing, reached with Israel and the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas of
Fatah, must be respected. That agreement called for a Palestinian Authority
presence at the crossing, supervision by European Union monitors and Israeli
video surveillance of who entered and left.

Hamas wants to control the crossing itself and is not eager to cooperate with
Fatah, its -rival.

In Washington, President-elect Barack Obama said Wednesday that upon taking
office he would ''engage immediately'' in the Middle East crisis and that he was
''deeply concerned'' about the loss of life on both sides.

''I am doing everything that we have to do to make sure that the day I take
office we are prepared to engage immediately in trying to deal with the
situation there,'' he said at a news conference. ''Not only the short-term
situation but building a process whereby we can achieve a more lasting peace in
the region.''

In Gaza, John Ging, the director of Gazan operations for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency, visited the school in the Jabaliya refugee camp where
Israeli shells fell Tuesday. He denied that Hamas militants had fired mortar
shells from within the school compound and called for an international
investigation into the attack, which he said had killed 40 people.

Israeli officials said they were continuing to investigate, but reiterated that
Hamas had been using the school as a base. Mr. Gilad, the defense official, told
Israeli Army radio: ''This school served as a base for Hamas men whose identity
we know. They fired from inside the school compound, and the army fired back at
the source. The time was after school hours, and this school is an example of
the cynical and cruel use Hamas does with civilian facilities.''

Casualty figures are hard to verify, but officials at Shifa Hospital in Gaza
City and the Gazan Ministry of Health said 683 Palestinians had died since the
conflict began Dec. 27, including 218 children and 90 women. They said 3,085 had
been wounded. The Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza said 130 children
age 16 or under had died. The United Nations estimated a few days ago that a
quarter of the dead were civilians.

But Palestinian residents and Israeli officials say that Hamas is tending its
own wounded in separate medical centers, not in public hospitals, and that it is
difficult to know the number of dead Hamas fighters, many of whom were not
wearing uniforms.

Israel says it has killed at least 130 Hamas fighters. Ten Israelis have been
killed during the offensive, including three civilians. Most of the seven dead
Israeli soldiers  were killed in so-called  friendly fire.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A woman in Rafah, Gaza, ventured into the rubble-strewn streets
on Wednesday. Israel suspended its assault for three hours to allow humanitarian
deliveries.(PHOTOGRAPH BY EYAD BABA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (92%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (91%);
PEACE PROCESS (91%); SMUGGLING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%);
ARMIES (76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (76%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (76%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); BORDER CONTROL (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (68%);
PRIME MINISTERS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (59%); EHUD OLMERT (59%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (51%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (59%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); EGYPT (94%);
UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1524 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Finger Pointing Over Israel and Gaza

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 962 words


To the Editor:

The Jan. 8 Op-Ed column and articles about the Gaza conflict by Nicholas D.
Kristof, Rashid Khalidi and Gideon Lichfield all create a false picture of the
situation Israel faces with regard to Hamas. The notion, espoused in these
articles, that Israeli military action is the source of the problems and
counterproductive because it brings Hamas more support misses the crux of the
problem.

Hamas took over in Gaza not in response to Israeli military actions but after
Israel unilaterally left Gaza in 2005, a moment that offered hope for a new life
for Palestinians. Rather than being taken as a building block to peace, the
Palestinians backed a group committed to Israel's destruction. In other words,
Israeli concessions led to greater Palestinian extremism.

Therefore, to blame Israel's military for the problems of the Palestinians in
Gaza is absurd and provides no solace for Israelis living under years of rocket
attacks out of Gaza.

Any solution to the problems created by Hamas rejectionist positions that relies
solely on Israeli action without true partners in the region and beyond places
an onus on Israel that is simply not sustainable.

Abraham H. Foxman   National Director  Anti-Defamation League  New York, Jan. 8,
2009

To the Editor:

Re ''What You Don't Know About Gaza'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 8):

Here's what many readers already knew before Rashid Khalidi condescendingly
tried to correct them:

It is true that the residents of Gaza live in an untenable situation, but it is
a situation that can be resolved only by political settlement. If all children
of refugees decide to take up arms because they did not choose to be where they
have found themselves, most of the world would be at war.

The citizens of Gaza knowingly elected a gang of extremist thugs that opts for
war at every turn and puts its own civilians on the front lines. With freedom
comes responsibility. When the people elect war, they get war. The Israelis have
been very clear that they would continue to maintain a blockade until Hamas
recognizes the Jewish state's right to exist.

Again, if Gaza elects rejectionism and belligerency, complaints against the
logical consequences ring hollow.

Hamas deliberately provoked an Israeli military response with relentless attacks
aimed specifically at a civilian population. The numbers do indeed speak for
themselves, but only when considered fairly and accurately in the proper
context. Let us lay responsibility where it belongs.

Julien Gorbach  Santa Fe, N.M., Jan. 8, 2009

To the Editor:

Thank you for publishing Rashid Khalidi's excellent Op-Ed article.

His concise, coherent and articulate article goes a long way in helping to
explain not only the current situation in Gaza but also what led to this crisis.

I am in full agreement with Professor Khalidi that if Israel had fulfilled the
terms of the June cease-fire and lifted the stifling blockade of Gaza, the
catastrophe that we are witnessing could in all probability have been avoided.

Karen Russo   Arlington, Vt., Jan. 8, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''Fighting to Preserve a Myth,'' by Gideon Lichfield (Op-Ed, Jan. 8):

As Mr. Lichfield and others point out, trying to weaken Palestinian support for
Hamas by killing hundreds of Gazans isn't working. Instead, how about closing
some West Bank settlements now, even as the military and diplomatic actions to
stop the Qassam rockets continue?

Many settlements will have to be dismantled anyway in an ultimate peace
agreement, and as the much stronger party, Israel won't weaken its negotiating
position by closing some now. There will be significant settler opposition, but
the Gaza campaign has renewed the Israeli government's political capital.

By rewarding the nonbelligerent Palestinian Authority even as it punishes Hamas,
Israel can demonstrate that it really has a vision for a better Middle East, and
not just a blind lust for retaliation.

Kevin Johnson  Boston, Jan. 8, 2009

The writer was chief of mission, National Democratic Institute West Bank and
Gaza, 1995-96.

To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof (''Gaza Boomerang,'' column, Jan. 8) claims that Israel's
ground invasion of Gaza is not justified because it has killed more than 660
people as opposed to the 20 Israelis killed by Hamas rockets.

Perhaps the fact that Israel looks to protect its citizens with sirens and bomb
shelters while Hamas, in turn, shelters itself by hiding among innocent
civilians has more to do with the resulting death tolls than the actual force
used.

While Israel goes out of its way to minimize loss of innocent life, it seems
that Hamas values its own citizens less than the Israelis do.

Shayna Goldberg   Bergenfield, N.J., Jan. 8, 2009

To the Editor:

Re ''The Mideast's Ground Zero,'' by Thomas L. Friedman (column, Jan. 7):

The portrayal of Hamas as a dangerous, terrorist, fundamentalist Islamic entity
is exactly right, and it should be treated as such by the international
community, including the United Nations.

There are very few things that are black and white regarding the Middle East,
but here are two facts that the international community should base its actions
on:

First, if Hamas were not lobbing rockets into Israel, there would be no war and
no civilian casualties on either side; and second, the way to peace is not by
espousing the avowed destruction of Israel.

Alan Schoffman  Teaneck, N.J., Jan. 7, 2009

To the Editor:

David Brooks, in ''The Confidence War'' (column, Jan. 6), misses the most
important psychological effect of the Israeli incursion into Gaza. The images of
dead women and children are sure to radicalize not only the most moderate of
Palestinians, but also the populations of the entire Muslim world.

Hanan Watson  New York, Jan. 6, 2009

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY JORDAN AWAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(89%); LIBEL & SLANDER (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); REFUGEES (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(59%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (55%)

CITY: SANTA FE, NM, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW MEXICO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(79%); JORDAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1535 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 12, 2009 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

The Sex Trade in America

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 188 words


To the Editor:

Re ''If This Isn't Slavery, What Is?,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (column, Jan. 4):

The sad fact is that the sex trade in America is made up of commercially
exploited young people. According to a 2001 study from the University of
Pennsylvania, each year there are 200,000 to 300,000 youths in the United States
who are commercially sexually exploited or at risk of being exploited.

In New York City, the most frequent age of initiation into prostitution is 14 to
15 years old. These children not only are tortured by their pimps and johns, but
also are punished by the juvenile justice systems while the pimps and johns
often go unpunished.

The slavelike conditions of the commercially sexually exploited young people are
an issue we need to deal with in our own communities. If anyone harbors doubts,
see a recently released documentary, ''Very Young Girls.'' These children have
the right to our protection, and this exploitation should not be tolerated by
our government here or abroad.

Elana Roffman   Brooklyn, Jan. 5, 2009

The writer is a staff lawyer with the Legal Aid Society's juvenile rights
practice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (92%); CHILDREN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); JUVENILE
JUSTICE (72%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (72%); LEGAL AID (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA (58%); LEGAL AID SOCIETY (NEW YORK)
(55%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1538 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 14, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spain: 14 Salvadorans To Face Trial

BYLINE: By VICTORIA BURNETT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 113 words


A judge on the High Court said Tuesday that he would prosecute 14 former members
of the Salvadoran Army accused  in the 1989 killings of six Jesuit priests,
their housekeeper and her daughter. The judge, Eloy Velasco, declined to
prosecute the former Salvadoran president, Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, citing a
lack of jurisdiction and insufficient evidence. Mr. Cristiani has been accused
of helping to cover up the crime, which took place during El Salvador's civil
war.  The Spanish court has in the past used the principle that crimes against
humanity can be prosecuted anywhere to pursue high-profile cases, including one
against the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (90%); EVIDENCE (88%); JURISDICTION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (87%);
CIVIL WAR (85%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(83%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (94%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1545 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 17, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times, January 17, 2009

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2393 words


International

TEA BUBBLE BURSTS,

Emptying Pockets in China

In southwest China, a type of tea known as Pu'er became the darling of the
nation's nouveaux riches over the last decade, as they embraced a distinctly
Chinese way to display their wealth and invest their savings. But the collapse
of the tea market has turned thousands of farmers and dealers into paupers and
provided the nation with a pungent lesson about greed and the perils of the
speculative bubble.  PAGE A6

BALTIC RIOTS SPREAD TO LITHUANIA

Riots broke out once again in the Baltic states, this time in the Lithuanian
capital, Vilnius, where a group of 7,000 gathered to protest planned economic
austerity measures. A smaller group began throwing eggs and stones through the
windows of government buildings until the police moved in, using tear gas and
rubber bullets to disperse the crowd.  PAGE A6

A BIN LADEN SON IN PAKISTAN

A son of Osama bin Laden who spent years under Iranian house arrest has left
Iran and is now probably operating inside Pakistan, a senior American
intelligence official said.

The son, Saad bin Laden, is one of a number of senior operatives of Al Qaeda
detained inside Iran in recent years. American officials have long puzzled over
the exact circumstances of their captivity, but they believe that Iran was
holding the militants in part as a deterrent against a Qaeda attack on Iranian
soil. PAGE A7

CAMPAIGNING IRAQI CLERIC KILLED

A cleric who is a member of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki's political
party, and was a candidate in the provincial elections, was killed by gunmen on
Friday as he drove away from a campaign event in a province south of Baghdad.
The candidate, Haitham Kadhim al-Husaini, was attacked as Iraq's Islamist
parties, including the movement of the anti-American Shiite cleric Moktada
al-Sadr, stepped up campaigning for the Jan. 31 elections during Friday Prayer.
PAGE A7

U.S. FREEZES ASSETS OF 2 BURMESE

In one of the final actions on human rights by the departing Bush
administration, the United States Treasury froze the assets of two Burmese
businessmen, Win Aung and Zaw Zaw, and of their companies for aiding and
financially backing the military junta in Myanmar.  PAGE A7

GERMANY SEEKS VOW ON GAS FLOW

Germany, the Western European country with the closest ties to the Kremlin,
warned Russia to abide by its contractual relations, saying its reputation as a
reliable supplier of gas could no longer be taken for granted as a result of the
two-week gas dispute between Ukraine and Russia, which has left millions of
homes without heat.  PAGE A10

Settlement in China's Milk Case  A10

New U.S. Ambassador to Russia  A10

National

PENTAGON CONSIDERS

Prison Sites for Detainees

Military sources said Pentagon officials have inspected several military bases
in the United States that could potentially replace the detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, if President-elect Barack Obama fulfills his pledge to
close the camp. The sites visited included Fort Leavenworth, Kan., and Camp
Pendleton, Calif.  PAGE A11

BUSH'S DISMAL POLL NUMBERS

As President Bush enters the final days of his administration, only 22 percent
of respondents in a New York Times/CBS News poll said they approved of his
performance -- which matched Mr. Bush's job-approval rating for much of last
fall, the lowest of his presidency.  PAGE A11

A LAWYER'S LATEST HIGH-WIRE ACT

Gregory B. Craig has been in politics for 40 years, once serving as an adviser
to Senator Edward M. Kennedy and later defending Bill Clinton from impeachment.
Now the in-house counsel for President-elect Barack Obama, he finds himself in
the middle of the most contentious debates facing the new administration, such
as how to shut down the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and whether C.I.A..
interrogators suspected of torture should be prosecuted.  PAGE A12

EX-F.B.I. CHIEF SUPPORTS NOMINEE

In the confirmation hearing for Eric H. Holder Jr., President-elect Barack
Obama's selection for attorney general, Louis J. Freeh, the former director of
the F.B.I., said that Mr. Holder was drawn into a ''corrupt act'' when he became
involved in the pardon of a fugitive businessman by Bill Clinton. But Mr. Freeh
said Mr. Holder had learned from his ''terrible mistakes'' and deserved to be
confirmed.  PAGE A12

PIVOTING FROM HIS OUTSIDER STANCE

During the campaign, President-elect Barack Obama ran as a Washington outsider,
and his campaign boasted that they did not hobnob at cocktail parties with the
city's well-connected citizens. But with their tenure in the White House set to
begin, he and his team are shifting gears and schmoozing with the town's media
elite.  PAGE A13

PENTAGON'S PUBLIC RELATIONS EFFORT

The office of the Defense Department's inspector general said that it found no
wrongdoing in a Pentagon public relations program that made use of retired
officers who worked as military analysts for television and radio networks. At
least 45 members of Congress had called for inquiries into the program, with
some asserting that it might have constituted an illegal campaign of propaganda
directed at the American public.  PAGE A15

NEW AID TO BORDER FENCE

The government said it will allot millions of dollars to make up for the
environmental damage from building hundreds of miles of fences along the Mexican
border through wilderness and protected lands, but environmental groups who have
fought the fence called it too little, too late.  PAGE A15

New York

PILOT OF DOWNED PLANE

Becomes an Instant Celebrity

Chesley B. Sullenberger III, the unassuming pilot who deftly steered his wounded
50-ton plane into the Hudson River, has become an instant celebrity, with fan
sites and government officials applauding his bravery. ''If it wasn't for him, I
wouldn't be here today,'' said one passenger. ''He was just wonderful.'' And all
without even so much as loosening his tie.  PAGE A21

Crash Inquiry Continues A19

Business

AFTER FAILING TO LURE BUYERS,

Circuit City Goes Out of Business

Circuit City, the country's second-largest consumer electronics chain, announced
that it would liquidate all its stores and that most of its 34,000 workers would
be laid off. The company had been hoping to be bought, but was unable to reach a
timely agreement with its creditors and lenders.  PAGE B1

WHITHER THE NEWSWEEKLY?

The production of newsweeklies, mass-market news magazines like Time and
Newsweek, published weekly to inform Americans about world and national events,
was once a lucrative business. But the Internet has obliterated the idea of
waiting a week for news, and the question now is whether what they are becoming
has a chance to endure. PAGE B1

THE DOWNSIDE TO THE D.I.Y. ETHIC

Consumers are praising themselves for their newfound frugality during the
economic downturn: dyeing their own hair, brewing their own espressos, trimming
their own hedges. But their penny-pinching has had serious repercussions for the
small businesses that used to perform those tasks for them.  PAGE B1

QUESTIONS ON CORPORATE TAXES

A new government report said that many of the largest United States
corporations, including big banks now receiving federal bailout money, operate
scores of subsidiaries in offshore tax havens that may allow them to evade their
tax bills.  PAGE B2

$1.5 BILLION FOR CHRYSLER FINANCE

The Treasury Department said that it would lend $1.5 billion to Chrysler's
finance unit to make loans available to consumers who want to buy vehicles from
the struggling carmaker. The government's loan will come from money already in
the Troubled Asset Relief Program, created last year to provide emergency aid to
financial institutions. PAGE B3

YAHOO AND MICROSOFT CHIEFS MEET

Could the scuttled Web search deal between Microsoft and Yahoo be restarting?
That was the question as Steven A. Ballmer, Microsoft's chief executive, met
this week with Roy J. Bostock, Yahoo's chairman. It was the second high-level
contact between them this week.  PAGE B4

Arts

SHOWCASING GREEN LIVES,

But Highlighting a Paradox

The schedule at this year's Sundance Festival has at least seven movies with
environmental themes. Of course, there's the obvious quandary: How can you get
46,000 people, roughly equivalent to a fifth of Hollywood's total work force,
into a pretty little mountain town without contributing mightily to the problems
your films hope to solve?  PAGE C1

U.S. REACHES PACT ON ARTIFACTS

The Bush administration has reached an agreement with China that will ban
imports of a wide range of Chinese antiquities into the United States to help
stanch a growing illicit traffic.  PAGE C1

GRIEVANCE FILED AGAINST PIVEN

The Broadway producers of the David Mamet play ''Speed-the-Plow'' filed a
grievance with an actors union against Jeremy Piven, the show's former star,
over his abrupt withdrawal from the production last month. Mr. Piven left the
play because of what his doctors said was a case of mercury poisoning, and
denied that he had left the show because of late-night partying or boredom with
the play.  PAGE C1

FUTURE BEGINS WITH A SORRY PAST

The New York City Opera presented Samuel Barber's ''Antony and Cleopatra'' at
Carnegie Hall just a day after the beleaguered company announced its new general
manager. It was another attempt to salvage the work's dismal reputation, and
Anthony Tommasini writes, a reminder of what the City Opera is capable of.  PAGE
C5

Patty Loveless at the Allen Room C8

GORE YOU CAN BELIEVE IN

''My Bloody Valentine 3D,'' an update of a horror classic, reaches back into
that old Hollywood bag of tricks by toying with the audience's depth perception.
''You've seen a body cavity before, but how many have you fallen into?''
Jeanette Catsoulis asks in her review.  Page C11

Obituaries

LEONARD E. B. ANDREWS, 83

He made a fortune publishing expensive newsletters on subjects like bankruptcy
and Iranian assets. But his celebrity came when he rocked the art world by
buying 240 previously unknown works by Andrew Wyeth -- and then rocked it again
when he sold them three years later at a profit .  PAGE A16

Sports

PLAYER BECOMES STAR AFTER

An Unlikely, Precarious Ascent

Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, the Arizona Cardinals safety, became an N.F.L.
standout despite playing only one year of varsity football in high school,
attending a small Division II college, and having only one kidney -- which means
a big hit in the wrong place could jeopardize his career.  PAGE B9

WINNING WITH HEAVY HEARTS

Wake Forest has jumped out to a 15-0 start and is the No. 2-ranked men's
basketball team in the country. Every player on the roster was recruited by Skip
Prosser, who died unexpectedly in July 2007 from a heart attack at 56, and whose
shadow continues to loom large over the program.  PAGE B9

SELLING ITSELF DURING PLAYOFF RUN

With each win, the Cardinals garner more publicity for the University of
Phoenix, for which their stadium is named. The $154 million deal for naming
rights was a major coup for the university, which doesn't even have a campus.
William C. Rhoden, Sports of the Times.  PAGE B10

Weekend

THE MAGAZINE

In the days before he is inaugurated, a president-to-be is a projection of his
aura and of our anticipation. But few things can diminish so quickly.  PAGE 37

TRAVEL

An igloo is an ingenious way of building and creating shelter in the Arctic. But
it's not big on view. The Hotel Kaksluattanen in Artic Finland has built its
igloos of steel and glass, the better to see the stars and the northern lights.
PAGE 10

It was 33.5 miles from one end to the other, and the words most often muttered
on the journey were ''awesome'' and ''incredible.'' The Milford Track on the
South Island of New Zealand is a hiking trail for novices and the experienced
alike.  PAGE 12

ARTS & LEISURE

Shifting time, seemingly ageless characters, smoke monsters and a bunch of
Dharma statues. ''Lost'' has garnered fans with its plots that have made just as
many others retire to the sound of ''huh?'' It's complicated, true, and for none
so much as Gregg Nations, the man in charge of keeping track of it all.  PAGE 1

ONE LAST TIME

As President Bush prepares to leave office, many will be happy to see him go, a
few will be sad and at least one will be getting in a parting shot. ''You're
Welcome America: A Final Night With George Bush'' is Will Ferrell's one-man show
on Broadway and what he hopes will be a catharsis for audiences.  PAGE 1

SUNDAY STYLES

By box, we mean of the television variety, though for many it's a flat-screen,
but you get the point. Travis Stork, an alumni of ABC's ''The Bachelor,'' is on
television in ''The Doctors'' and ready to dispense medical advice, along with
three other physicians.  PAGE 1

Editorial

NOT SO REASONABLE

Patients who feel ripped off whenever they use a doctor outside their insurance
company's network should benefit from two important new agreements.  PAGE A20

BUT WHO WILL DRIVE THEM?

Even with a cornucopia of hybrid and electric vehicles showcased at the North
American International Auto Show, a big obstacle remains to the greening of
American drivers: the price tag.  PAGE A20

'STUPID THINGS'

The war in Afghanistan has been so disastrously mismanaged that some NATO allies
are arguing that it is too late to salvage. We, too, are deeply worried. Anyone
who has questions about why it is so important to try should go and read the
story of Shamsia Husseini. PAGE A20

Op-Ed

BOB HERBERT

A tragic health crisis has engulfed Zimbabwe, a nation reduced to a state of
ruin by its president, Robert Mugabe.  PAGE A21

GAIL COLLINS

Today I am on inauguration duty. Barack Obama is a celebrated speaker, and the
country is in a save-us-F.D.R. kind of mood. So our hopes for Tuesday are
unusually high. How are you going to experience it? The options before us are
many. PAGE A21

OUR HOUSE

When President-elect Barack Obama and his family move into the White House, they
will be joined by Michelle Obama's 71-year-old mother. The White House has
always been home to many different kinds of families, all of whom re-invented
the place to fit their needs. Historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and William Seale
show how four presidents -- Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, James Garfield
and Franklin D. Roosevelt -- lived and worked in the White House.  PAGE A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL-QAEDA (90%); RIOTS (90%); ECONOMIC BUBBLE (90%); TEA (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (88%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (88%); COFFEE &
TEA (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (74%); TREASURY
DEPARTMENTS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TERRORISM (73%); SHOOTINGS
(73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%); PRIME
MINISTERS (69%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (69%); MILITARY RULE (68%); ARRESTS (68%);
HOUSE ARREST (67%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (66%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES &
TREASURIES (64%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (85%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (53%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (53%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); VILNIUS, LITHUANIA (79%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CHINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); MYANMAR
(93%); LITHUANIA (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); IRAQ (92%); PAKISTAN
(92%); GERMANY (91%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); UKRAINE (79%); BALTIC STATES (79%);
EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1546 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

City Shifts Girls' Soccer From Spring To the Fall

BYLINE: By JAVIER C. HERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 650 words


For 28 years, girls in New York City have had to wait until spring to take out
their soccer cleats. They stood on the sidelines as their male counterparts used
the fall season to show off for college recruiters. Now, facing charges of
discrimination and the threat of a lawsuit, the Department of Education has
agreed to move the girls' soccer season to the fall.

For many of the nearly 1,800 female players in the Public Schools Athletic
League, soccer in the spring has become a logistical tour de force. Many also
belong to club teams not affiliated with their schools but that also have spring
seasons, leaving the girls with little time for homework and rest as they juggle
back-to-back practices.

After three players complained to the New York Civil Liberties Union, the group
threatened last month to sue the Department of Education, claiming the current
schedule discriminated against women athletes and violated Title IX, the law
covering equity in education.

The department said it believed the girls had been treated equally, but agreed
this week to move the season, starting next school year, to avoid litigation.
Having girls play soccer in the spring made it easier to reserve fields for
other fall sports, the department said.

''We'll work hard to give the girls' teams, and all of our fall athletes, the
best possible schedules and playing conditions,'' Eric Goldstein, chief
executive for school support services, said in a statement.

On Saturday, the first day of spring practice for members of the Manhattan
Soccer Club, the girls worked out on an icy field at Riverside Park.

Hannah S. Anousheh, a 15-year-old sophomore who plays on the club team as well
as on the varsity team at Bronx High School of Science, said she now practices
about four hours each day, leaving her exhausted by the time she gets home
around 10 p.m. She said the spring regimen increased her chances of getting
injured and interfered with her schoolwork.

''Boys don't have to worry because they only have to play on one team per
season,'' said Hannah, who was one of the players who contacted the New York
Civil Liberties Union. ''I think it is really unfair.''

Christina Angione, 16, a soccer player at Beacon School on the West Side, had
also spoken with the civil liberties union. She said she was forced to choose
between playing on her high school soccer team and an elite soccer club because
of the scheduling demands.

''It shouldn't be any different because of our gender or who we are,'' she said.
''Maybe people think we don't take soccer as seriously because we are girls. I
take this seriously.''

Both Christina and Hannah said they felt their chances of getting college soccer
scholarships were hurt because they could not use the fall season to stay in
shape for showcases in front of recruiters.

At a news conference at Riverside Park on Saturday, Betsy Gotbaum, the city's
public advocate, said the decision to move the season to the fall ''ends a clear
practice of discrimination against our young, talented female athletes.''

''It's very important boys and girls have the same opportunities,'' said Ms.
Gotbaum, who played soccer in high school.

In 2006, a report by Ms. Gotbaum found that at some schools, boys' participation
in athletic programs well outpaced participation by girls. She also found that
several other sports, including fencing, golf and swimming, were scheduled in
different seasons for boys and girls, causing girls' teams to miss some
tournaments because their schedules did not align with the rest of the state.

In New York, girls make up about 44 percent of the more than 30,000 athletes in
the public schools league, according to Department of Education data. During
the past six years, participation in girls' soccer has increased by 51 percent,
to 1,756 athletes, and overall participation by girls in competitive sports has
risen by 24 percent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Manhattan Pride club team at soccer practice on Saturday.
Many girls also play for their schools, leading to time conflicts. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY TINA FINEBERG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SOCCER (92%); SPORTS & RECREATION (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SCHOOL
SPORTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); SPORTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS (89%); ATHLETES (89%); HIGH SCHOOLS (89%);
GENDER EQUALITY (78%); HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS (78%); WOMEN (78%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS
(78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); HOMEWORK (76%);
EXECUTIVES (50%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1564 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

From Hospital, Afghans Rebut U.S. Account

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1599 words

DATELINE: MEHTARLAM, Afghanistan


-- The American military declared the nighttime raid this month a success,
saying it killed 32 people, all Taliban insurgents -- the fruit of an emphasis
on intelligence-driven use of Special Operations forces.

But the two young men who lay wincing in a hospital ward here told a different
story a few days later, one backed up by the pro-American provincial governor
and a central government delegation.

They agreed that 13 civilians had been killed and 9 wounded when American
commandos broke down doors and unleashed dogs without warning on Jan. 7 in the
hunt for a known insurgent in Masamut, in Laghman Province in eastern
Afghanistan. The residents were so enraged that they threatened to march on the
American military base here.

The conflicting accounts underscore a dangerous rift that has grown between
Afghans and the United States forces trying to roll back widening Taliban
control of the countryside.

With every case of civilian casualties or mistaken killings, the anger that
Afghans feel toward the government and foreign forces deepens and makes
residents less likely to help American forces, Afghan officials warn. Meanwhile,
American forces are reluctant to share information about future military raids
with local officials, fearing that it will be passed on to the Taliban.

Added to all that is a complication for American forces here: many villagers are
armed, in the absence of an effective local police force.

Into that increasingly complex environment, the Obama administration is
preparing to send as many as 30,000 more troops this year. As the plan moves
forward, Afghan officials and some Western coalition partners are voicing
concern that the additional troops will only increase the levels of violence and
civilian casualties, after a year in which as many as 4,000 Afghan civilians
were killed.

The outrage over civilian deaths swelled again over the weekend. Hundreds of
angry villagers demonstrated here in Mehtarlam, the capital of Laghman Province,
on Sunday after an American raid on a village in the province on Friday night.
The raid killed at least 16 villagers, including 2 women and 3 children,
according to a statement from President Hamid Karzai.

The president condemned the raid, saying it had not been coordinated with Afghan
officials, and called for such raids to stop. The United States military said
that 15 armed militants, including a woman, had been killed.

In a sign of how serious the episode was, an American military spokesman, Col.
Greg Julian, said the military would send an investigation team to the area, The
Associated Press reported.

Raids like the ones in Laghman Province by United States Special Operations
forces, on Jan. 7 and on Friday, have been a special focus of complaint for
several years.

Provincial governors say the tactics used, and the lack of coordination with
Afghan and other American and NATO forces, alienate villagers and cause unneeded
casualties among civilians. The raids are undoing much of the good work done by
other American and international troops and reconstruction teams, they say.

The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission warned that the lack of
accountability of those conducting such raids, and the lack of redress for
civilian victims, was stoking resentment. ''The degree of backlash and community
outrage that they provoke suggests they may often not be an advisable tactic
within the Afghan context,'' the commission concluded in a report in December.

Mr. Karzai  said in an address at the opening of Parliament on Tuesday that he
had once more sent written requests to United States forces and to NATO to end
civilian casualties.

Afghans would never complain about casualties among their security forces, but
they would never accept the suffering of civilians, he said, to a great shout of
support from the chamber. The speaker of the Senate, Sebaghatullah Mojadeddi,
followed with a warning that if more care was not taken, the nation could rise
up against the foreign troop presence here.

A number of different American units, Special Forces and others, have been
conducting counterterrorism operations around the country for the past seven
years, operating out of the Bagram and Kandahar airfields, and several small
Special Forces bases. They do not operate under NATO command and usually do not
coordinate their operations with Afghan forces, since they argue that the
element of surprise is critical.

Military spokesmen often release results of raids but do not identify the forces
involved. Philip Alston, a United Nations special rapporteur, or investigator,
complained last year that despite high-level meetings with the military, he had
been unable to identify some of the groups conducting the raids or to establish
the chain of command under which they operated.

Afghan officials and others suspect some of the raids may also be carried out by
the C.I.A.

The raid in Masamut on the night of Jan. 7 was typical of many conducted in
Afghanistan. United States Special Operations forces entered the village under
cover of darkness looking for a known Taliban insurgent, Gul Pacha, who was
killed in the raid, along with a visitor to his home, another Taliban member,
Bahadur Khan.

According to several villagers, the nighttime raid stirred alarm and confusion
as people were roused from their sleep.

One of the first to be shot and killed was a man called Qasem, a member of the
Afghan Border Police who was at home on leave. His brother, Wazarat Khan, said
Qasem was killed as soon as he looked out his front door.

''We did not think they were Americans; we thought they were thieves,'' he said.
''They killed my brother right in the doorway.''

One of the men in the hospital, Abdul Manan, 25, who had a bullet wound in the
shoulder, said he woke up when he heard a female neighbor calling for help and
heard three shots.

He said he came out of his house and saw soldiers wearing headlamps. ''I thought
they were smoking cigarettes,'' he said. ''They said something in English that I
did not understand, and then they shot me.''

Another man, Darwaish Muhammad, 18, hospitalized with shrapnel wounds, said he
was awakened by the mother of a neighbor, Shahpur Khan, calling for help. He had
been shot.

Mr. Muhammad said he and two others rushed to help carry the woman's son on a
rope bed down a slope outside the village to get help. They were 10 minutes from
the village when a helicopter fired a rocket at them, killing the wounded man
and two of the bearers. He and the  mother were badly wounded, he said.

A United States military spokesman, Col. Jerry O'Hara, confirmed that United
States air support forces had fired on a group of five carrying a wounded person
outside the village. He said all five had been killed and all were militants.
That some of the villagers survived may explain some of the discrepancy of the
death toll.

Colonel O'Hara added that care had been taken not to use air power inside the
village, to avoid civilian casualties. He dismissed the villagers' accounts that
they had mistaken the soldiers for thieves. ''I am not buying that,'' he said.
''These people were acting as sentries.''

In a statement, Colonel O'Hara said, ''Coalition forces exercised great
restraint and prevented any civilian casualties at the same time the enemy
placed the whole village in harm's way by operating the way they do.''

In an interview, he also expressed frustration that four years after his earlier
tour in Afghanistan, people still were not coming forward with information
against Taliban members. ''Until there is active involvement amongst Afghan
civilians to turn in or give a tip on people with explosives, you are not going
to get on the road to peace,'' he said.

Yet, after seven years of war, Afghans say that villagers are less and less
inclined to side with a foreign army that still conducts house searches and
bombardments.

The villagers of Masamut readily acknowledged that Mr. Pacha had been a member
of the Taliban. They had even nicknamed him ''Al Qaeda.'' But they criticized
the United States forces for killing his elderly father and two sons along with
him, and for the shooting of the other villagers.

''The government should have informed us not to come outside while they
surrounded the house of Gul Pacha,'' said Mawla Dad, 35, whose brother, nephew
and cousin, an off-duty policeman, were all killed.

The governor of Laghman Province, Lutfullah Mashal, acknowledged that some of
the villagers were armed. But he explained that because there was no police
force to speak of in rural areas, villages kept security through a kind of
neighborhood watch. ''Whoever came out with a weapon, he was shot because the
American forces have night-vision devices,'' the governor said.

Villagers of Masamut, and local officials who visited the village afterward,
protested the tactics used in the raid to United States military officials. The
governor also complained that the raid had been conducted without coordination
with Afghan forces or even with other American forces based in the province.

The raid undermined the government, Mr. Mashal said, and the tactics violated
Afghan customs and whipped up a religious hatred, which was very damaging for
both the government and the international forces.

''The people are angry with us,'' he said. ''Unless the international community,
and especially military forces, coordinate with us, we are not going to win this
war, because to win the war is to win the hearts and minds of the people, and
then you can beat the enemy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Afghans protesting civilian deaths in military raids rallied
Sunday against the Afghan and American governments in Mehtarlam, east of the
capital, Kabul. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAHMAT GUL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A9) MAP: Afghan
officials say the tactics used in raids, like the one Jan. 7 on Masamut,
alienate villagers and cause unneeded casualties. (pg.A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TALIBAN (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); DOGS (75%); US
PRESIDENTS (73%); HOSPITALS (72%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%); INVESTIGATIONS
(67%); POLICE FORCES (52%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (55%); BARACK OBAMA (50%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1565 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Expands Ability to Sue in Sexual Harassment Investigations

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Employees fired after cooperating in sexual harassment investigations may sue
for retaliation, the Supreme Court ruled Monday in a case concerning the scope
of a federal law barring sex discrimination in the workplace.

The case arose from an internal investigation into possible misconduct by Gene
Hughes, the employee relations director of a Tennessee school system. Vicky
Crawford, who had worked for the school system for 30 years but who had not
complained about Mr. Hughes, answered questions about him in the investigation.

Justice David H. Souter, writing for himself and six other justices, said Ms.
Crawford had described ''louche goings-on'' involving ''gross clowning'' and
''sexually obnoxious'' conduct by Mr. Hughes. According to court papers
summarizing her accusations, Mr. Hughes seemed to think it amusing to grab his
genitals and ask Ms. Crawford to show him her breasts.

At the conclusion of the investigation, Mr. Hughes received an oral reprimand.
Ms. Crawford and two other women who had made accusations against him were
fired. In Ms. Crawford's case, the reason was said to be embezzlement, a charge
she denied and which the authorities did not pursue.

The question in the case, Crawford v. Metropolitan Government of Nashville and
Davidson County, Tenn., No. 06-1595, was whether Ms. Crawford could sue under a
provision of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 barring retaliation
against people who opposed unlawful employment practices. In 2006, the United
States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, dismissed the case
before trial, saying the law requires more vigorous opposition than merely
answering questions in an internal investigation.

In his opinion reversing that decision, Justice Souter said that lesser forms of
opposition count, too. ''Countless people were known to 'oppose' slavery before
emancipation, or are said to 'oppose' capital punishment today,'' he wrote,
''without writing public letters, taking to the streets or resisting the
government.''

''Nothing in the statute requires a freakish rule protecting an employee who
reports discrimination on her own initiative,'' Justice Souter added, ''but not
one who reports the same discrimination in the same words when her boss asks a
question.''

Justice Souter rejected the employer's argument that ruling in favor of Ms.
Crawford would result in fewer investigations. But he said that employees who
knew they were subject to firing without recourse if they answered questions
from their employer honestly would be less likely to cooperate.

Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., writing for himself and Justice Clarence Thomas,
joined the decision but did not adopt Justice Souter's reasoning. Justice Alito
noted that the number of retaliation claims filed with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission doubled from 1992 to 2007 and said that ''an expansive
interpretation of protected opposition conduct would likely cause this trend to
accelerate.''

The court's ruling, Justice Alito wrote, ''does not and should not extend beyond
employees who testify in internal investigations or engage in analogous
protected conduct.''

Prosecutorial Immunity

In a second decision on Monday, the court unanimously ruled that a California
man who had served 24 years in prison for murder based on false testimony from a
jailhouse informant could not sue the two senior prosecutors who ran the Los
Angeles County district attorney's office at the time of his trial.

The former inmate, Thomas L. Goldstein, was convicted on the testimony of the
aptly named Edward F. Fink. Mr. Fink, according to Mr. Goldstein's brief, was
''a heroin addict and career felon'' with ''an uncanny knack for extracting
confessions from cellmates.''

But Mr. Goldstein did not learn of Mr. Fink's talents until years later. At Mr.
Goldstein's trial in 1980, Mr. Fink falsely said he had not received favorable
treatment in exchange for his testimony in that or other cases. The trial
prosecutors apparently did not know and so did not tell Mr. Goldstein's lawyers
that Mr. Fink had repeatedly received reduced sentences for providing
prosecutors with favorable testimony in Mr. Goldstein's case and others.

In 2002, a federal magistrate judge in Los Angeles ordered Mr. Goldstein retried
or released. ''It is readily apparent to this court that Fink fits the profile
of the dishonest jailhouse informant,'' Judge Robert N. Block wrote. Prosecutors
eventually chose to let Mr. Goldstein go.

Mr. Goldstein then filed a civil suit against John Van de Kamp, who was the
district attorney at the time of the trial, and his chief deputy, Curt Livesay.
Mr. Goldstein claimed the two men had failed in their administrative duties by
not ensuring that trial prosecutors were adequately trained and provided with
information about the activities of jailhouse informers.

Prosecutors enjoy absolute immunity for anything they do connected to a
particular criminal trial. Justice Stephen G. Breyer, writing for a unanimous
court, quoted a 1949 decision from Judge Learned Hand to explain the reasoning
behind that protection: ''It has been thought in the end better to leave
unredressed the wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject those who try
to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation.''

But the Supreme Court has left open the possibility that some kinds of
administrative conduct by supervising prosecutors not connected to the conduct
of a trial may be the subjects of lawsuits.

What Mr. Goldstein complained about, Justice Breyer wrote, may have been
administrative but was nonetheless ''directly connected with the prosecutor's
basic trial advocacy duties'' in that it concerned whether and when to make
information available to defense lawyers. As a consequence, he wrote, the
defendants in the case, Van de Kamp v. Goldstein, No. 07-854, were entitled to
absolute immunity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEXUAL HARASSMENT (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (90%); DISMISSALS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); EMPLOYMENT (89%); MISCONDUCT (79%); LEGISLATION
(78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (74%); TRENDS (74%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(73%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (69%); EMBEZZLEMENT
(66%); CITIES (51%); CITY GOVERNMENT (51%)

PERSON: DAVID SOUTER (89%); CLARENCE THOMAS (58%); SAMUEL ALITO (58%)

CITY: NASHVILLE, TN, USA (79%); CINCINNATI, OH, USA (70%)

STATE: TENNESSEE, USA (93%); OHIO, USA (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2009


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1570 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Shattered Gaza Town, Roots of Seething Split

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER and SABRINA TAVERNISE; Taghreed El-Khodary and Nadim
Audi contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1754 words


EL ATATRA, Gaza -- The phosphorus smoke bomb punched through the roof in exactly
the spot where much of the family had taken refuge -- the upstairs hall away
from the windows.

The bomb, which international weapons experts identified as phosphorus by its
fragments, was intended to mask troop movements outside. Instead it breathed its
storm of fire and smoke into Sabah Abu Halima's hallway, releasing flaming
chemicals that clung to her husband, baby girl and three other small children,
burning them to death.

The Israeli military says that it is unaware of the family's disaster, or of any
other civilian deaths in this farming village in northwest Gaza. While residents
say that 11 other civilians were killed during the first few days of Israel's
ground invasion, Israel says that its soldiers killed gunmen and militants in
this village, which it considers a Hamas stronghold. At least four Israeli
soldiers were wounded in the fight.

The war in El Atatra tells the story of Israel's three-week offensive in Gaza,
with each side giving a very different version. Palestinians here describe
Israeli military actions as a massacre, and Israelis attribute civilian
casualties to a Hamas policy of hiding behind its people.

In El Atatra, neither version appears entirely true, based on 50 interviews with
villagers and four Israeli commanders. The dozen or so civilian deaths seem like
the painful but inevitable outcome of a modern army bringing war to an urban
space. And while Hamas fighters had placed explosives in a kitchen, on doorways
and in a mosque, they did not seem to be forcing civilians to act as shields.

The gaps reflect not only a desire to shape public opinion, but also something
more significant: a growing distance between two peoples who used to have daily
interactions, but who are being forced apart by violence, mutual demonization
and a policy of separation.

Palestinians almost never question the legitimacy of firing rockets at Israeli
civilians as a form of resistance, and seemed shocked that Israel would go to
war over it. Meanwhile, Israel sent a double message.

On one hand, it made clear that it was furious over the years of rocket fire and
would not restrain its reaction. On the other, it argued that it took an
exceptionally humane approach to the civilians of Gaza, in contrast to what it
saw as its bloodthirsty enemy, Hamas.

Unlike most Gazans, many people in this village are not refugees from the 1948
independence war, but farmers and landowners, who for years sold strawberries to
Israel until an embargo against the Hamas-run territory began a few years ago.
Israel warned residents, in leaflets, radio broadcasts and telephone calls to
leave, but many thought that the Israeli incursion did not threaten them.

''I figured it would be like all the other times when they dropped leaflets, so
we went inside and waited,'' said Rafiq Gambour, 45, a car mechanic who worked
in Israel for years, including in Sderot, where Hamas rockets have taken the
biggest toll.

So when disaster struck at the Abu Halima house on Jan. 4, a Sunday, many did
the only thing they thought might save them: They got on the phone with their
Israeli friends. As the sun set and the bodies burned, a crowd of panicked
villagers waited as a village elder and farmer, Mahmoud Khlaiyel, and another
farmer made frantic phone calls to merchants on the other side of the border.

''There was no one I didn't call,'' Mr. Khlaiyel said.

A man who identified himself as Danny Batua, a 54-year-old Israeli Jewish
businessman whose family has been friends with the Abu Halima family for years,
said by telephone that he believed the Abu Halimas were not involved with Hamas,
and that their suffering was a result of inaccurate intelligence on the part of
the Israeli military.

''What can I tell you?'' Mr. Batua said. ''The army has no idea.''

But according to Captain E., an Israeli military commander whose men took the
western sector of the village on the first night of the ground war, most houses
in that area were empty of civilians. What is more, he said, militants had
remained and had begun gun battles with his soldiers.

The military made the commander available for an interview in Israel, but
limited his identification to the initial of his first name.

''We faced fire mostly from snipers,'' he said. ''We found tunnels, maps,
Kalashnikovs, uniforms from our army and many large explosives throughout the
houses we searched,'' he added, showing photographs of what his men had
collected. ''We also found a bucket of grenades inside a mosque.''

Some of what the army contends is clearly real. Rockets were launched from near
the town's elementary school, and from many of its fields, Israeli commanders
and several residents said.

Hamas leaders were in the village and Israeli commanders displayed evidence of
four tunnels throughout the village, though not the extensive network that
higher-level commanders had reported. The militants also had weapons, but while
the commanders said they had destroyed houses that corresponded only to weapons
caches, that did not always seem to have been true.

''My principle for blowing up houses was not to destroy a house that just had
one AK-47, but only if we found real infrastructure or large amounts of
explosives,'' said the brigade commander for the area, Col. Herzl Halevy, by
telephone from Israel.

''I checked this out personally,'' he added. Between 40 and 50 houses were
destroyed.

But when the platoon of another commander, Captain Y., took over the
neighborhood where a family named Ghanem lived, it blew up their house without
going inside, he made clear in a phone interview. A search of it two weeks later
by a correspondent for The New York Times joined by a 20-year veteran of the
British Army, Chris Cobb-Smith, a weapons consultant for Amnesty International,
showed no evidence of explosive material or of a secondary blast.

So why was the house destroyed?

''We had advance intelligence that there were bombs inside the house,'' Captain
Y. said. ''We looked inside from the doorway and saw things that made us
suspicious. I didn't want to risk the lives of my men. We ordered the house
destroyed.''

That seemed to be the guiding principle for a number of the operations in El
Atatra: avoid Israeli casualties at all cost.

The elementary school was a similar story. Intelligence suggested that there
were explosives inside, and an F-16 dropped a bomb on it, producing a house-size
hole. When the Israelis inspected later, they found written material from Hamas
but no explosives, Captain Y. said. Now the school is unusable, its giant metal
flower decorations lying on their sides.

For the Ghanem family's 23-year-old son, Bakr, the act will not easily be
forgotten.

''A house is something physical, but also something in your heart,'' he said as
he stood outside his collapsed home, taken over by cats and putrid odors. ''The
place in our heart has also been injured. There can be no peace after this.''

This talk pains some of the older villagers, like Tamam Abu Halima, 65, who
wants to return to the past she shared with Israeli neighbors, when she would
fix dinners of fish and figs, and accepting an invitation was as easy as getting
in the car.

Her grandson, Hamza, who grew up in a time when boundaries were stricter, has no
fond memories of Israelis.

''The only ones I know shoot and kill,'' he said.

Many here believe that Israelis feel the same about them, and that they were
treated with suspicion and contempt, as would-be fighters. That might help
explain what happened, they say, when Omar Abu Halima and his two teenage
cousins tried to take the burned body of his baby sister and two other living
but badly burned girls to the hospital on that Sunday.

The boys were taking the girls and six others on a tractor, when, according to
several accounts from villagers, Israeli soldiers told them to stop. According
to their accounts, they got down, put their hands up, and suddenly rounds were
fired, killing two teenage boys: Matar Abu Halima, 18, and Muhamed Hekmet, 17.

An Israeli military spokeswoman said that soldiers had reported that the two
were armed and firing. Villagers strongly deny that. The tractor that villagers
say was carrying the group is riddled with 36 bullet holes.

The villagers were forced to abandon the bodies of the teenage boys and the
baby, and when rescue workers arrived 11 days later, the baby's body had been
eaten by dogs, her legs two white bones, captured in a gruesome image on a
relative's cellphone. The badly burned girls and others on the tractor had fled
to safety.

Matar's mother, Nabila Abu Halima, said she had been shot through the arm when
she tried to move toward her son. Her left arm bears a round scar. Her son came
back to her in pieces, his body crushed under tank treads.

''Those who came this time were not Israelis,'' Mr. Gambour, the car mechanic,
said of the attackers. ''They were not even human.''

The question of how Israel handled civilians in this war has become a matter of
keen controversy. Human rights groups are crisscrossing Gaza, documenting what
they believe will form the basis for war crimes proceedings aimed at
demonstrating that Israel used disproportionate force.

Israeli officers said they took special care not to harm civilians.

''I can promise you that throughout the war, there were many times that
civilians walked by us and we never shot at them,'' said a commanding officer in
a part of El Atatra, Major E.

That statement draws a hollow laugh from villagers.

''They think everybody in Gaza is a terrorist,'' said Bekker Abu Halima, who had
driven a truck with other bodies and said it was fired on.

Both sides engage in their own denials.

Israelis argue that this war was especially tough because they had waited so
long before taking action in response to the thousands of rockets fired from
Gaza over eight years.

Yet after Israelis withdrew their settlers and soldiers from Gaza in late 2005,
they killed, over the next three years in numerous military actions here, the
same number of Gazans as those killed in this war -- about 1,275.

For their part, few Palestinian villagers even acknowledged the existence of
fighters here. Hamas is now asserting that it achieved a victory.

But here in the ruins of El Atatra, perhaps the biggest damage has been to any
memory of a shared past and any thought of a shared future.

''We used to tell fighters not to fire from here,'' said Nabila Abu Halima,
looking over a field through her open window. ''Now I'll invite them to do it
from my house.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gathering firewood in El Atatra, Gaza. Only the older residents
can recall friendly ties to many of the Israelis across the border. (pg.A1)
Ahed al-Daaor, 32, comforted his cousin Nor, 4, in their family's home. Mr.
Daaor's mother and brother were killed in the home by the Israeli military.
Zahar Abu Halima, 50, was wounded by shrapnel when an Israeli tank fired on his
home. A wall in the home of the Abu Halima family. Five people were burned to
death by what international weapons experts say was a phosphorus smoke bomb.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 This photo of a booby-trapped kitchen was taken when an Israeli commander and
his men searched houses in the village. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ISRAELI DEFENSE FORCES)
(pg.A6) MAPS: Farmers in El Atatra used to sell strawberries to Israel. (pg.A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
HAMAS (90%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); EXPLOSIVES (78%); AGRICULTURAL ACCIDENTS
(75%); CHILDREN (71%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); BURN INJURIES (70%); REFUGEES (69%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%)

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1572 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2333 words


International

AS ISRAELI ELECTIONS NEAR,

Confusion and Apathy Mix

The leaders of the major parties in Israel's parliamentary elections have mostly
avoided critical policy issues like how to deal with the West Bank, Hamas-ruled
Gaza, Syria or the threat of a nuclear Iran. That has left many Israeli voters
undecided on whom to vote for, and why they are voting in the first place. PAGE
A5

AFTER THE FIGHTING IN SRI LANKA

After more than a quarter-century of violence, the Sri Lankan government's war
with ethnic Tamil separatists may be in its final stages. But when the fighting
ends, anger and resentment are likely to linger for many Tamils, over what they
see as decades of official marginalization. PAGE A5

IRAQIS SAY AMERICANS BROKE PACT

Iraqi leaders in Kirkuk Province say that twice in the last two weeks the
American military has violated the hard-won security agreement signed in
November by attacking Iraqi criminal suspects without coordinating with Iraqi
security forces. PAGE A6

RUSSIA APPROVES U.S. SHIPMENTS

Russia said that it had fast-tracked approval of a plan to allow the United
States military to ship nonlethal equipment across Russian territory to
Afghanistan. Russia has emphasized its desire to cooperate with the United
States and NATO in Afghanistan since the announcement on Tuesday that
Kyrgyzstan, a close Russian ally, will close a critical air base in supplying
the war effort in Afghanistan. PAGE A6

INFANTS KILLED BY MEDICINE

A toxic chemical mixed into a teething medicine for babies by counterfeiters has
killed at least 84 children in Nigeria, health officials said Friday, more than
tripling the toll in a wave of infant deaths that began in late November. PAGE
A7

ZIMBABWE LEADER CLEARED

A judge in Zimbabwe on Friday withdrew treason charges against Tendai Biti, a
senior leader of the political opposition and an important negotiator in talks
with President Robert Mugabe's government, just a week before the opposition and
Mr. Mugabe's party are expected to form a jointly run government. PAGE A7

ITALY MOVES TO KEEP WOMAN ALIVE

The Italian government passed an emergency decree to keep a woman in a
vegetative state alive on a feeding tube, circumventing a high court decision
and ignoring a warning from the Italian president that he would refuse to sign
the decree. PAGE A7

PUTIN CHIDES EUROPE ON RIGHTS

Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin of Russia responded to a European official's
criticism of what appeared to be several contract killings in Moscow by saying
that rights abuses occurred in Western Europe, too, citing the ill treatment of
migrant workers. PAGE A8

National

GENE STUDY FINDS LINK TO THYROID CANCER

Scientists from the Icelandic company Decode Genetics have identified two
genetic variations that account for 57 percent of cases of thyroid cancer, a
finding that could lead to earlier detection among people at high risk for the
disease and a resurgence of interest in the quest for the genetic roots of other
common maladies. PAGE A9

A Zoroastrian Matchmaker A9

OBAMA MEETS TERROR VICTIMS

In an hourlong meeting with family members of Americans who were killed in the
Sept. 11 attacks and the bombing of the destroyer Cole, President Obama tried to
assure them that the terrorism suspects would be prosecuted and brought ''to a
swift and certain justice.'' He explained his rationale for ordering the
detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be closed, and to halt a process
that was moving toward trials of some terrorism suspects. PAGE A11

Court Fight on Mercury A11

The Energy Agenda

Energy Forecasts May Be Off

President Obama's projections of how much electricity would be saved by new
mandatory efficiency standards for a variety of household appliances may not be
completely reliable. Two audits of a 17-year-old program to conserve electricity
used in consumer goods have found that such estimates may be misleading. PAGE
A11

FREEING UP THE ENERGY DEPT.

The Obama administration is considering whether to shift the management of
nuclear weapons production to the Pentagon from the Energy Department to better
focus the agency on energy research, production and conservation. PAGE A11

HURDLES TO NEW ENERGY GRID

The Obama administration has vowed to make the nation's energy grid smarter and
tougher, allocating $11 billion to the task in the economic stimulus package
passed by the House last week. But it will take a lot more than money to
transform the grid into one capable of sending clean energy to distant cities.
PAGE A11

CITY RALLIES FOR ARKANSAS DOCTOR

West Memphis, Ark., has taken the still-unsolved bombing that nearly killed Dr.
Trent P. Pierce, the state medical board chairman, as an assault on the entire
city, and in the shaky days since the bombing, a portrait of Dr. Pierce has
emerged as a pillar of the state medical establishment and a quiet healer for
the community. PAGE A13

PROFESSOR ACCUSED OF GENOCIDE

A professor at a Maryland university has been accused of genocide in Rwanda, his
home country. The professor, Leopold Munyakazi, faces deportation, federal
immigration officials said. Mr. Munyakazi denies the accusations. PAGE A14

ENVIRONMENTAL VIEWS, 43 TO 44

In his first weeks in office, President Obama has dismantled many environmental
policies set by the Bush administration. But as Mr. Obama moves further, he must
decide how much to preserve of the broad landscape left to him by Mr. Bush --
environmental and energy policies that encompass land, air, water, wildlife and
climate. PAGE A14

New York Report

DOCUMENTS FAULT ELEVATOR WORKERS

For Workplace Negligence

Newly released city documents show that employees in the New York City Housing
Authority's beleaguered elevator division have been repeatedly caught goofing
off on the job and conducting personal business on city time. A city
investigator wrote in the documents that preventive maintenance was not
performed regularly and ''could pose a significant safety hazard over time.''
PAGE A15

NEW EXPRESS LINE TO ATLANTIC CITY

A new train line from New York City to Atlantic City made its debut. The line is
financed by three casinos and operated by New Jersey Transit, and is the latest
attempt by Atlantic City to make itself into something more than a gambling
destination for day-trippers. PAGE A15

Obituaries

DEWEY MARTIN, 68

He was the drummer for Buffalo Springfield, the short-lived but influential
1960s California rock band that spawned the careers of Neil Young and Stephen
Stills. PAGE A19

Business

F.D.A. APPROVES DRUG MADE

From Goats With Human Genes

The Food and Drug Administration approved a drug meant to prevent fatal blood
clots in people, the first drug produced by livestock that have been given a
human gene. Made by GTC Biotherapeutics, the human anti-clotting protein is
produced by a herd 200 bio-engineered goats on a farm in central Massachusetts.
Above, one of the bio-engineered goats. PAGE B1

TIPS FOR CUTTING OUT THE FAT

How do you start getting your financial life in shape? Learn to avoid unhealthy
habits by taking cues from diet and nutrition gurus. Ron Lieber, Your Money.
PAGE B1

Toyota Posts First Net Loss B2

LAYOFFS FROM HARVARD ENDOWMENT

The company that manages the endowment for Harvard will cut about 25 percent of
its staff, or 50 positions, over the next several months, according to the
school. B2

REWARDED FOR HEALTHY PATIENTS

UnitedHealth Group once tried a model of health care that is growing popular
among policy experts: rewarding doctors for the overall quality of care that
patients receive, instead of rewarding them for the number of services they
provide. Now it is trying again and teaming up with doctors' groups in Arizona
at the behest of the state's largest employer, I.B.M. PAGE B3

STOCK MARKETS FINISH UP

The stock markets surged as investors waited for the federal government to
detail its latest plan to shore up the banking system. PAGE B6

Arts

A NOTED JAZZ LABEL FIGHTS

To Remain Long Playing

Founded in 1939, Blue Note Records has built a catalog that includes almost
every major figure in jazz. Now, with the entire music industry in perilous
waters, Blue Note in particular has reached a pivotal moment as they try to
remain the pre-eminent jazz label and survive as a profitable business, which
means signing nonjazz artists. PAGE C1

FALLING FROM DEF JAM TO DEAF EARS

Sony Music Entertainment made a bold move when it hired Rick Rubin to run its
Columbia Records label less than two years ago. The founder of Def Jam records,
Mr. Rubin had produced hits for Run-DMC, the Beastie Boys, the Red Hot Chili
Peppers and Johnny Cash, but it appears he has done little so far to lift the
label out of the doldrums and his executive role, is facing challenges. PAGE C1

OVEREXPOSING BUSH IN SATIRE

Although the Broadway show ''You're Welcome America. A Final Night with George W
Bush,'' starring Will Ferrell, has been a major draw, so far six audience
members have stormed out mid-performance -- according to those keeping count at
the Cort Theater -- after a penis is projected on the backdrop of the stage.
PAGE C1

Theater Review

Inside the Big Bad City

Oscar Hammerstein II's 1932 Broadway hit ''Music in the Air,'' which runs
through Sunday at City Center, is propelled by the collision of the innocent
Bavarian town of Edendorf with the worldly Munich theater. Watching the
production is rather like being imprisoned in a cuckoo clock, Ben Brantley
writes. PAGE C1

Linking Bach and Elliott Carter C3

CELEBRATING A GALLERY'S FUNERAL

More signs that gallery closings have accelerated are cause for distress, but
the SoHo gallery Guild & Greyshkul is going out with a bang. The gallery will be
filled to the brim with 120 artists and an array of mediums, styles and
worldviews for a four-day show entitled, ''On From Here,'' which is the
gallery's final curtain. Above, a sculpture painting titled, ''Warped Scape,''
by Nicole Cherubini. PAGE C4

John Legend Assumes His Name C4

Television Review

Death of a President

The Bush-era paranoia rampant in ''24'' also pervades ''XIII,'' a two-part
Canadian and French mini-series on NBC. After the president is assassinated, an
agent, played Stephen Dorff, must untangle the mystery and motive that reaches
up to the highest levels of political and corporate life and, who knows, maybe
even the worlds of professional figure skating and yodeling, Ginia Bellafante
writes. PAGE C11

Sports

TRYING TO GET A MEASURE

Of the Mets' New Ballpark

How will Citi Field -- soon to be the Mets new home -- play when it's completed?
Is it too big? David Wright took part in the first unofficial batting practice
at the field, and even after blasting a few pitches over the high walls, he
didn't have an answer. ''The bottom line is it's impossible to know,'' he said.
PAGE D1

ON MICHAEL PHELPS'S FOLLY

While people may defend marijuana use, George Vecsey writes that USA Swimming
and Kellogg, the cereal maker, have every right -- in fact, a responsibility --
to punish Michael Phelps for his recent high-profile lapse of judgment, in which
he was photographed with what appears to be a bong. PAGE D1

FROM THE GARAGE TO THE BIG TIME

When she was 4, Florence Schelling was conscripted into service by her older
brothers, who needed a goaltender for their makeshift hockey games in the family
garage. From there, a star was born: Schell is now the starting goaltender as a
freshman at Northeastern University. She is also one of the top goalies in
international hockey, anchoring the Swiss national team. PAGE D5

This Weekend

THE MAGAZINE

A look at some of the great onscreen performers of the last year, from Kate
Winslet to Brad Pitt. PAGE 35

SUNDAY STYLES

Caroline Jacobson's father left behind millions of dollars for his wife and two
daughters. But the investment fund in which her father had placed his money was
the one helmed by Bernard L. Madoff, accused of defrauding investors of
billions. PAGE 1

BOOK REVIEW

Lincoln-mania has taken hold. But Abraham Lincoln's life is more worthy of
detailed study than dutiful reverence, William Safire writes. PAGE 1

TRAVEL

In the quarter-century since the United States invaded Grenada, the Caribbean
island's battlefields have been supplanted by luxury beach resorts and its
insurgents have been replaced with surfers. PAGE 1

Editorial

DISAPPEARING JOBS

It was impossible to argue with President Obama on Friday when he said that the
dismal new jobs report -- the largest loss in 13 consecutive months of decline
-- made it all the more urgent for Congress to pass the economic stimulus and
recovery package. Our only objection was that he didn't go further. PAGE A20

THOSE WHO IGNORE HISTORY ...

With the global economy staggering, wealthy countries need to pull together to
produce a concerted economic stimulus, protect the free flow of trade and rescue
the poor countries that cannot possibly make it on their own. What the world is
getting --from the United States Congress and other governments -- is the kind
of beggar-thy-neighbor blunders that unleashed the global depression almost 80
years ago. PAGE A20

A STIMULUS FOR THE POOR

The stimulus package taking shape in Congress does little to provide affordable
housing for the country's poorest families. Lawmakers could help low-income
Americans find homes -- and create jobs doing it -- by providing money for the
Housing Trust Fund. PAGE A20

Op-Ed

GAIL COLLINS

I know it's been a tough week, little Obama-ites. But think of it this way: The
mess in the Senate drove Tom Daschle completely out of the news. In a week or
so, nobody will even remember he was nominated for anything. PAGE A21

CHARLES M. BLOW

So much for bipartisanship. The gloves came off during the final days of
negotiating the stimulus bill. The tone fit the Republicans just fine. The
Democrats, not so much. PAGE A21

BOB HERBERT

With the economy in deep, deep trouble and Americans suffering by the millions,
the Republicans spent much of the week doing their same old, bad-faith two-step:
trying their best to derail the economic stimulus package. Luckily, President
Obama, ordinarily cool and accommodating exhibited some real fire to get some
results. PAGE A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
HAMAS (90%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); SCIENCE NEWS (77%); SCIENCE &
TECHNOLOGY (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%);
JUDGES (73%); LITIGATION (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (72%); APPROVALS (72%);
HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (69%); TREASON (67%); INFANT MORTALITY (64%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (64%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (64%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(63%); GENES & CHROMOSOMES (62%); CANCER (62%); ENDOCRINE SYSTEM DISORDERS
(60%); THYROID CANCER (60%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (52%); MIGRANT WORKERS
(50%); COUNTERFEITING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); ISRAEL (95%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); ZIMBABWE (93%); SRI LANKA (93%); ITALY (93%); EUROPE
(92%); SYRIA (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%);
NIGERIA (79%); ICELAND (79%); KYRGYZSTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1588 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

MEMOS SPELL OUT BRUTAL C.I.A. MODE OF INTERROGATION

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and SCOTT SHANE; Charlie Savage contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1235 words


WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department on Thursday made public detailed memos
describing brutal interrogation techniques used by the Central Intelligence
Agency, as President Obama sought to reassure the agency that the C.I.A.
operatives involved would not be prosecuted.

In dozens of pages of dispassionate legal prose, the methods approved by the
Bush administration for extracting information from senior operatives of Al
Qaeda are spelled out in careful detail -- like keeping detainees awake for up
to 11 straight days, placing them in a dark, cramped box or putting insects into
the box to exploit their fears.

The interrogation methods were authorized beginning in 2002, and some were used
as late as 2005 in the C.I.A.'s secret overseas prisons. The techniques were
among the Bush administration's most closely guarded secrets, and the documents
released Thursday afternoon were the most comprehensive public accounting to
date of the program.

Some senior Obama administration officials, including Attorney General Eric H.
Holder Jr., have labeled one of the 14 approved techniques, waterboarding,
illegal torture. The United States prosecuted some Japanese interrogators at war
crimes trials after World War II for waterboarding and other methods detailed in
the memos.

The release of the documents came after a bitter debate that divided the Obama
administration, with the C.I.A. opposing the Justice Department's proposal to
air the details of the agency's long-secret program. Fueling the urgency of the
discussion was Thursday's court deadline in a lawsuit filed by the American
Civil Liberties Union, which had sued the government for the release of the
Justice Department memos.

Together, the four memos give an extraordinarily detailed account of the
C.I.A.'s methods and the Justice Department's long struggle, in the face of
graphic descriptions of brutal tactics, to square them with international and
domestic law. Passages describing forced nudity, the slamming of detainees into
walls, prolonged sleep deprivation and the dousing of detainees with water as
cold as 41 degrees alternate with elaborate legal arguments concerning the
international Convention Against Torture.

The documents were released with minimal redactions, indicating that President
Obama sided against current and former C.I.A. officials who for weeks had
pressed the White House to withhold details about specific interrogation
techniques. Leon E. Panetta, the C.I.A. director, had argued that revealing such
information set a dangerous precedent for future disclosures of intelligence
sources and methods.

A more pressing concern for the C.I.A. is that the revelations may give new
momentum to proposals for a full-blown investigation into Bush administration
counterterrorism programs and possible torture prosecutions.

Within minutes of the release of the memos, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the
Vermont Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said that
the memos illustrated the need for his proposed independent commission of
inquiry, which would offer immunity in return for candid testimony.

Mr. Obama condemned what he called a ''dark and painful chapter in our history''
and said that the interrogation techniques would never be used again. But he
also repeated his opposition to a lengthy inquiry into the program, saying that
''nothing will be gained by spending our time and energy laying blame for the
past.''

Mr. Obama said that C.I.A. officers who were acting on the Justice Department's
legal advice would not be prosecuted, but he left open the possibility that
anyone who acted without legal authorization could still face criminal
penalties. He did not address whether lawyers who authorized the use of the
interrogation techniques should face some kind of penalty.

The four legal opinions, released in a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed
by the A.C.L.U., were written in 2002 and 2005 by the Justice Department's
Office of Legal Counsel, the highest authority in interpreting the law in the
executive branch.

The first of the memos, from August 2002, was signed by Jay S. Bybee, who
oversaw the Office of Legal Counsel, and gave the C.I.A. its first detailed
legal approval for waterboarding and other harsh treatment. Three others, signed
by Steven G. Bradbury, sought to reassure the agency in May 2005 that its
methods were still legal, even when multiple methods were used in combination,
and despite the prohibition in international law against ''cruel, inhuman or
degrading'' treatment.

All legal opinions on interrogation were revoked by Mr. Obama on his second day
in office, when he also outlawed harsh interrogations and ordered the C.I.A.'s
secret prisons closed.

In the memos, the Justice Department authors emphasized precautions the C.I.A.
proposed to take, including monitoring by medical personnel, and the urgency of
getting information to stop terrorist attacks. They recounted the C.I.A.'s
assertions of the effectiveness of the techniques but noted that interrogators
could not always tell a prisoner who was withholding information from one who
had no more information to offer.

The memos include what in effect are lengthy excerpts from the agency's
interrogation manual, laying out with precision how each method was to be used.
Waterboarding, for example, involved strapping a prisoner to a gurney inclined
at an angle of ''10 to 15 degrees'' and pouring water over a cloth covering his
nose and mouth ''from a height of approximately 6 to 18 inches'' for no more
than 40 seconds at a time.

But a footnote to a 2005 memo made it clear that the rules were not always
followed. Waterboarding was used ''with far greater frequency than initially
indicated'' and with ''large volumes of water'' rather than the small quantities
in the rules, one memo says, citing a 2004 report by the C.I.A.'s inspector
general.

Most of the methods have been previously described in news accounts and in a
2006 report of the International Committee of the Red Cross, which interviewed
14 detainees. But one previously unknown tactic the C.I.A. proposed -- but never
used -- against Abu Zubaydah, a terrorist operative, involved exploiting what
was thought to be his fear of insects.

''As we understand it, you plan to inform Zubaydah that you are going to place a
stinging insect into the box, but you will actually place a harmless insect in
the box, such as a caterpillar,'' one memo says.

Mr. Bybee, Mr. Bradbury and John Yoo, who was the leading author of the 2002
interrogation memos, are the subjects of an investigation by the Justice
Department's ethics office about their legal analysis on interrogation.
Officials have described the draft ethics report, by the Office of Professional
Responsibility, as highly critical, but its completion has been delayed to allow
the subjects a chance to respond.

The A.C.L.U. said the memos clearly describe criminal conduct and underscore the
need to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate who authorized and carried
out torture.

But Dennis C. Blair, the director of national intelligence, cautioned that the
memos were written at a time when C.I.A. officers were frantically working to
prevent a repeat of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

''Those methods, read on a bright, sunny, safe day in April 2009, appear graphic
and disturbing,'' said Mr. Blair in a written statement. ''But we will
absolutely defend those who relied on these memos.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: U.S. Department of Justice Memos.(A1)
BYBEE
YOO
GOLDSMITH
COMEY
BRADBURY (A10) CHARTS: Disputing the Memos at the Justice Department's Office of
Legal Counsel
 Explaining and Authorizing Specific Interrogation Techniques: The Justice
Department released four memos on Thursday describing interrogation techniques
used by the Central Intelligence Agency. The first, from August 2002, described
10 techniques used in the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah, a terrorist logistics
specialist. It concluded that the methods did not constitute torture under
United States law.  Memos from May 2005 introduced four more techniques and
confirmed that the combination of interrogation methods was allowed. Another
memo that month claimed United Nations articles did not apply and, even if they
did, the interrogation program did not ''shock the conscience,'' the relevant
standard. The full documents are online at www.nytimes.com/world. (A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); APPROVALS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); IMMUNITY (77%); WAR CRIMES
(76%); LITIGATION (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); AL-QAEDA (71%);
TERRORISM (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); ACCOUNTING (68%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (66%); WORLD WAR II
(66%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%);
AL-QAEDA (57%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); LEON E PANETTA (58%); ERIC HOLDER (58%); PATRICK
LEAHY (58%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company


                             1590 of 1598 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2009 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside The Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2303 words


INTERNATIONAL

IRAN'S LEADER ASKS PROSECUTOR

To Review Case of U.S. Journalist

President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, in a rare effort to intervene in the justice
system, urged Tehran's chief prosecutor to fairly examine the cases of an
Iranian-American journalist and an Iranian-Canadian blogger. PAGE A6

U.S. BOYCOTTS U.N. CONFERENCE

The first United Nations conference to address the issue of racism in eight
years will open in Geneva without delegations from the United States and several
of its important allies, but with President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran as a
speaker. PAGE A7

MALIKI CRITIC TO LEAD PARLIAMENT

Iraq's Parliament chose a new speaker after months of political infighting. The
election of the speaker, Ayad al-Sammaraie, a Sunni Arab lawmaker who has until
now headed Parliament's Finance Committee, is expected to break a legislative
gridlock, but could also lead to new confrontations with the government of Prime
Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. PAGE A10

PARTY GETS BOOST BY MANDELA

Nelson Mandela joined the African National Congress's presidential candidate,
Jacob Zuma, at a campaign rally to lend support before elections. PAGE A10

SPAIN HAILS ARREST OF ETA SUSPECT

Spanish officials said that the arrest of a man, Jurdan Martitegi Lizaso,
suspected of leading the Basque separatist group ETA was a severe blow to the
group, and they vowed to capture its next leader. A total of nine militants
suspected of being ETA members were captured. PAGE A11

Yangon Journal

Spraying Water, Letting Off Steam

The traditional New Year's water festival is the one time of the year when
Myanmar's junta looks the other way as masses of young people let loose, dancing
and drinking in Yangon, an otherwise repressive city where gatherings of more
than 10 people are usually banned. PAGE A11

SOUTH KOREA TO TALK WITH NORTH

South Korea accepted North Korea's proposal for talks on a troubled joint
industrial complex, setting up the first official dialogue between the countries
in a year amid tensions over the North's recent rocket launching. PAGE A11

ITALY AGREES TO EVACUATE SHIP

Italy agreed to evacuate about 140 migrants from the deck of a Turkish-owned
cargo ship that had rescued them in the Mediterranean Sea, breaking four days of
diplomatic gridlock with Malta over who should take responsibility. PAGE A12

NATIONAL

SOME CRIME IS ON THE RISE

As Economic Woes Persist

Columbia, smack in the center of South Carolina, the state with the
second-highest unemployment rate in the nation, saw property crimes increase by
14 percent last year from their 2007 level, according to the Police Department.
PAGE A13

PICKING LETTERS FOR THE PRESIDENT

Mike Kelleher, director of the White House Office of Correspondence, is in
charge of selecting letters from the public that are included in President
Obama's briefing book. Many letters offer advice on treats for the Obamas' dog,
Bo. The president answers some letters by hand. PAGE A14

PLAN FOR HOSPITAL

Just weeks after inspectors with the International Olympic Committee visited
Chicago as part of a bid for the 2016 Games, city officials appeared to be
moving ahead with a deal to pay $86 million for a hospital campus that they hope
to convert into the Olympic Village. But their plan, and preservationists'
hopes, have been complicated by economic realities. PAGE A15

OBAMA'S PLANS HIT RESISTANCE

President Obama is running into stiff Congressional resistance to his plans to
raise money for his ambitious agenda, and the resulting hole in the budget is
threatening a major health care overhaul and other policy initiatives. PAGE A17

NEW YORK

IN NEW JERSEY, A TUITION FIGHT

Involving Illegal Immigrants

Champions of a proposal to allow illegal immigrants in New Jersey to pay
in-state college tuition could be forgiven for believing that their cause may
finally have momentum. But in an election year, the political climate is hard to
predict for legislation that critics say would take coveted spots from citizens.
PAGE A20

SEPARATING FAST FOOD AND SCHOOLS

A study has found that young teenagers tend to be fatter when there are
fast-food restaurants within a block of their schools. To remedy that, Eric N.
Gioia, a city councilman from Queens, wants to stop fast-food restaurants from
opening so close to New York City schools. Page A24

OBITUARIES

WHITELAW REID, 95

The scion of a prominent New York publishing family who joined The New York
Herald Tribune in the late 1930s; he became a war correspondent and later the
paper's editor, president and chairman. PAGE B8

BUSINESS

SHAREHOLDERS DISCONTENT

With Bank of America

More and more shareholders are alarmed by the daunting challenges confronting
Bank of America. Kenneth D. Lewis, the bank's chairman and chief executive, is
under growing pressure, from within and without, to turn things around. PAGE B1

PUSH TO RAISE INTERNET PRICE

Internet service providers want to end the all-you-can-eat plans and get their
customers paying a la carte. But they are having a hard time closing the buffet
line. PAGE B1

Advertising

Appealing to Older Consumers

The experience of ebeanstalk.com, which sells children's educational toys, many
of them to grandparents, illustrates a growing trend as the recession grinds on:
an increasing interest in marketing goods and services to consumers who are 50
or older. PAGE B1

PORSCHE INTRODUCES SEDAN IN CHINA

Porsche unveiled its entry into the luxury sedan market on the eve of the
Shanghai auto show. It is the latest confirmation of the importance of China and
the first time that Porsche has entered a new market segment at an auto show
outside Europe or North America. PAGE B3

MEDIAINVESTORS SLIGHT MURDOCH

A back-of-the-envelope calculation shows the assets that the media baron Rupert
Murdoch has cobbled together from the handful of newspapers he inherited from
his father are worth at least $12 a share. That's nearly 50 percent more than
the closing price on Friday for News Corporation Class A shares of $8 and
change. PAGE B2

FROM WEB CARTOON TO BOOK

Randall Munroe, creator of the popular Internet comic strip xkcd, plans to
publish an actual book. PAGE B3

The Media Equation

Cable Stages News,

Then Covers It

Apparently there is an ingredient in tea that causes hysteria when given to
cable news anchors. How else to explain the coverage of the tax day tea parties,
which was the day when we procrastinators finally mailed the check to the feds?
David Carr, The Media Equation. PAGE B1

CHANGES AT ATLANTA PAPER

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution announced that its editorial page editor,
Cynthia Tucker, will move to Washington, continuing to write her Pulitzer
Prize-winning column but not working on editorials and not setting the paper's
stance on issues. Most of the editorial board will be replaced in May. PAGE B4

TWEETS WENT ON TOO LONG

In The New Yorker last week, Garry Trudeau parodied the self-absorption of the
clueless Twitter user. But he got one detail glaringly wrong: The tweets were
more than 140 characters, that is, too long to be posted on Twitter. PAGE B4

Arts

DISNEY RETHINKS HOW TO SELL

A Nanny, a Mermaid and a Lion

With revenues down, Disney Theatrical Productions has been heavily discounting
tickets to ''The Lion King,'' ''Mary Poppins'' and ''The Little Mermaid,'' its
three Broadway shows, and preparing a new marketing plan to attract families and
others during this economic climate, in which the three musicals risk vying with
one another.

PAGE C1

GETTING AWAY WITH PLOT TWISTS

In the first few seasons of ''24,'' viewers were easily dazzled by the dense
plotting, wondering, ''What will they think they can get away with next?''
Viewers may not be able to recapture that suspense but they can become engrossed
in the minor variations offered by the current seventh season. Now, Alessandra
Stanley writes, viewers mostly marvel at the writers' gall: ''Do they really
think they can get away with that again?'' PAGE C1

AESTHETICS OF PLASTIC SURGERY

The curator is a plastic surgeon, and he has selected the work of three
colleagues to exhibit at ''I Am Art: An Expression of the Visual & Artistic
Process of Plastic Surgery.'' How is their art, which is also their surgery,
best described? The human body is their medium, the operating room their studio.
PAGE C1

PROTECTING THE BRANDO LEGACY

The Marlon Brando trustees filed suit in Los Angeles County Superior Court
against a group of companies that own and operate the Broadcast Center
Apartments near CBS Television City, claiming infringement of Brando's
trademarked name for their Brando Loft. It was one small step for those who have
been trying to make a business out of Brando's legacy ever since he died, at 80,
in 2004. PAGE C1

MONEY WOES DON'T DETER FANS

Even as the recorded music industry contracts, the live music business continues
to flourish. Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, in the scorching but
majestically beautiful desert east of Los Angeles, is the year's first major
festival and a bellwether for the all-important summer touring season. The
promoter behind the festival, now in its 10th year, said that despite the
economy it was a success. PAGE C7

UNSTABLE AMERICAN UNIONS

To read the provocative account in ''The Marriage-Go-Round'' is to think that
America's relationships are in chaos. We continue to have one of the highest
marriage rates of any Western country. But since the 1960s, divorce rates have
been rising, and now nearly half our marriages end up there, Andrew J. Cherlin
writes in his intriguing book. PAGE C4

A Stamp Sells for Nearly $2 Million C4

Wagner at the Metropolitan C5

Engaging, Youthful Individuals C2

Sports

SUDDENLY, IN THE SPOTLIGHT

So far, Glen ''Big Baby'' Davis, the Celtics' second-year forward, has been
known more for his outgoing personality than his play. But with the team's star
forward, Kevin Garnett, likely to miss the entire playoffs, Davis will have to
take on a much larger role on the court. PAGE D1

Sports of the Times Tailor-Made for the Long Ball

It's still early in the careers of the new Yankee Stadium and Citi Field, but
George Vecsey writes that one thing is already very clear: the Yankees' new
ballpark is much more conducive to hitting home runs. PAGE D1

LAUNCHING A FOOTBALL START-UP

The number of schools that launched football programs dipped in the 1990s
because of spiraling costs and soul-searching on whether the mission of higher
education was being perverted by big-money sports. The pace has picked up again
this decade with universities like Georgia State, which is looking to fuse the
disparate segments of their campuses and energize their indifferent alumni. PAGE
D1

BASEBALL'S UNLIKELY PITCHMAN

Harvey Schiller, a well-connected executive at a risk-mitigation company and now
the president of the International Baseball Federation, is charged with
returning the sport to the Olympics. It's an uphill battle, and he has little
direct experience in the world of baseball. But even those who think the push is
a lost cause believe he has the best shot of making it happen. PAGE D1

SPEAKING FROM EXPERIENCE

Donald Brown of the University of Connecticut led the nation in rushing last
season and will probably be a first-round pick in the N.F.L. draft. In the
meantime, he is getting ready for the inaugural Donald Brown Player-to-Player
Leadership Conference in Red Bank, N.J., where he will discuss his football
experiences with dozens of high school athletes. PAGE D5

HORSE TRAINER IS SUSPENDED

Jeff Mullins, who trains the Kentucky Derby favorite I Want Revenge, was
suspended for seven days and fined $2,500 by the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board for administering a cough remedy in the security barn before the
Bay Shore Stakes on April 4 at Aqueduct. No medication is allowed in New York on
race day with the exception of a diuretic, which is administered by the state
veterinarian. PAGE D6

On Par

Raining? Windy? Let's Play Golf.

The Scots have a saying, ''nae wind, nae rain, nae golf.'' That's a very
different take on rainy golf than most Americans have, but Bill Pennington
writes that running for cover at the sight of a downpour means passing up lots
of chances to play -- especially since there's plenty of equipment designed to
make playing easier in bad weather. PAGE D7

Editorial

UNREASONABLE SEARCH

On Tuesday, the Supreme Court will hear arguments in a suit brought on behalf of
a 13-year-old girl who was strip-searched after a fellow student claimed that
she had ibuprofen pain-relief pills. The invasion of privacy was extreme, and
the security rationale weak. The court should rule that the search was
unconstitutional. PAGE A24

NEBRASKA'S TROUBLED CHILDREN

Nebraska has failed to provide adequate counseling and mental health services
for troubled children and their desperate families. The Legislature needs to
straighten out this mess. PAGE A24

A REAL PROBLEM, HERE

The AIDS epidemic is spreading faster than previously thought, even as the
American public's concern about it declines. That dangerous disconnect
underscores the urgency of a new campaign announced by the Obama administration
to combat complacency about the disease and its potential to strike the unwary.
PAGE A24

Op-Ed

PAUL KRUGMAN

Ireland got into its current bind by being just like us, only more so. And the
lesson of Ireland is that you don't want to put yourself in a position where you
have to punish your economy to save your banks. PAGE A25

AFGHAN WOMEN MARCH, AND AMERICA TURNS AWAY

With girls in Kandahar braving acid attacks to attend school and women in Kabul
protesting a law that tramples on their rights, this is no time for the United
States to give up on democracy in Afghanistan, Nader Nadery, a member of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, and Haseeb Humayoon, a student
at Middlebury College, argue in an Op-Ed article. In any case, they write,
ignoring the need for democratic reforms cannot help bring a speedier end to the
war. PAGE A25

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A2
 A3) DRAWING (A3)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); BASQUE HOMELAND & FREEDOM (90%); WRITERS
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); CRIME RATES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
US PRESIDENTS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); BOYCOTTS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%);
INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES
(74%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (72%); RACE & RACISM (71%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(69%); PROPERTY CRIMES (66%); INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY (66%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(65%); MARINE VESSELS (65%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (60%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); EUZKADI TA ASKATASUNA (ETA) (54%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (88%); NELSON MANDELA (79%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (74%);
BARACK OBAMA (58%); JACOB ZUMA (58%)

CITY: YANGON, MYANMAR (92%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); COLUMBIA,
SC, USA (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (79%); MEDITERRANEAN SEA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); SPAIN (92%);
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (92%); MYANMAR (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); IRAN (92%); MALTA
(79%); IRAQ (79%); TURKEY (79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);
MEDITERRANEAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2011


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
